Part I: Administrative Legislation
:1

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-11-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local
laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of Webster, as codified by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 175, together with an Appendix,
shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Webster," hereafter termed the
"Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
contained in the "Code of the Village of Webster" to any other local law, ordinance or
resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter title, chapter number, article number or section number appearing in the Code as
if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as the 1994
Code and the local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of the Code by this local law, are intended as a continuation of such local
laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior local law, ordinance
or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and
are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Webster, and it is the intention of said Board of Trustees that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repealer.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law shall not
affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
A. Repeal of inconsistent enactments. Except as provided in § 1-4, Enactments saved
from repeal; matters not affected, below, all local laws and ordinances, or parts of
such local laws or ordinances, inconsistent with the provisions contained in the
Code adopted by this local law are hereby repealed as of the adoption and filing of
this local law as set forth in § 1-13; provided, however, that such repeal shall only
be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Village of
Webster which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific enactments. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Webster has
determined that the following local laws are no longer in effect and hereby
specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Local Law No. 7-2012, Dumpsters, adopted December 13, 2012.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of this local law
or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision of the Village of Webster prior to the effective date of this local law or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in
violation of any legislative provision of the Village of Webster or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law brought pursuant to
any legislative provision of the Village of Webster.
D. Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege
heretofore granted or conferred by the Village of Webster.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Webster providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing
name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street,
road, highway, park or other public place within the Village of Webster or any
portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Webster appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing
the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Village of Webster or other instruments
or evidence of the Village's indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any local law or ordinance relating to salaries and compensation.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any local law or ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for Village employees.
M. Any local law or ordinance or portion of a local law or ordinance establishing a
specific fee amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Village.
N. Any local law or ordinance adopted subsequent to June 13, 2013.
§ 1-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 1-5
1:4
part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk
of the Village of Webster and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such
copy shall be certified by the Village Clerk of the Village of Webster by impressing
thereon the Seal of the Village of Webster, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by
the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Webster"
or any new local laws or resolutions, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate
the intention of the Village to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in
this local law shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended, deleted or
changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the
book containing the Code of the Village of Webster required to be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said Code and all local laws
and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this
local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board of Trustees to be a part
of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Village
Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to be set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the
periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who alters or tampers with the Code of the Village of Webster in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Webster to be
misrepresented thereby, or who violates any other provision of this local law, shall be
guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more
than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the Code of the
Village of Webster, such local law to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I, Adoption
of Code," and the sections of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the
State of New York.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the Village of Webster, no changes in the meaning or
intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have been made, except as
provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain grammatical changes and
other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule A attached
hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon the
effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section number references are to the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in
the Code.)1
C. Nomenclature. The following terms are updated as indicated:
(1) In Chapter 113, "Water Pollution Control Federation" is changed to "Water
Environment Federation (WEF)."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections that were added, amended, adopted or
deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced
with the following history: "Amended (added, repealed) 12-11-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014." Schedule A, which contains a
complete description of all changes, is on file in the Village offices.
§ 1-10 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 1-13
1:6
Chapter 5
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs —See Ch. 24, Art. I.
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 46.
Solid waste — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 5-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize certain public servants of the Village of
Webster to issue and serve appearance tickets in connection with violations of state
statutes, local laws, ordinances or rules and regulations of the Village which said public
servants are authorized or required to enforce.
§ 5-2. Authorized servers; specific areas of enforcement. [Amended 6-9-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-19942]
The Building Inspector(s), Deputy Building Inspector(s), Assistant Building
Inspector(s), Zoning Officer(s), Deputy Local Law Enforcement Officer(s), Code
Enforcement Officer(s), Webster police officers, Fire Marshal(s) and Deputy Fire
Marshal(s) are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets, as defined by
§ 150.10 of the Criminal Procedure Law, with respect to violations of a state statute,
a local law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village of Webster that such public
servants are required or authorized to enforce. Specific areas of enforcement are fire
prevention and building construction, dogs and other animals, solid waste reuse and
recycling, Chapter 175, Zoning, and all other zoning or planning regulations relating to
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants of any building or of persons subject to the
use of property within the Village. Appearance tickets shall be made returnable before
the Town Justice of the Town of Webster.
§ 5-3. Existing and future positions included.
The above listing of public servants is intended to and does include those positions
presently in existence and, additionally, such said designated positions as may
subsequently be created by the Village Board of the Village of Webster.
§ 5-4. Method of service. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
An appearance ticket shall be served personally, except for an appearance ticket issued
for a traffic infraction related to parking, as provided in § 150.40 of the Criminal
Procedure Law.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 1-13 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 5-4
5:1

Chapter 7
ASSESSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 143.
§ 7-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Webster is to implement § 1402(3)
of the Real Property Tax Law providing for the voluntary termination of the Village's
status as an assessing unit, as provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax
Law. It is also the intent of this chapter to abolish the position of Assessor (or Board of
Assessors) and to terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for the review
of the assessments of real property located within the Village of Webster.
§ 7-2. Termination of assessing unit.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, the Village of July 26, 2007, shall cease to
be an assessing unit.
§ 7-3. Position of Assessor abolished.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Webster is hereby abolished.
§ 7-4. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Webster is hereby abolished.
§ 7-5. Village taxes to be levied on Town assessment roll.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, taxes in the Village of Webster shall be
levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the Town of Webster
with the taxable status date of such Town controlling for village purposes.
§ 7-6. Filing of copies.
Within five days of the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Webster shall file a copy of such local law with the Clerk and Assessor (or Board of
Assessors) of the Town of Webster and with the State Board of Real Property Services.
§ 5-4 ASSESSMENT § 7-6
7:1

Chapter 9
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 13.
§ 9-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Village
recognizes that there are rules of ethical conduct for public officers and employees which
must be observed if a high degree of moral conduct is to be maintained and if public
confidence is to be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this
chapter to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees of
the Village. These rules shall serve as a guide for official conduct of the officers and
employees of the Village. The rules of ethical conduct of this chapter as adopted shall
not conflict with, but shall be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest
in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 9-2. Definitions.3
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
INTEREST—A direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal
officer or employee as the result of a contract with the municipality which such officer or
employee serves. For the purposes of this chapter a municipal officer or employee shall
be deemed to have an interest in the contract of:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Village
of Webster, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative board,
commission or other agency thereof.
His spouse, minor children and dependents, except a contract of employment with
the municipality which such officer or employee serves;
A.
A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is a member
or employee;
B.
A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director or employee;
and
C.
A corporation any stock of which is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by
such officer or employee.
D.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 7-6 ETHICS, CODE OF § 9-3
9:1
§ 9-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village shall be subject to and abide by the following
standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He or she shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit any gift, whether in the form
of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or promise, or any
other form, under circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred that the
gift was intended to influence him or her or could reasonably be expected to
influence him or her in the performance of his or her or her official duties, or was
intended as a reward for any official act on his or her part. He or she shall not,
directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift having a value of $75 or more,
whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
thing or promise, or any form, under circumstances in which it could be reasonably
inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or could be reasonably expected
to influence him in the performance of his or her duties, or was intended as a reward
for any official action on his or her part.
B. Confidential information. He or she shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his or her official duties or use such information to
further his or her personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He or she shall not receive, or enter into
any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in
relation to any matter before any agency of this municipality, whereby his or her
compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit the fixing at
any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the services rendered.
D. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof, a member
of the Board of Trustees and any officer or employee of the Village, whether paid
or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or gives official opinion to the Village
on any matters before the Board, shall publicly disclose on the official record the
nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest he has
in such matters. Actual entry in the official minutes of the disclosure of interest will
suffice.
E. Investments in conflict with official duties. He or she shall not invest or hold any
investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business, commercial or other
private transaction which creates conflict with his or her official duties.
F. Private employment. He or she shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or promise
to accept private employment or render services for private interests when such
employment or service creates a conflict with or impairs the proper discharge of his
or her official duties.
G. Future employment. He or she shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with such municipality, appear before any board or agency of the
Village in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he or she
personally participated during the period of his or her service or employment or
which was under his or her active consideration.
§ 9-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 9-4
9:2
§ 9-4. Claims against Village.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or to prevent the timely filing by present or former
municipal officer or employee of any claim, account, demand or suit against the Village,
or any agency thereof, on behalf of himself or herself or any member of his or her
family, arising out of any personal injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit
authorized or permitted by law.
§ 9-5. Distribution of Code of Ethics.4
The Clerk of the Village shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed to
every officer and employee of the Village within 10 days after the effective date of this
chapter. Each officer and employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished
a copy before entering upon the duties of his or her office or employment. Failure to
distribute any such copy or failure of any officer or employee to receive such copy
shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with such code, nor the enforcement of
provisions thereof.5
§ 9-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any person who shall
knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this code may be fined,
suspended or removed from office or employment, as the case may be, in the manner
provided by law.
§ 9-7. Board of Ethics.
A. Membership. There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting of at least
three members, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Board of Trustees,
all of whom shall reside in the Village of Webster and who shall serve without
compensation for a term of one year. The Board shall consist of a majority of
members whom are not otherwise officers or employees of such municipality and
shall include at least one member who is an elected or appointed municipal officer
or employee.6
B. Advisory opinions. The Board of Ethics established hereunder shall render advisory
opinions to Village employees on written request, and, upon request of the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Webster, make recommendations to such Village
Board. The opinions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory and confidential and
in no event shall the identity of the Village employee be disclosed except to
authorized persons and agencies. Such opinions shall be on the advice of counsel
employed by the Board of Ethics or, if none, of the Village Attorney.
C. Rules and regulations. Such Board of Ethics, upon its formation, shall promulgate
its own rules and regulations as to its form and procedures and shall maintain
appropriate records of its opinions and proceedings.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
5. Editor's Note: Original § 9-6 of the 1994 Code, Filing with State Comptroller, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 9-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 9-8
9:3
§ 9-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect 10 days after it is adopted.
§ 9-8 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 9-8
9:4
Chapter 13
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 9.
§ 9-8 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 9-8
13:1

ARTICLE I
Residency Requirement for Appointed Officials
[Adopted 9-11-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003; amended in its entirety 6-23-2011 by L.L.
No. 2-2011]
§ 13-1. Eligibility for appointment to and continuance in office.
In addition to any other legal requirement or prohibitions, any person appointed as the
Village Clerk, Deputy Clerk, Village Treasurer, Deputy Village Treasurer, Building
Inspector or Superintendent of Public Works need not be residents of the Village but
must be residents of Monroe County.
§ 13-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 13-1
13:3

ARTICLE II
Antinepotism
[Adopted 6-13-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
§ 13-2. Intent.
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Webster hereby finds that the enactment
of this article, which is designed to address the employment, supervision, transfers or
recommendation of immediate family members, regardless of time worked, of elected
and appointed officials as defined under this article, shall promote the public interest,
avoid the possibility of personal bias, and strengthen public confidence in the integrity
of the Village government. This article will ensure public confidence in the integrity of
municipal personnel practices by requiring Village Board approval of the hiring, transfer
or promotion of municipal officials' relatives who are assigned positions not subject to
competitive examination pursuant to the New York Civil Service Law.
§ 13-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all appointments (including transfers) made
on or after the effective date of this article. This article shall not apply to employment
and supervisory arrangements which existed and which were in effect in accordance with
applicable Village policy prior to the effective date of this article. However, any future
changes in employment or relationship status shall be governed under this article.
§ 13-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPOINTED OFFICIAL — All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals,7 Historical
Preservation Commission, Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, Village Clerk, Village
Treasurer, and Superintendent of Public Works.
ELECTED OFFICIAL—The Mayor and all members of the Village Board of Trustees.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Spouse, grandfathers, grandmothers, grandsons,
granddaughters, fathers, mothers, stepfathers, stepmothers, sons, daughters, stepsons,
stepdaughters, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, nieces, nephews, first cousins, fathersin-
law, mothers-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, daughters-in-law, or sons-in-law
and the spouses of any members of the employee's immediate family. "Immediate
family" also includes a person who is in a spouse-like relationship to the employee.
§ 13-5. Prohibited employment.
A. The employment of any individual to a position not being filled pursuant to Civil
Service Law competitive examination, or which is not being filled pursuant to the
requirements set forth in a collective bargaining agreement between the Village and
a representative union, shall be prohibited when that individual is an immediate
family relative of an elected or appointed official.
7. Editor's Note: Pursuant to L.L. No. 3-2020, adopted 11-12-2020, which abolished the existing Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Appeals and created a new Zoning Board of Appeals, the references in this definition to the "Zoning
Board" and "Planning Board" were changed to "Zoning Board of Appeals."
§ 13-2 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 13-5
13:5
§ 13-6. Affidavit.
Any individual hired or promoted to a position not being filled pursuant to Civil Service
Law competitive examinations, or appointed pursuant to the requirements set forth
in a collective bargaining agreement between the Village and a representative union,
shall sign a sworn affidavit at least five business days prior to the commencement of
employment with the Village of Webster stating whether or not such individual is a
relative of any Village official, elected or appointed, as defined under this article. This
affidavit shall be filed with the Village of Webster Clerk at least one business day prior
to the commencement of employment with the Village of Webster.
§ 13-7. Exceptions.
The Village Board may authorize an exception to the prohibitions under this article in
cases where it is determined to be in accordance with applicable law and in the best
interest to grant an exception. Requests for exceptions shall be submitted as a resolution
by a member of the Village Board in accordance with this article. The Village Board
shall hold a public hearing at a regularly advertised and scheduled meeting. The Village
Board may have the opportunity to question the proposed employee at said hearing. A
majority vote of the Village Board present at the meeting shall be required to approve
such an exception for employment.
§ 13-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any individual who fails to file an affidavit required by § 13-6 of this article shall be
guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $1,000 and/or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed six months and immediately terminated from employment
at the Village of Webster. Additionally, any false statement submitted on the affidavit
or any other violation not covered by this section may be punishable in accordance with
New York State Penal Law.
B. Any individual holding an elected or appointed position as defined under this
article, for which payment is made from funds administered by the Village of
Webster, shall be prohibited from supervising, employing, appointing, or voting for
the appointment of members of his or her immediate family, in or to any position
or employment when the salary, wages, pay or the compensation of such appointee
is to be paid out of such funds administered by the Village of Webster.
§ 13-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 13-8
13:6
Part II: General Legislation
§ 13-8 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 13-8
13:7

Chapter 24
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 85.
§ 13-8 ANIMALS § 13-8
24:1

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 1-11-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
§ 24-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the Village of Webster, including the protection and preservation of the property of
the Village of Webster and its inhabitants and of the peace and good order by adopting
and enforcing certain regulations and restrictions on privileges of the owners of dogs
and the rights and privileges of the residents of the Village of Webster and by imposing
restrictions upon the keeping and running at large of dogs within the Village of Webster.
§ 24-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AT LARGE — A dog off the premises of the owner.
DOGS — Both male and female dogs, except where the context requires otherwise.
LEASHED OR RESTRAINED BY A LEASH — The dog is equipped with a collar of
sufficient strength to restrain the dog, to which collar is attached a leash of sufficient
strength, not more than eight feet long, which leash shall be held by a person having the
ability to control and restrain the dog by means of the collar and leash. A harness worn
by a guide dog for the blind shall be considered a suitable leash hereunder.
OWNER — Includes any person who owns, keeps or harbors or has the care, custody
or control of a dog. Dogs owned by minors shall be deemed to be in the custody of the
minor's parents or other head of the household where the minor resides.
§ 24-3. Regulations and restrictions.
A. No person shall permit a dog owned by him to be at large within the Village of
Webster unless restrained by a leash; provided, however, that dogs may be
unleashed while off the owner's premises when on the private premises of another
with the knowledge, consent and approval of such person or when hunting in the
company of and under the control of a hunter or hunters upon the property of
another with the knowledge, consent and approval of the property owner.
B. No dog, whether leashed or unleashed, shall be in any restaurant, grocery or
commercial establishment which sells food for human consumption or in any
cemetery, except that a guide dog for the blind may enter any such premises if
leading or accompanying a blind person therein.
C. No person shall keep or suffer to be kept a dog which has attacked any person
peaceably conducting himself in any place where such a person may lawfully be or
which has attacked, chased or worried or killed any domestic animal, as defined in
§ 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York, or any dog or
cat while such animal is in any place where it may lawfully be.
D. No person who owns a dog shall permit or suffer such dog to damage or destroy
property of any kind or to deposit waste on the private property of other persons.
§ 24-1 ANIMALS § 24-3
24:3
§ 24-4. Enforcement.8
It shall be the duty of the designated Animal Control Officer or peace officer of the Town
of Webster to enforce the provisions of this article as well as of the Agriculture and
Markets Law of the State of New York, with respect to dogs in the Village of Webster.
§ 24-5. License fee.
Annual license fees in the Village of Webster shall be established by resolution of the
Webster Town Board.
§ 24-6. Seizure of dogs.9
The designated Animal Control Officer or peace officer of the Town of Webster shall
seize any dog which is found at large within the Village of Webster in violation of this
article, as well as any dog or dogs otherwise required to be seized under and by virtue of
the Agriculture and Markets Law of the State of New York.
§ 24-7. Redemption of seized dogs.10
Every dog seized shall be properly fed and cared for until disposition thereof is made by
the Town as provided in Chapter 101, Dogs and Other Animals, of the Town of Webster
Code. The redemption of a seized dog shall be in conformance with and pursuant to the
provisions of the Agriculture and Markets Law of New York, both as to licensed and
unlicensed dogs.
§ 24-8. Town Justice shall have jurisdiction.
E. No person shall keep, suffer or permit to be kept on the premises occupied by such
person any dog which, by its continual barking, howling or whining or other
frequent or long continued noises, shall unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose
of other persons.
F. No person who owns a dog shall permit the premises, structures or enclosures in
which such dog is kept to be unclean or unsanitary.
G. No person shall permit a female dog owned by him to be off such owner's premises,
whether such dog is leashed or unleashed, while such female dog is in heat.
A. Any Town Justice of the Town of Webster shall have jurisdiction to hear all signed
complaints filed as hereinafter provided and all actions and proceedings hereunder
and of all prosecutions for the violation of this article. Upon receipt by the Town
Justice of any complaint against the conduct of any particular dog, the Town Justice
shall summon the alleged owner or other person harboring said dog to appear in
person before him. If the summons is disregarded, the Town Justice say permit the
filing of information and issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
B. Any person who observes a dog causing damage or destruction to the property of a
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 24-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 24-8
24:4
§ 24-9. Penalties for offenses.11
A violation of this article shall be deemed an offense against this article and shall be
punishable by either a fine not exceeding $150, removal of the dog from the Town of
Webster, by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or such fine and imprisonment, plus
reimbursement to the Town for the caring, feeding and housing of the dog commencing
from arraignment to final disposition. Each separate offense shall constitute a separate
additional violation. The provisions hereof are in addition to the regulations, restrictions,
requirements and penalties contained in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 24-10. Severability.
The invalidity of any such sentence, clause, paragraph or provision of this article shall
not invalidate any other sentence, clause, paragraph or provision or part thereof.
§ 24-11. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon publication and posting as required by law.
person other than its owner or violating any section of this article may file a signed
complaint, under oath, with a Town Justice of the Town of Webster, specifying the
objectionable conduct of the dog, the date thereof, the damage caused, a description
of the dog and the name and residence, if known, of the owner or other person
harboring said dog.
11. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 24-8 ANIMALS § 24-11
24:5

Chapter 30
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 5.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 46.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 50.
Plumbing — See Ch. 101.
Sewers — See Ch. 113.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 130.
Water — See Ch. 162.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 24-11 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 24-11
30:1

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 2-1989]
§ 30-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Village of Webster, New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code Administration and Enforcement Law."
§ 30-2. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide for the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of all laws, codes, ordinances, regulations and orders applicable to:
§ 30-3. Definitions. [Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partly enclosed within exterior walls or within
exterior or party walls and a roof, affording shelter to persons, animals or property.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials constructed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground. "Structures" include but are not limited to buildings, walls, fences, billboards,
poster panels, towers and pools 24 inches deep or more. However, a child's playhouse is
not included in this definition.[Amended 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 30-4. Adoption of standards.
The Village Board of the Village of Webster hereby adopts the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, henceforth referred to as the "Uniform Code," and
all subsequent amendments thereto.
§ 30-5. Code enforcement officials.12
The Building Inspector, Deputy Building Inspector, Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal
and Code Enforcement Officer are code enforcement officials as defined in the Uniform
Code.
A. The location, design, materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment,
maintenance, use, occupancy, removal and demolition of buildings, structures and
appurtenances located in the Village of Webster.
B. Fire prevention and firesafety regulations consistent with generally accepted
standards and nationally recognized good practice for the safeguarding of life and
property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from hazardous conditions
in the use or occupancy of buildings or premises and from the storage and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices.
12. Editor's Note: Original § 30-5, Office of the Building Inspector, was renumbered as § 30-6 6-14-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007.
§ 30-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-6
30:3
§ 30-6. Office of Building Inspector.13
§ 30-7. Powers and duties of Building Inspector and Fire Marshal.
A. The Village Board of the Village of Webster does hereby establish the Office to be
known as the "Office of the Building Inspector."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this Office is for the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of all laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders applicable to the
location, use, occupancy, removal and demolition of buildings, structures and
appurtenances located in the Village.
C. Personnel. [Amended 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(1) Building Inspector. The Office shall be headed by the Village officer
designated as the "Building Inspector." The Building Inspector shall be
appointed by the Village Board at a compensation to be fixed by the Board.
(2) The Code Enforcement Official shall possess background experience related
to building construction or fire prevention and shall, within the time prescribed
by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service
training and other training as the State of New York shall require for code
enforcement personnel, and the Code Enforcement Official shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law
and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(3) Deputy Building Inspector. The Village Board may appoint a Deputy Building
Inspector as the need may appear.
(a) One or more inspectors may be appointed by resolution of the Village
Board to act under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Official and to assist the Code Enforcement Official in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Official by this article. Each inspector shall, within the time
prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New York
shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector shall
obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
(4) The compensation for the Code Enforcement Official and inspectors shall be
fixed from time to time by the Village Board of this Village of Webster.
A. Building Inspector. Except as otherwise provided by law, ordinance, rule or
regulation, the Building Inspector shall administer and enforce all provisions of
laws, codes, ordinances, rules, regulations and orders applicable to the location,
design, materials, construction, alteration, repair, equipment, maintenance, use,
occupancy, removal and demolition of buildings, structures and appurtenances
thereof not specifically delegated as responsibilities of the Fire Marshal.
13. Editor's Note: Original § 30-6, Code enforcement officials, was renumbered as § 30-5 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007.
§ 30-6 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-7
30:4
§ 30-8. Cooperation of municipal officials.
The Building Inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the
discharge of the Building Inspector's duties, the assistance and cooperation of all other
municipal officials exercising any jurisdiction over the construction, use or occupancy
of buildings or the installation of equipment therein.
§ 30-9. Applicability of standards; continuance of nonconforming conditions.
§ 30-10. Appeals; removal of hazards.
B. Fire Marshal. Except as otherwise provided by law, ordinance, rule or regulation,
the Fire Marshal shall administer and enforce all laws, codes, ordinances, rules,
regulations and orders applicable to fire prevention and firesafety under Chapter 46,
Fire Prevention.
C. Joint responsibilities on Uniform Code. The Building Inspector and the Fire
Marshal shall jointly administer and enforce those provisions of the Uniform Code
dealing with building construction related to fire prevention and firesafety.
D. Other duties.
(1) The Building Inspector and/or the Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate, shall
issue notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the
necessary safeguards during construction or demolition and to assure
compliance with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(2) The Building Inspector and Fire Marshal shall keep official records of all
transactions and activities of their respective offices, including records of all
applications received, all permits and certificates issued, inspections
conducted and notices and orders issued.
A. The provisions of the Uniform Code relating to maintenance, housekeeping and
behavior regulations so as to protect life and property against the hazards of fire,
explosion and the release of toxic gases arising from the storage, handling or use of
combustible or hazardous substances, materials or devices shall apply equally to
new and existing buildings and conditions.
B. The Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate, shall have the
authority to permit the continuance of existing conditions not in strict compliance
with the terms of this article where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct hazard
to life or property.
A. Whenever the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
Uniform Code do not apply or that the intent and meaning of this article have been
misconstrued or misinterpreted, the person affected may appeal from the decision
of the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal to the State Fire Prevention and Building
Code Council of the New York State Executive Law.14
14. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 30-7 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-10
30:5
§ 30-11. Permits required; applications.
B. The procedures set forth herein for appeals shall not prohibit the Building Inspector
or Fire Marshal from immediately removing a hazard or ordering the immediate
closing of a building or premises until a violation of this article has been corrected
when such hazard or the existence of such violation constitutes a distinct hazard to
life or public safety.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall commence erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, removal, improvement, demolition, conversion or
installation therein of any building or structure or the change in use or occupancy
of any building or structure without first obtaining the appropriate required permits
from the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal. No permit shall be required for
construction work which is not structural in nature and does not entail installation
of plumbing, electrical, heating or ventilation systems already in use. No permit
shall be required for work of an ordinary replacement or maintenance nature, except
as otherwise stated in this article.
B. Application for a permit shall be made, on forms provided by the Village, by the
owner or lessee or the agent of either or by the architect, engineer or builder
employed in connection with the proposed work.
C. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by duplicate copies of plans and
specifications, including a plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the location and size
of all proposed new construction as well as the location of all existing structures on
the site, distances from lot lines, the relationship of structures on adjacent property,
the widths and grades of adjoining streets, walks and alleys, watercourses,
easements and utilities on the property. Said plans and specifications shall show the
size of all proposed new construction, and describe the nature and character of the
work to be performed and all materials to be incorporated and, where required by
the Building Inspector, details of structural, plumbing, mechanical and electrical
work, including computations, stress diagrams and other essential data.
D. The aforementioned requirements of this section may be waived by the Building
Inspector where it appears that strict application of this section would create an
undue hardship and where it further appears that the strict application of this section
would not result in a violation by the applicant of any of the other sections of this
article or of any other ordinance, rule or regulation.
E. Plans and specifications shall bear the signature of the person responsible for the
design and drawings and, where required by § 7307, as amended, of Article 147 of
the Education Law of the State of New York, the seal of a licensed architect or a
licensed professional engineer.
F. In all cases where there is to be installation of new plumbing or alteration of
existing plumbing, a plumbing permit must be obtained.
G. The Fire Marshal shall issue all permits for solid-fuel-burning appliances, chimneys
and/or flues, as governed by § 46-11B in Chapter 46, Fire Prevention. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
H. Amendments to any application, plan or specifications may be filed at any time
§ 30-10 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-11
30:6
§ 30-12. Issuance of permits; nontransferability; extensions; consent to
inspections; consolidated permits.
§ 30-13. Fees.
A schedule of fees is on file and available in the Village office.
prior to commencement of the work. Such amendments shall likewise be subject to
the approval of the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate.
A. The Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate, shall review or
cause to be reviewed applications for permits, together with the plans,
specifications and documents filed therewith.
B. Upon the payment of the required fee and upon satisfactory proof's being given that
the applicant is in compliance with the applicable provisions, rules and regulations
of this article, a permit may be issued by and bear the name and signature of the
Building Inspector or Fire Marshal, as may be appropriate.
C. Any permit granted hereunder shall be limited only to the activity authorized on
said permit, and its continued validity shall be subject to the conditions set forth in
said permit.
D. Any permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable except when transfer is
approved by the appropriate official, and any change in the activity, size, extent or
type of operation, location, ownership or use shall require a new permit.
E. Permits shall continue until revoked as provided for herein or for a period of time
designated at the time of issuance. An extension of the permit time period may be
granted, provided that satisfactory justification can be shown for failure to start or
complete the work or activity authorized within the required time period.
F. Any application for or acceptance of any permit issued or requested pursuant to this
article constitutes agreement and consent by the person making application or
accepting the permit to allow the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal to enter
upon the premises at any and/or during reasonable/normal working hours to
conduct inspections as required by this article. Refusal to allow the Building
Inspector or Fire Marshal to conduct said inspections of the premises and their
records related to such permit or required to be maintained by this article shall
constitute sufficient justification for the summary and immediate revocation or
suspension of said permit. In addition, should the Building Inspector or Fire
Marshal deem it necessary, either may make an application to any court of
competent jurisdiction to obtain a warrant authorizing an inspection of the premises
in question.
G. Consolidated permits. When more than one permit is required by the Fire Marshal
for the same property or premises, a single permit may be issued listing all materials
or operations covered. Revocation or suspension as set forth herein of a portion or
portions of such consolidated permit for specific hazardous materials or operations
may, at the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal, be sufficient cause to revoke or
suspend the other permitted activities.
§ 30-11 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-14
30:7
§ 30-14. Expiration of permits, approvals and variances.
Any approval issued by any Village official under this article, any zoning variance, any
subdivision approval granted under Chapter 137, Subdivision of Land, and any other
permit of any kind which is approved under this article shall expire if the construction
or use permitted by such approval, variance or permit is not begun within one year after
the granting of the approval, variance or permit. The recipient of any such approval,
permit or variance may apply to the Board or official who issued the approval, permit or
variance for an extension of one year in which to begin construction. This section shall
apply to all permits, approvals and variances granted before the effective date of this
article or hereafter.15
§ 30-15. Stop-work orders.
§ 30-16. Inspections; complaints; open burning.
A. Whenever the Building Inspector has reasonable grounds to believe that the work
on any building or structure is proceeding without permit or is otherwise in
violation of the provisions of any applicable law, code, ordinance, rule or regulation
or is not in conformity with any of the provisions of the application, plans or
specifications on the basis of which a permit was issued or is being conducted in an
unsafe or dangerous manner, the Building Inspector shall notify either the owner of
the property or the owner's agent or the person, firm or corporation performing the
work to immediately suspend all work. In such instance, any and all persons shall
immediately suspend all related activities until the stop-work order has been duly
rescinded.
B. Such stop-work order shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the Building
Inspector and shall state the reason for the stop-work order, together with the date
of issuance. The stop-work order shall bear the signature of the Building Inspector
and shall be prominently posted at the work site.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Official shall cause the stopwork
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property
(and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the permit holder) personally or by
registered mail/certified mail. The Code Enforcement Official shall be permitted,
but not required, to cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on
any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work
affected by the stop-work order, personally or by registered mail/certified mail;
provided, however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall
not affect the efficacy of the stop-work order. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
A. A schedule of required inspections shall be made available to all applicants for
permits.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the owner's agent to notify the Building
15. Editor's Note: Original § 30-14B, which immediately followed this section and required the posting of permits issued by
the Fire Marshal, was repealed 6-4-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994. For the provisions on posting of permits, see now Ch. 46,
Fire Prevention, § 46-4F.
§ 30-14 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-16
30:8
Inspector and/or Fire Marshal when work is ready for each required inspection.
C. Inspections of all work authorized by a building permit shall be requested by
notification of the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal not less than one working
day prior to the time the inspection is to be scheduled. All inspections shall be
scheduled as soon as possible, subject to the availability of the Building Inspector
and Fire Marshal.
D. Firesafety inspections shall be conducted on a regular schedule by the Fire Marshal.
All areas of public assembly shall be inspected at least once each year. Multiple
dwellings and all nonresidential occupancies shall be inspected at least once every
two years. Dwellings shall be inspected only upon bona fide complaints or upon the
request of the owner or occupant.
E. Inspections of the installation of any solid-fuel-burning heating appliances and
associated chimneys and flues shall be conducted by the Fire Marshal. No person
shall use or permit the use of any solid-fuel-burning appliance, chimney or flue
which has been installed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired or altered or which
has been subjected to a chimney fire unless and until said appliance, chimney or
flue has been inspected by the Fire Marshal and a certificate of compliance issued
by the Fire Marshal. Failure to comply with these provisions is a violation of this
article and is grounds for ordering that the premises be vacated.
F. For all other inspections, specific requirements as to the advance time for inspection
requests and the acceptable means of notification shall be at the discretion of the
Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal or in accordance with established
procedures, rules or regulations.
G. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible and exposed
until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement Official or by an inspector
authorized by the Code Enforcement Official. The permit holder shall notify the
Code Enforcement Official when any element of work described in Subsection I of
this section is ready for inspection. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
H. Failure to request a required inspection shall be cause for rejection of the work or
an order to expose the work for inspection.
I. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the construction
process shall be inspected, where applicable: [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
§ 30-16 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-16
30:9
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit has been
completed.
J. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall be noted as
satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to where the
work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code. Work not in
compliance with any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy Code
shall remain exposed until such work shall have been brought into compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected,
and found satisfactory as completed. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
K. Where permits are required, the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal may, at any
reasonable hour, enter any building or premises within the Village of Webster for
the purpose of making the required inspections.
L. Upon written complaint of any person, duly affirmed under penalty of perjury,
alleging a violation of this article or of the Uniform Code, the Building Inspector
and/or Fire Marshal shall investigate the complaint and make written report to the
complainant, the owner of the property, the Mayor and the Village Board.
[Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
M. The Building Inspector/Fire Marshal shall review and investigate complaints which
allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any other local law or regulation
adopted for administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy
Code. The process for responding to a complaint shall include such of the following
steps as the Building Inspector/Fire Marshal may deem to be appropriate: [Added
6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(1) Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to be in
violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
(2) If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected property
and any other person who may be responsible for the violation with notice of
the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the violation, or
otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 30-22, Violation notices;
appearance tickets; penalties for offenses, of this article;
(3) Issuing a stop-work order;
(4) If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected, performing an
inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated or corrected, preparing
a final written report reflecting such abatement or correction, and filing such
report with the complaint.
N. The Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal may, at any reasonable hour, enter any
building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection or investigation to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and the Uniform Code.
§ 30-16 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-16
30:10
§ 30-17. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. [Amended 8-11-2005
by L.L. No. 5-2005; 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
O. Should entrance to make an inspection be refused or permission to enter be unable
to be obtained, application may be made for a warrant to make such inspection to
any court of competent jurisdiction.
P. Open burning shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Monroe County
Sanitary Code, Article V. All controlled burnings must first be checked by the Fire
Marshal for compliance and properly set up with notification to the respective Fire
Chiefs and Departments, the Village Clerk, the Webster Police Department and the
Monroe County Fire Dispatcher's office.16
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance shall be required for any work which is the
subject of a building permit and for all structures, buildings, or portions thereof
which are converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification
to another. Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only by issuance
of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The Building
Inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance if the work
which was the subject of the building permit was completed in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use or occupancy
classification or subclassification to another complies with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and Energy Code. The Code Enforcement Official or an
inspector authorized by the Building Inspector shall inspect the building, structure
or work prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance.
In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance
with the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be
designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Building Inspector, at the expense of
the applicant for the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, shall be
provided to the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report of special
inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications, where applicable.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. A certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance shall contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
16. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 30-16 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-17
30:11
(4) If the certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is not applicable to an
entire structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which the
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to whether the
sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of the
building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Building Inspector issuing the certificate of occupancy/
certificate of compliance and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Building Inspector shall be permitted to issue a
temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a building or structure,
or a portion thereof, prior to completion of the work which is the subject of a
building permit. However, in no event shall the Building Inspector issue a
temporary certificate unless the Building Inspector determines that the building or
structure, or the portion thereof covered by the temporary certificate, may be
occupied safely, that any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment
which has been installed is operational, and that all required means of egress from
the building or structure have been provided. The Building Inspector may include
in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary
or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes and intent of the Uniform
Code. A temporary certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed
six months, which shall be determined by the Building Inspector and specified in
the temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of the
temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring the building or
structure into full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Building Inspector determines that a
certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or a temporary certificate was
issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, and if
the relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector within such period of time as shall be specified by the Building Inspector,
the Building Inspector shall revoke or suspend such certificate.
F. A certificate of occupancy for a two-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, or
building containing a dwelling unit or units and a retail store, restaurant,
professional office, business office and/or personal service establishment shall
expire upon the first to occur of the following:
(1) Change in use.
(2) Sale or transfer of title, other than a sale or transfer that is:
§ 30-17 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-17
30:12
§ 30-18. Temporary certificate. [Amended 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(a) A transfer of a fee simple interest to a person or persons who held a fee
simple interest in the real property (whether as a joint tenant, a tenant in
common or otherwise) immediately before the transfer; or
(b) A transfer is to a person or persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
to the transferor or to one or more of the transferors or to a person or
entity where 50% or more of the beneficial interest in such real property
after the transfer is held by the transferor or such related person or
persons (as in the case of a transfer to a trustee for the benefit of a minor
or the transfer to a trust for the benefit of the transferor); or
(c) A transfer to a trustee in bankruptcy, a receiver, assignee, or other officer
of a court.
(3) Reoccupying a building or portion thereof after it has remained vacant or
unoccupied for a period of 200 days;
(4) Sixty days following the issuance of a second or subsequent violation notice
or appearance ticket under § 30-22 of this Code, unless such violation has been
cured during that sixty-day period.
G. Inspections and issuance of renewal certificates of occupancy for a two-family
dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, or building containing a dwelling unit or units
and a retail store, restaurant, professional office, business office and/or personal
service establishment shall be governed by the standards described in § 175-3 for
"usable condition" and § 175-67 for maintenance standards.17
A. The Code Enforcement Official shall be permitted to issue a temporary certificate
allowing the temporary occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof,
prior to completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit. However,
in no event shall the Code Enforcement Official issue a temporary certificate unless
the Code Enforcement Official determines that the building or structure, or the
portion thereof covered by the temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, that
any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment which has been installed
is operational, and that all required means of egress from the building or structure
have been provided. The Code Enforcement Official may include in a temporary
certificate such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to
ensure safety or to further the purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A
temporary certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six
months, which shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Official and specified
in the temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of the
temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring the building or
structure into full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code.
B. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement Official
determines that a certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance or a temporary
17. Editor's Note: Original § 30-17H, Violations, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 30-17 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-18
30:13
§ 30-19. Certificate of compliance.
§ 30-20. Notification regarding fire or explosion. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a property within
this Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement Official of any fire or explosion
involving any structural damage, fuel-burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 30-21. Unsafe buildings and structures. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-200719]
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete
information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the satisfaction
of the Code Enforcement Official within such period of time as shall be specified
by the Code Enforcement Official, the Code Enforcement Official shall revoke or
suspend such certificate.18
A. Certificates of compliance shall be used to indicate conformance with this article
and the Uniform Code for installations which require inspection but would not be
issued a certificate of occupancy. Such installations include but are not limited to
solid-fuel burning heating appliances, plumbing installations, other equipment
installation and removal of underground tanks and firesafety inspections.
B. Certificates of compliance shall be issued by the Building Inspector or Fire Marshal
only after an inspection which shows that the installation is in conformance with
this article and the Uniform Code.
C. Certificates of compliance may be revoked when there has been substantial and
unauthorized change in conditions which renders or may render the installation not
in conformance with this article and the Uniform Code.
A. Purpose. Unsafe buildings pose a threat to the health and safety of the residents of
the Village of Webster. Buildings may become unsafe by reason of fire, damage
caused by other elements, age and/or general deterioration. Vacant buildings that
are not properly secured serve as attractive nuisances for young children and
provide a place for older children and transients to congregate unsupervised. A
dilapidated building may also serve as a place of rodent or other infestation,
creating a health menace to the community. The outdoor storage, accumulation,
deposit or placement of abandoned, junked, discarded, wholly or partially
dismantled or unlicensed or unregistered motor vehicles, rubbish, debris, solid
waste or garbage upon private property likewise threatens the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Village of Webster. It is the purpose of this section
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
Village of Webster by providing for a procedure and process to deal with unsafe
buildings by requiring that they be either repaired or demolished and removed and
to deal with unsafe property by requiring that accumulated debris, junked motor
vehicles, garbage and solid waste be removed.
18. Editor's Note: Original § 30-19, Temporary certificate of occupancy, was repealed 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007.
19. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 30-18 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-21
30:14
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Includes any building, structure or portion thereof used for
residential, business, agricultural, industrial or other use.
DEBRIS — Includes all materials resulting from the construction, excavation,
renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair or demolition of structures, property or
roads, as well as materials consisting of vegetation resulting from land clearing
and grubbing, utility line maintenance and seasonal storm-related cleanup. Such
materials shall include, but not be limited to, bricks, concrete and other masonry
material, soil, rock, wood, wall coverings, plaster, drywall, plumbing fixtures,
nonasbestos insulation, roofing shingles, asphalt pavement, glass, window frames,
electrical wiring and components, plastics, carpeting, foam padding, linoleum or
vinyl flooring, metals or combinations thereof which are incidental to construction,
excavation, renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair or demolition.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, materials that are being used on the owner's
premises for an ongoing improvement for which a building permit is in effect shall
not be deemed to be "debris," provided that, if stored outside, they are covered by
tarps or the equivalent to protect the materials from the weather.
GARBAGE — Includes all putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from
the growing, processing, marketing and preparation of food items, including
containers in which packaged, and animal feces from household pets.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes a motor vehicle which is wrecked,
abandoned, dismantled or partially dismantled and which is in such a deteriorated
condition that it cannot be legally operated upon the public highways without
substantial repairs. With respect to any motor vehicle not required to be licensed
or motor vehicles not usually used on public highways, the fact that such motor
vehicle has remained unused for six months or more and is not in condition to be
moved under its own power shall be presumptive evidence that such motor vehicle
is a junked motor vehicle.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all putrescible and nonputrescible materials and
substances discarded or rejected as having served their original intended use or as
being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owner at the time of such discard
or rejection, including but not limited to household and commercial garbage,
industrial waste, rubbish, debris, litter and ashes.
UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES —
Buildings or other structures which have any of the following defects:
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center
of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base.
(a)
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more of damage
or deterioration of the supporting member or members or 50% of damage
or deterioration of nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering.
(b)
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength
(c)
(1)
§ 30-21 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-21
30:15
UNSAFE PROPERTY — Includes a property upon which debris, garbage, junked
motor vehicles, rubbish and/or solid waste have been allowed to accumulate to
the extent that their presence constitutes a hazard to public health by creating
a hazardous condition for those persons entering onto the property whether by
invitation or in response to emergency calls, provides a habitat for rats and other
undesirable animals or creates an eyesore to the community.
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, snow load or other causes
so as to have become dangerous to the life, safety and general welfare of
the residents of the Village of Webster.
(d)
Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or
unsanitary that they are unfit for occupation by humans or animals or for
use for storage.
(e)
Those buildings intended or used for human occupation that are
inadequate to protect the health, safety and general welfare of human
residents living therein.
(f)
Those buildings that lack adequate facilities for ingress and egress in
case of fire or other emergency or those having insufficient stairways,
elevators, fire escapes or other means of escape.
(g)
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure persons on the property or members of the general public or
cause damage to other property.
(h)
Those buildings and structures which violate the provisions of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the Zoning Law
of the Village of Webster, the Property Maintenance Code of New York
State, the Building Code of New York State, the Fire Code of New York
State, the Residential Code of New York State, the Plumbing Code of
New York State, the Mechanical Code of New York State, the Energy
Code of New York State and any other applicable laws of the State of
New York, County of Monroe or Village of Webster.
(i)
Any building which remains vacant and unattended continuously for a
period of one year or longer, without adequate safeguards to prevent
unauthorized entry.
(j)
This Code provision shall be applicable to all properties in the Village of
Webster, whether existing at the time of the adoption of this provision or
constructed thereafter.
(2)
C. Notification of unsafe condition; demolition or reconstruction.
(1) When a building has been damaged by a fire or explosion, it shall be the
obligation of the owner to notify the Code Enforcement Official of such
occurrence within 72 hours after such occurrence. Notwithstanding this
notification requirement, if the Code Enforcement Official has already been
notified of the damage, this notice provision shall be waived.
§ 30-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-21
30:16
(2) If fire, explosion or other natural disaster or general neglect shall render the
building so damaged as to be incapable of being occupied or used in
accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code and/or Chapter 175, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Webster, the
owner of such building shall also, within 72 hours after such occurrence or, in
the case of a building that has become deteriorated by general neglect, within
72 hours after being notified by the Code Enforcement Official of the
deterioration of the building into an unsafe condition, seal said building
against access by unauthorized persons and shall clear the site of debris
incident to the occurrence within two weeks after the occurrence.
(3) Within 60 days after an occurrence as set forth in Subsection C(2) above, the
owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Official in writing of his or her intent
to either demolish the building and not rebuild or to rebuild the building. The
owner shall have the right to request a sixty-day extension if the delay is
caused by circumstances beyond his control, including but not limited to delay
in settlement with his insurance company.
(4) If the owner notifies the Code Enforcement Official of his intent to demolish
the building and not rebuild, the owner must commence demolition within 30
days thereafter and demolition must be completed and all debris removed
within 30 days thereafter (60 days after notice of election to demolish).
(5) If the owner notifies the Code Enforcement Official of his intent to rebuild or
reconstruct the building, application for a building permit must be obtained
within 60 days after notice of election to rebuild. The owner shall have a total
of six months to complete the rebuilding or reconstruction of the building but
shall have the right to request an extension if necessary to finish the
reconstruction; provided, however, that during such period the building must
remain secured as to not present a hazard to the public. The Code Enforcement
Official shall grant an extension if it appears that rebuilding or reconstruction
is continuing and that during such rebuilding or reconstruction the building is
secured so as not to create a hazard to the public. Any extension granted by the
Code Enforcement Official shall not extend beyond one year following the
election to rebuild, unless the consent of the Village Board to a further
extension is granted.
D. Investigation and report.
(1) Upon receipt of a report filed with the Code Enforcement Official in
accordance with Subsection C above or when, in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Official or upon receipt of information from another source that
a building or structure is or may be an unsafe building as defined in Subsection
B hereof, the Code Enforcement Official shall cause or make an inspection of
the same and report in writing to the Village Board of his findings and any
recommendations in regard to the unsafe building or structure, its repair or
demolition and removal. The Code Enforcement Official shall be required to
identify himself to any reputed owner or occupant thereof. If in the opinion of
the Code Enforcement Official an interior inspection is warranted, the Code
Enforcement Official shall have the authority to obtain an administrative
search warrant.
§ 30-21 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-21
30:17
(2) Upon receipt of a complaint from a person indicating that a property may have
been rendered an unsafe property due to the accumulation of debris, junked
cars, rubbish and/or solid waste on a property or upon personal observation by
the Code Enforcement Official, the Code Enforcement Official shall be
required to identify himself to any reputed owner or occupant thereof. If,
following an inspection, the Code Enforcement Official believes that the
property is in violation, the Code Enforcement Official shall serve or caused
to be served notice, in person or by certified mail, upon the owner or owner's
agent and upon the occupant or lessee of the property, if applicable. Said
notice shall specify the name of the owner, the address of the property where
the violation exists, the SBL number of the property, and a statement of the
conditions that exist on the property that make the property in violation of this
section and shall demand that the items which have resulted in the violation be
removed within 10 days following receipt of written notice of violation. The
Code Enforcement Official shall inspect the property 10 days after the giving
of written notice, as provided above, and if violations have been corrected, the
matter shall be deemed closed. If the violations have not been corrected, the
Code Enforcement Official shall file a report to the Village Board.
E. Village Board order. The Village Board shall review the report submitted by the
Code Enforcement Official and by resolution determine if, in its opinion, based
solely upon the report, it is indicated that the building is an unsafe building or that
the property is an unsafe property, as defined herein, and, if it so finds, order that a
hearing be held before the Village Board to determine whether the building is an
unsafe building or the property is an unsafe property, as defined herein, with notice
to the owner of the building or property.
F. Contents of notice; noncompliance.
(1) The notice shall contain the following:
(a) A description of the premises, including tax account number and street
address.
(b) A statement of the particulars in which the building or property is unsafe
or dangerous.
(c) An order outlining the manner in which the building is to be made safe
and secure, or demolished and removed, or the manner in which the
property is to be rendered safe.
(d) A statement that the securing or removal of such building or the removal
of the debris, junked motor vehicles, rubbish and/or solid waste shall
commence within 30 days following a further decision of the Village
Board rendered following the hearing specified hereafter and shall be
completed within 60 days thereafter, unless for good cause shown the
Village Board shall extend such time.
(e) A date, time and place for a hearing set by the Village Board before the
Village Board in relation to such dangerous or unsafe building, which
hearing shall be scheduled not less than 15 business days from the date of
service of the notice.
§ 30-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-21
30:18
(2) The notice shall further state that, in the event of the refusal or neglect of the
person so notified to comply with the order of the Village Board following the
hearing, the Village Board may provide for the repairing and securing or
demolition and removal of such building or the removal of the debris, junked
motor vehicles, rubbish and/or solid waste either by Village employees or by
contract and that the expenses of such repairing and securing or demolition
and removal will be assessed back against the owner in accordance with
Subsection L of this section.
(3) As an alternative, the Village Board may, in its discretion, elect to direct the
Code Enforcement Official to apply to the Supreme Court of the State of New
York for an order directing that the building be repaired and secured or
demolished and removed or that the property be cleaned up.
G. Service of notice. Said notice shall be served personally upon the owner as shown
by the records of the Village Assessor of the Village of Webster or the Monroe
County Clerk's office. In the event that the reputed owner is deceased, service shall
be made upon the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees, heirs or
distributees, as determined after review of surrogate court or other relevant records.
If no such person can be reasonably found, such notice shall be served by mailing,
both by regular and certified mail addressed to the last known address, if any, of the
owner or the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees, heirs or
distributees. If such notice is served by regular and certified mail, a copy of such
notice shall be posted on the premises.
H. Filing of notices. A copy of the notice served as provided herein shall be filed in the
Monroe County Clerk's office in the same manner as provided for in the case of a
notice of pendency pursuant to Article 65 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York and shall have the same effect as the filing of a notice of
pendency as provided therein. A notice so filed shall be effective for a period of one
year from the date of filing; provided, however, that it may be vacated upon an
order of a judge or justice of a court of record or upon the consent of the Attorney
for the Village. The County Clerk shall mark such notice and record or docket
thereof as canceled of record upon the presentation and filing of such consent or a
certified copy of such order. In addition, a copy of said notice shall be filed in the
office of the Webster Village Clerk.
I. Hearing, determination and order.
(1) At the time and place specified in the notice issued pursuant to Subsection F
of this section, the Village Board shall conduct a hearing to review the report
prepared by the Code Enforcement Official, the testimony of the Code
Enforcement Official and such other evidence as the owner or Code
Enforcement Official shall introduce having relevance to the proceedings. At
such hearing, the owner, his executor, legal representative, agent, lessees, heirs
or distributees shall be entitled to introduce evidence to rebut the report
submitted by the Code Enforcement Official and his testimony, including but
not limited to the owner's own testimony, photographic evidence, reports of
licensed Building Inspectors and other relevant evidence. In addition, the
owner shall have the right to request the Village Board to personally visit the
building and/or the property.
§ 30-21 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-21
30:19
(2) At the close of the hearing, the Village Board shall by resolution affirm,
modify or rescind its initial decision and order. If the initial order is affirmed
or affirmed with modification, the Village Board shall issue an order directing
that the owner shall, within 30 days following the service upon the owner of
the Village Board's order following the hearing, commence with the repairing
and securing of the building or the demolition and removal of the building in
accordance with the order of the Village Board or in the case of an unsafe
property that the owner shall remove and dispose of the items that have
rendered the property unsafe and that such repairing and securing or
demolition and removal shall be completed within 60 days thereafter.
J. Repair or demolition by Village.
(1) If the owner shall fail to commence repairing and securing or demolishing and
removal of the building or cleaning up of the property within 30 days
following service upon the owner of the order of the Village Board following
the hearing or fails to complete said repairing and securing or demolition and
removal or cleaning up of the property within 60 days thereafter, the Village
Board may provide for the repairing and securing of the building or the
demolition and removal of the building or cleaning up of the property by
Village employees or by contract and that said expenses be assessed back
against the owner in accordance with Subsection L hereof. Except in the case
of an emergency as provided in Subsection K hereof, any contract for the
repairing and securing or the demolition and removal of a building in excess
of the monetary limits established in § 103 of the General Municipal Law shall
be awarded by the Village Board through competitive bidding.
(2) As an alternative, the Village Board may, in its discretion, elect to direct the
Code Enforcement Official to apply to the Supreme Court of the State of New
York for an order directing that the building be repaired and secured or
demolished and removed or that the property be cleaned up and the items that
render it unsafe be removed and disposed of properly.
K. Emergency actions. Where the Village Board determines that there is a clear and
imminent danger to the life, safety or health of persons and/or property unless an
unsafe building is immediately repaired and secured or demolished and removed or
unless an unsafe property is immediately cleaned up with items rendering it unsafe
removed, the Village Board may by resolution authorize the Code Enforcement
Official to immediately cause the repair or demolition of such unsafe building and/
or the cleaning up of the property and removal of the items that rendered the
property unsafe. The expenses of any repair and securing or demolition and removal
shall be a charge against the real property upon which such unsafe building is
located and shall be assessed, levied and collected as provided for in Subsection L
hereof.
L. Assessment and collection of Village's expenses. All expenses incurred by the
Village in connection with proceedings to compel the repair and securing or
demolition and removal of an unsafe building and any cost of the actual repair and
securing or demolition and removal and the cost of cleaning up an unsafe property
and removal of all items that have caused the property to become unsafe shall be
assessed upon the real property upon which such unsafe building or the unsafe
§ 30-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-21
30:20
§ 30-22. Violation notices; appearance tickets; penalties for offenses.
property is located and shall be levied and collected in the same manner as provided
for in Article 5 of the Village Law for the levy and collection of special ad valorem
assessments.
A. Violations; procedures for correction; appearance tickets.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, alter,
repair, remove, move, demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building
or structure or portion thereof in violation of any of the provisions of this
article or fail in any manner to comply with any notice, directive or order of
the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal or to construct, alter or use and
occupy any building or structure or part thereof in a manner not permitted by
an approved building permit, use permit, plumbing permit or certificate of
occupancy.
(2) Any individual, partnership, corporation or other firm owning, operating,
occupying or maintaining property or premises within the scope of the
Uniform Code or this article shall comply with all the provisions of the
Uniform Code, this article and all orders, notices, rules, regulations or
determinations issued in connection therewith.
(3) Whenever it is found that there has been a violation of the Uniform Code, this
article or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article, a violation
notice and/or appearance ticket may be issued to the person, individual,
partnership or corporation owning, operating or maintaining the premises in
which such violation has been noted.
(4) Violation notices shall be in writing, shall identify the property or premises,
shall specify the violation or remedial action to be taken and shall provide that
said violation must be corrected within 10 days from the receipt of said
violation notice unless said ten-day period shall be modified in the discretion
of the enforcement officer issuing such violation notice or unless a shorter
period of time has been prescribed in this article.
(5) Violation notices and other orders or notices referred to in this article shall be
served on the owner or one of the owner's executors, legal representatives,
agents, lessees, any tenant or other person occupying the premises or other
person having a vested or contingent interest in the premises, either personally
or by certified mail addressed to the last known address, if any, of the owner
or one of the owner's executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or other
person having a vested or contingent interest in the same, as shown by the last
preceding completed record of the Receiver of the Taxes or in the office of the
County Clerk.
(6) Appearance tickets. The Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal shall have the
authority, pursuant to the Criminal Procedure Law, to issue an appearance
ticket subscribed by the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal directing a
designated person to appear in court at a designated time in connection with
the commission of a violation of this article or any order made thereunder.
§ 30-21 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-22
30:21
B. Penalties.
(1) Unless otherwise provided in § 382 of the Executive Law, any person who
shall fail to comply with a written order of the Building Inspector and/or Fire
Marshal within the time fixed for compliance therewith and any owner,
builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, plumber, construction
superintendent or agent thereof or any other person taking part or assisting in
the construction or use of any building who shall violate any of the applicable
provisions of this article or any lawful order, notice, directive, permit or
certificate of the Building Inspector and/or Fire Marshal made thereunder or in
addition to any other penalties provided for in this article, the Uniform Code
or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this article or who shall violate
or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder shall be
guilty of an offense punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both, and each day such violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. The imposition of such penalty
shall not be held to prohibit the enforced removal of prohibited conditions by
any appropriate remedy, including immediate application for an injunction.
[Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(2) An action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Webster, New York,
may be commenced in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation of any provision of the
Uniform Code, this article, a rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this article
or a violation of any order to vacate the occupancy or building in the case of
imminent danger to life or property. Such remedy shall be in addition to
penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
(3) Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name of the
Village of Webster, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article or any term or condition of any
building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit, compliance order, or other
notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Official pursuant to any
provision of this article. In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the
construction or use of a building or structure is in violation of any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this article, or any stop-work order,
compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this article, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name
of the Village of Webster, in the Supreme Court or in any other court having
the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the
building or structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of such
provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection shall be
commenced without the appropriate authorization from the Board of the
Village of Webster. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(4) Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section shall
be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any violation described
§ 30-22 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-22
30:22
§ 30-23. Recordkeeping. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
§ 30-24. Program review and reporting. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be in
addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the other remedies or
penalties specified in this section, in § 30-15, Stop-work orders, of this article,
in any other section of this article, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy
or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior
to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 30-15, Stop-work orders, of this article, in any
other section of this article, or in any other applicable law. In particular, but
not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty specified in this section
shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the penalties
specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of the Executive Law, and any remedy
or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time, whether
prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in
Subdivision (2) of § 382 of the Executive Law. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007]
A. The Building Inspector shall keep permanent official records of all transactions and
activities conducted by all code enforcement personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance,
temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by this article;
and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection during normal
business hours. All plans and records pertaining to buildings or structures, or
appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for at least the minimum time period so
required by state law and regulation.
A. The Building Inspector shall annually submit to the Board of the Village of Webster
a written report and summary of all business conducted by the Building Inspector
and the inspectors, including a report and summary of all transactions and activities
described in § 30-23, Recordkeeping, of this article and a report and summary of all
appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
§ 30-22 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 30-24
30:23
§ 30-25. Indemnification of Village.
This article shall not be construed to hold any Code Enforcement Officer of the Village
of Webster or the Village of Webster responsible for any damages to persons or property
by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or
reinspect as required by any permits under this article, nor shall the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Village be liable for any damage to persons or property by reason of the
Building Inspector's and/or Fire Marshal's exercising their discretion as provided in this
article.
§ 30-26. Conflict with other provisions.
In the event that the provisions of this article shall be in conflict with any other law, rule
or regulation, the more stringent provision shall govern.
B. The Building Inspector shall annually submit to the Secretary of State, on behalf of
the Village of Webster, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of
the activities of the Village relative to administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code.
C. The Building Inspector shall, upon request of the New York State Department of
State, provide to the New York State Department of State, from the records and
related materials this Village is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries,
tabulations, statistics and other information and accounts of the activities of the
Village of Webster in connection with administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code.
§ 30-24 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 30-26
30:24
Chapter 33
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 33-1. District established.
The Business Improvement District is established in accordance with General Municipal
Law, Article 19-A, § 980.
§ 33-2. Amendments or extensions.20 [Added 4-24-2008 by L.L. No. 6-2008]
Any amendments or extensions of any proposed Business Improvement District must
be made in accordance with the provisions set forth in General Municipal Law Article
19-A.
§ 33-3. Extension of district. [Added 11-11-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
A. This section is adopted and the establishment or extension of the Business
Improvement District is hereby approved.
B. The boundaries of the Business Improvement District shall be those as are set forth
on the attached map.21
C. The improvements and services of the Business Improvement District shall be those
as are set forth in the latest district plan previously adopted and on file in the office
of the Village Clerk.
D. This section shall become effective upon compliance with General Municipal Law
§ 980-g.
20. Editor's Note: Original § 33-2, Activities of District, was repealed 4-24-2008 by L.L. No. 5-2008.
21. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 30-26 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT § 33-3
33:1

Chapter 46
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 5. Building construction — See Ch. 30.
§ 46-1. Applicability.
§ 46-2. Administration.
A. This chapter shall provide the basic method for administration and enforcement of
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. [Amended
10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
B. The provisions of this code shall apply equally to new and existing conditions,
except that existing conditions not in strict compliance with the terms of this code
shall be permitted to continue where the exceptions do not constitute a distinct
hazard to life or property in the opinion of the Fire Marshal or Deputy Fire
Marshals.
C. Whenever the Fire Marshal or duly authorized assistant deems that a violation,
condition or situation as set forth in this code constitutes a distinct hazard to life or
public safety, said officer may remove the hazard and/or order the building or
premises immediately closed to the public until said violation, condition or situation
is corrected at the owner's expense.
A. There is hereby designated the Fire Marshal to administer and enforce the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and this chapter as it relates
to fire prevention, control and investigation within the Village of Webster.
[Amended 10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988; 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. The Fire Marshal in charge of the Office of the Fire Marshal as well as the Deputy
Fire Marshal shall report to the Superintendent of Public Works. The Fire Marshal
shall be appointed from the appropriate civil service list upon the joint
recommendation of the Superintendent of Public Works and the Webster Area Fire
Council members. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-199422]
C. The Chiefs of various Fire Departments may detail such members of their Fire
Departments as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary in the opinion of
the Fire Marshal and upon the Fire Marshal's request therefor.
D. The Office of the Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances
of every fire occurring in the municipality which is of suspicious nature or which
involves the loss of life or injury to persons or by which property has been
22. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 33-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-2
46:1
§ 46-3. Adoption and publication of rules and regulations.
§ 46-4. Permit procedures.
destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigation shall commence
immediately following extinguishment of such fire with the approval of the fire
officer in charge, and, if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin, the Chief
of the Fire Department shall be immediately notified of the facts. The Office of
the Fire Marshal shall preserve immediately any physical evidence, shall notify the
proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters and
shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the
prosecution of the case. The foregoing shall be without prejudice to the right of the
Fire Officer in charge to notify the proper authorities directly and to turn over the
evidence gathered at the scene of the fire to such authorities.
E. Every structure fire shall be reported to the Office of the Fire Marshal after the
occurrence of the same as soon as practicable by the Fire Officer in charge.
Furthermore, the Office of the Fire Marshal shall be notified upon the occurrence
of a working fire as soon as possible.23
F. A report of the Office of Fire Marshal shall be made monthly and annually and
transmitted to the Village Board, Town Board, Fire Commissioner and Chiefs of
each district of the town; it shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such
statistics as the Fire Marshal may wish to include therein. The Fire Marshal shall
also recommend amendments to the code which, in the Fire Marshal's judgment,
shall be desirable. Itemized reports of complaints shall be kept separate, Village
from Town.
G. In addition to the foregoing duties, the Fire Marshal shall perform such other duties
as may be assigned by the Village Board of the Village of Webster from time to
time.
H. The workweek shall be 40 hours. Scheduling of said hours shall be at the discretion
of the Fire Marshal.
A. The Webster Village Board may adopt rules and regulations for the administration
and enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code. Such rules and regulations shall not conflict with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this chapter or any other provision of
law. [Amended 10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
B. The Village Clerk of the Village of Webster shall publish all rules and regulations
at least 30 days prior to the effective date thereof in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Village of Webster.
A. Upon the payment of a fee as prescribed in the schedule of fees adopted by the
Webster Village Board by resolution from time to time,24 permits shall be issued by
23. Editor's Note: Original Subsection F, regarding modification of the Fire Prevention Code, and Subsection G, regarding
modification of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code for large integrated industrial areas,
as amended 10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988, which subsections immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 46-2 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-4
46:2
and bear the name and signature of the Fire Marshal of the Village of Webster and
shall specify:
(1) The activity or operation for which the permit is issued.
(2) The address or location where the activity or operation is to be conducted.
(3) The name and address of the permittee.
(4) The permit number and date of issuance.
(5) The period of permit validity.
B. Permits shall not be transferable, and any change in activity, operation, location,
ownership or use shall require a new permit.
C. Permits shall continue until revoked or for a period of time designated at the time
of issuance. An extension of the permit time period may be granted, provided that
a satisfactory reason can be shown for failure to start or complete the work or
activity authorized within the required time period.
D. Permits shall be obtained for the following:
(1) Acetylene generators: to operate an acetylene generator, carbide capacity
exceeding five pounds.
(2) Automobile tire rebuilding plants: to operate an automobile tire rebuilding
plant.
(3) Automobile wrecking yards: to operate an automobile wrecking yard.
(4) Bowling establishments: for bowling pin refinishing and bowling lane
resurfacing operations involving the use and application of flammable or
combustible liquids or materials.
(5) Cellulose nitrate motion-picture film: to store, keep or have on hand more than
25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion-picture film.
(6) Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin):
(a) To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate
plastics (pyroxylin) motion-picture film. [Amended 10-11-1988 by L.L.
No. 3-1988]
(b) To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin), which
shall include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin) in the
manufacture or assembling of other articles.
(7) Combustible fibers: to store, handle or use combustible fibers in quantities in
excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products on a farm.
(8) Combustible materials: to store combustible materials, including but not
limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar
24. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 46-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-4
46:3
containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork or other similar materials in
excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume, on any premises.
(9) Compressed gases.
(a) To store, handle or use at normal temperatures and pressures more than:
[1] Two thousand cubic feet of flammable compressed gas.
[2] Six thousand cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of liquefied natural or hydrogen gas.
(10) Cryogenics: to store, handle or use cryogenic fluids used as a motor fuel and
stored in motor vehicle tanks as follows:
(a) Production, sale or storage of cryogenic fluids.
(b) Storage or use of flammable cryogenic fluids, cryogenic oxidizers or
liquefied oxygen in excess of 10 gallons.
(11) Dry-cleaning plants: to use in excess of four gallons of solvents or cleaning
agents classified as flammable or combustible.
(12) Dust-producing plants: to operate any grain elevator, flour, starch or feed mill,
woodworking plant or plant pulverizing aluminum, coal, cocoa, plastics,
magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur or other materials producing explosivepotential
dust.
(13) Explosive ammunition and blasting agents.
(a) To manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of explosives
and blasting agents.
(b) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(c) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents.
(14) Fireworks: for the public or private display of fireworks. See also § 46-11K.
[Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(15) Flammable and combustible liquids: [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
(a) To store, handle or use flammable liquids in excess of 6 1/2 gallons inside
any building or other occupancy or in excess of 60 gallons outside of any
building.
(b) This shall not apply to:
[1] Liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, portable or
stationary engine, boat or portable heating plant.
[2] Paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such
liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar purposes.
§ 46-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-4
46:4
(16) Flammable finishing: for spraying, coating or dipping operations utilizing
flammable or combustible liquids.
(17) Fruit-ripening process: to conduct a fruit-ripening process using ethylene gas.
(18) Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging: to conduct fumigation or thermal
insecticidal fogging operations.
(19) Hazardous chemicals.
(a) To store, handle or use more than 55 gallons of corrosive liquids or more
than 50 pounds of oxidizing materials or more than 10 pounds of organic
peroxides or more than 50 pounds of nitromethane or 1,000 pounds or
more of ammonium nitrate, ammonium nitrate fertilizers and fertilizer
mixtures containing 60% or more ammonium or any amount of toxic
material or poisonous gas.
(b) To store, handle or use any quantity of air-reactive, water-reactive or
unstable materials.
(20) Junkyards: to operate a junkyard.
(21) Liquefied petroleum gas: for each installation of liquefied petroleum gas
employing a container or an aggregate or interconnected containers of 500
gallons or more of water capacity and for each permanent installation,
irrespective of size of containers, made at buildings in which 20 or more
persons congregate for civic, political, educational, religious, social or
recreational purposes. Installers shall maintain a record of all installations and
replacement of portable cylinders and have it available for inspection.
(22) Lumberyards: to operate a lumberyard.
(23) Magnesium: for melting, casting, heat-treating, machining or grinding of more
than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
(24) Matches.
(a) To manufacture matches.
(b) To store matches in excess of 25 cases. (NOTE: One case equals one
matchman's gross of 14,400 matches.)
(25) Organic coatings: to perform organic coating operations utilizing more than
one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
(26) Ovens and furnaces: to operate ovens and furnaces operating at approximately
atmospheric pressures and temperatures not exceeding 1,400° F. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]25
(27) Wood-burning appliances: installation in reference to § 46-11B.
25. Editor's Note: Original Subsections D(26), regarding places of assembly, D(27), regarding service stations and repair
garages, and D(28), regarding welding and cutting, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 6-9-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 46-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-4
46:5
§ 46-5. Operating permits. [Added 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
E. Consolidated permits. When more than one permit is required for the same property
or premises, a single permit may be issued listing all materials or operations
covered. Revocation of a portion or portions of such consolidated permit for
specific hazardous materials or operations shall not invalidate the remainder.
F. Location of permits. Permits issued by the Fire Marshal shall be kept posted in a
conspicuous place on the property or premises covered by the permit for as long a
period of time as the permitted activity continues. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
G. Revocation of permits. Permits may be suspended or revoked when it is determined
that there is a violation of a condition under which the permit was issued or there
has been misrepresentation or falsification of material facts in connection with the
permit application or a condition of the permit.
H. Permit fees; validity of permits; renewal.
(1) Except as to bulk storage permit fees and flammable liquid transport vehicle
permit fees as set from time to time by the Village Board, whenever the code
provides or requires the issuance of a permit, application therefor shall be
made to the Fire Marshal of the Village of Webster. Upon the filing of the
application, a fee in the amount per the fee schedule shall be paid to the Village
Clerk of the Village of Webster. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(2) All such permits as herein required shall be valid for a period of one year and
shall be renewed yearly upon application therefor and the payment of the
permit fee as herein required.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or using the
categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in quantities
exceeding those listed in Table 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or
2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and
incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible dust as
a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a substantial
potential hazard to public safety, as determined by resolution adopted by
the Village Board of this Village of Webster.
§ 46-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-5
46:6
§ 46-6. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections. [Amended 10-11-1988
by L.L. No. 3-1988; 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 6-14-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any type of
building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to obtain an operating
permit prior to commencing such activity or operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating permit shall be
in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer. Such application shall include such information as the Code Enforcement
Officer deems sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement
Officer that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of the
Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that tests or reports are
necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or
provided by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises prior to the issuance of an
operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity listed in
Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the Code Enforcement
Officer may require a separate operating permit for each such activity, or the Code
Enforcement Officer may, in his or her discretion, issue a single operating permit to
apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect until
reissued, renewed, revoked or suspended.
A. The Fire Marshal of the Village of Webster shall conduct periodic inspections for
all buildings and premises, except the interiors of single-family dwellings, for
compliance with the provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code. Such inspections may be made at any reasonable time. Inspections
shall be performed in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures
with areas of public assembly as defined in the Building Code of New York
State shall be performed at least once in every 12 months.
(2) The common areas of all multiple dwellings consisting of three of more units,
including but not limited to hallways, foyers, staircases, etc., shall be inspected
at least once in every 24 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures
being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at least once every 12
months.
(4) All other buildings, uses and occupancies, except one- and two-family
dwellings, shall be inspected at least once every 36 months.
(5) An inspection of a building or dwelling unit shall be performed at any other
§ 46-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-6
46:7
§ 46-7. Prohibited acts.
§ 46-8. Penalties for offenses.
time upon:
(a) The request of the owner or authorized agent;
(b) Receipt of a written statement specifying the ground upon which the
subscriber believes a violation of the Uniform Code or this article exists;
or
(c) Other reasonable and reliable information that such a violation exists.
(6) Such inspection shall be performed by the Fire Marshal.
B. If entrance to make an inspection is refused or cannot be obtained, the Fire Marshal
of the Village of Webster may apply for a warrant to make an inspection to any
court of competent jurisdiction.
C. Appearance tickets. The Fire Marshal shall have the authority pursuant to Article
150 of the Criminal Procedure Law to issue an appearance ticket subscribed by the
Fire Marshal, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal
court at a designated future time in connection with the alleged commission of a
designated violation of this code or any order made thereunder.
A. A person owning, operating, occupying or maintaining property or premises within
the scope of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code or
this chapter shall comply with all the provisions of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code, this chapter and all orders, notices, rules,
regulations or determinations issued in connection therewith. [Amended
10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
B. Whenever the Fire Marshal of the Village of Webster finds that there has been a
violation of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter, a violation order
shall be issued to the person or persons responsible. [Amended 10-11-1988 by L.L.
No. 3-1988]
C. Violation orders shall be in writing, shall identify the property or premises, shall
specify the violation and remedial action to be taken, shall provide a reasonable
time limit for compliance and shall state the time within which an appeal may be
taken.
D. Violation orders may be served by personal service, by mailing by registered or
certified mail, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the premises and
by mailing a copy thereof to the premises on the same day as posted, enclosed in a
postpaid wrapper addressed to the person responsible.
E. In case the owner, lessor, occupant or the agent of any of them shall fail, neglect or
refuse to remove, eliminate or abate the violation within the time specified in the
violation order, an appearance ticket will be issued by the Fire Marshal.
§ 46-6 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-8
46:8
§ 46-9. Records. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The Fire Marshal of the Village of Webster shall keep official records of all permits,
inspection reports, recommendations, complaints, violation orders, investigations and
any other documents deemed necessary.26
§ 46-10. Appeals. [Amended 10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988; 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
A. Unless otherwise provided in § 382 of the Executive Law, failure to comply with
any provision of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code,
this chapter or a violation order shall be deemed a violation, and the violator shall
be liable for a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment not to exceed 15 days,
or both, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
[Amended 10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988; 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. An action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Webster may be commenced
in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain by
injunction the violation of any provision of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code, this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant to this chapter or a violation order or to vacate the occupancy or building
in the case of imminent danger to life or property. Such remedy shall be in addition
to penalties otherwise prescribed by law. [Amended 10-11-1988 by L.L. No.
3-1988]
C. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any vehicle or other obstruction found parked
in a fire lane will be ticketed for a no-parking violation, removed or towed away
and stored by or at the direction of any peace or law enforcement officer, Fire
Marshal or Deputy Fire Marshal. Any such removal, towing or storage as herein
provided may be performed by a private towing contractor, and any and all
expenses related thereto shall be at the full responsibility of the owner or person
entitled to possession of said vehicle or obstructing article. [Amended 6-9-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
D. In addition, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant except when such vehicle is attended by a licensed operator or chauffeur
who is seated in the front seat and who can immediately move such vehicle in case
of emergency, unless a different distance is indicated by official signs, markings or
parking meters. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A. The Webster Village Board is hereby designated as the hearing board for appeals in
connection with this chapter. This Board shall be responsible for hearing and
rendering decisions regarding appeals to this chapter.
B. Where a person seeks relief from a decision of the Fire Marshal enforcing
provisions of this chapter, including permits, waivers, alternate materials, alternate
methods, approvals or variances or matters of local law interpretations, that person
may request reconsideration of the Fire Marshal's decision by appealing to the
26. Editor's Note: Original § 15-11, Removal of dangerous buildings, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 46-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-10
46:9
§ 46-11. Supplementary administrative and enforcement procedures. [Amended
10-11-1988 by L.L. No. 3-1988]
Webster Village Board in writing within 15 days of the Fire Marshal's decision. The
appeal shall state the reasons why relief is sought and what decision the person feels
should be forthcoming. A copy of the appeal shall be transmitted to the Office of
the Fire Marshal. Upon giving not less than five business days' notice to the persons
interested, a hearing shall be held. The Board may, after such hearing, by a majority
vote, affirm, annul or modify the action of the Fire Marshal. The decision of the
Board shall be in writing, and a copy shall be mailed to the appellant within seven
business days after the conclusion of the hearing, and any decisions made shall be
final. Further recourse shall be through established legal procedures.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall be applied to this chapter only. Any appeals
seeking relief to the requirements and provisions of the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be transmitted to the appropriate Board of
Review as described in 19 NYCRR 1205.27
D. The procedure set forth herein for appeals shall not prohibit the Fire Marshal from
immediately removing a hazard or ordering the immediate closing of a building or
premises until a violation of this chapter has been corrected when such hazard or
existence of such violation constitutes, in the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal, a
distinct hazard to life or public safety.
A. Fire Department and emergency service access. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-199428]
(1) Fire lanes in commercial and industrial districts shall be 30 feet in width.
(2) Fire lanes in multiple residential districts shall be 25 feet in width.
(3) Fire lanes in school areas shall be 20 feet in width.
(4) Fire lanes shall be clearly designated by approved markings on pavement or
sign or both.
(5) Signs shall be posted on both sides of a designated fire lane. The top of the
sign shall be six feet from the ground.
(a) Signs in commercial areas shall be no more than 50 feet apart.
(b) Signs in residential areas shall be placed at a distance to be determined by
the Fire Marshal.
(6) Signs shall read NO PARKING FIRE LANE and shall have arrows pointing
in the direction of the area designated to be the fire lane.
(7) All signs shall be stationary. Signs shall be 12 inches by 18 inches in size, with
a white background, red legend and three-inch letters.
27. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
28. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-10 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-11
46:10
(8) Pavement markings shall be no more than 50 feet apart and shall read NO
PARKING FIRE LANE.
(9) Pavement markings shall be painted on the pavement to read in the direction
of travel. If two-way traffic is maintained, every other marking shall be painted
in the opposite direction.
(10) Pavement markings shall be painted on the pavement to the following
specifications:
(a) All word markings shall be yellow in color.
(b) All word markings shall read up, i.e., the first word shall be nearest to the
driver.
(c) The elongated height of each letter shall be 26 inches.
(d) The width of each letter shall be 18 inches. The letter "I" is excluded from
this requirement.
(e) The stroke of each letter shall be five inches.
(11) In addition, the operator of a motor vehicle shall not stop that vehicle within a
fire lane, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of and while actually engaged in the loading and unloading of merchandise or
passengers.
(12) The markings of fire lanes on private property devoted to public use shall be
approved by the Fire Marshal, the Chief of Police or both.
(13) The owner or occupant of the property shall be required to post signs or
pavement markings, or both, approved by the Fire Marshal, Chief of Police or
both and maintain them in good condition. Failure to replace or repair
damaged, faded, rusted or obsolete signs or faded pavement markings within
30 days after written notice served by the Fire Marshal or Chief of Police shall
constitute a violation under this chapter.
B. Heating systems and chimneys, flues and gas vents. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-199429]
(1) Wood-burning appliances.
(a) Definition. A "wood-burning appliance" is any appliance intended for
burning wood, such as but not limited to freestanding fireplaces, airtight
stoves, fireplace inserts, etc., except a standard masonry fireplace
installed as a part of the original construction of a building.
(b) Permits required.
[1] A permit from the Fire Prevention Department is required prior to
the installation of a wood-burning appliance.
29. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-11
46:11
[2] Application for permit to the Fire Marshal shall include location of
installation, type of installation and manufacturer, if available. A
permit shall be issued after approval of the application and the fees
are paid.
(c) Fire Prevention Department inspection and approval is required for any
installation of a wood-burning appliance.30
C. Fire-protection equipment and water supply. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-199431]
(1) Fire Department connections for standpipe and sprinkler systems are to be
maintained accessible at all times. No large shrubbery, fences or barriers of
any type shall be placed within 10 feet of connections. This shall also apply to
snow removal or plowing.
(2) The Fire Marshal shall approve hydrant locations, site of hydrants and water
mains in new subdivisions, apartment projects, commercial and industrial
areas and where new schools and churches are being constructed. Such
approvals shall be in line with the following procedures:
(a) The Village Building Inspector or other appropriate officer shall furnish
the Fire Marshal with maps or plans showing street and water main
locations, together with other site information.
(b) The Fire Marshal will be allowed five days for the review of plans,
location of hydrants and water mains. The Fire Marshal's
recommendations shall be plainly shown on the plans and signed by the
Fire Marshal. Two complete copies of the plans shall be returned to the
Fire Marshal upon final approval.
(3) Residential districts.
(a) Hydrants shall not exceed a maximum of 500 feet apart on each street in
either direction and shall be located at intersections, whenever possible.
(b) Hydrants must be installed and flow tested before above-the-ground
construction is commenced. The flow test shall comply with the
specifications of the Insurance Services Office of New York to produce
an A-rating.
(c) Temporary exceptions may be made during construction by the Fire
Marshal.
(d) No person shall place any object, including bushes, trees, flowers, posts,
fence, etc., within 10 feet of any hydrant, except in emergency conditions
with the approval of the Fire Marshal.
(4) Higher density areas; commercial and industrial districts.
30. Editor's Note: Original Subsection C, Means of egress, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
31. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-11 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-11
46:12
(a) Hydrants shall not exceed a maximum of 300 feet apart and be so located
that all buildings can be reached by comparatively short hose lays from
more than one hydrant.
(b) Hydrants must be installed and flow tested before aboveground
construction is commenced. Flow tests shall comply with the
specifications of the Insurance Services Office to produce an A-rating.
(c) Temporary exceptions may be made by the Fire Marshal.
(d) No person shall place any object, including bushes, trees, flowers, posts,
fence, etc., within 10 feet of any hydrant, except in emergency conditions
with the approval of the Fire Marshal.
(5) Privately owned water mains and fire hydrants. Privately owned water mains
and fire hydrants on property devoted to public use, including but not limited
to multiple-dwelling complexes, churches, schools, places of assembly and
shopping centers, shall be regularly maintained and annually serviced by the
owner or person generally in charge of the subject premises. Said maintenance
and annual servicing shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted
and nationally recognized standards. The owner or person generally in charge
of the property and who is responsible for the above-mentioned maintenance
shall annually furnish to the Fire Marshal evidence acceptable to the Fire
Marshal that said maintenance and annual servicing has been properly carried
out.
(6) Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems and other fireprotective
or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in
compliance with any permit or order or because of any law or ordinance shall
be maintained in operative conditions at all times, and it shall be unlawful for
any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so
required, except that this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from
temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make
tests, repairs, alterations or additions. The Fire Marshal shall be notified before
such tests, repairs, alterations or additions are started, unless the work is to be
continuous until completion.32
D. Sprinkler, standpipe and other fire-protection systems. [Added 6-9-1994 by L.L.
No. 2-1994]
(1) The Fire Marshal shall be notified before any tests, repairs, alterations or
additions are made to any fire-protection system that will reduce or impair the
operation of the system while said work or testing is being done.
(2) A copy of the testing report shall be kept on the premises so that the same is
available for examination.
E. Fire alarm systems. Fire alarm systems shall be approved by the Fire Marshal prior
to installation.33
32. Editor's Note: Original Subsection E, Sprinkler systems, and Subsection F, Standpipe systems, which subsections
immediately followed this subsection, were repealed 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 46-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-11
46:13
F. Storage and handling of motor vehicle fuel. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-199434]
(1) Portable containers for motor vehicle fuel shall be clearly marked with the
name of the product contained. This marking shall have been applied to such
container by the manufacturer of the same.
(2) Underground storage tanks containing gasoline, oil or other liquid that
generates a flammable vapor at normal temperature and having a maximum
individual capacity of up to 10,000 gallons may be installed. The maximum
aggregate capacity at any site shall not exceed 24,000 gallons' total capacity.
The maximum aggregate capacity may be increased upon written application
to the Webster Village Board with the use of double-wall tanks and electronic
monitoring devices and other provisions approved by the Fire Marshal.
(3) The Fire Marshal or the Fire Marshal's designated representative is further
authorized to order the owner or occupants of premises having flammable
liquids storage tanks located thereon to have such tanks tested by methods
prescribed by the Fire Marshal to determine if such tanks are leaking, if the
Fire Marshal has reasonable belief that such tanks may contain a leak.
(4) Aboveground storage tanks of flammable liquids shall be prohibited.
(5) Underground storage tanks containing Class I liquids shall be prohibited in
residential districts.
(6) Installation or alteration permit. No installation, alteration or replacement of
underground or aboveground tanks, pumps, piping and other equipment
relating to the storage of flammable liquids shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Fire Marshal.
(7) Noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be sufficient cause
for the suspension or revocation by the Fire Marshal of any permit issued
hereunder in this chapter.
(8) Leaking tanks, pumps or piping shall be repaired or replaced immediately, and
it shall be within the discretion of the Fire Marshal as to whether the station or
facility must cease any and/or all operations while repairs or replacements are
being made.
(9) There is to be no more than one gasoline tank truck delivering flammable
liquids on the premises of a gasoline service facility at any one time. Before
making any deliveries to underground tanks, the driver or other authorized
person shall set the brakes of the truck and shall turn off the engine of the
vehicle. Evertite or O.P.W. fill couplings or equivalent must be used when
unloading flammable liquids from a tank truck to storage tank. The driver shall
remain at the point of delivery to prevent spillage and overflow. In case of
spillage or overflow, the appropriate Fire Department and the Fire Marshal
33. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Original Subsection H,
Places of public assembly, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
34. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-11 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-11
46:14
shall be notified immediately.
(10) In the event of accidental spillage or leakage of a flammable liquid in
quantities of five United States gallons or greater, whether or not it may enter
sewers, the appropriate Fire Department and the Fire Marshal shall be notified
immediately.
(11) A minimum of five fifty-pound bags of Stay Dry absorbent or equivalent must
be kept on the premises at all times for flammable liquid spills and should be
used for this purpose whenever possible, instead of flushing with water.
(12) All tanks containing flammable liquids must be tested weekly for water
infiltration, and records kept on the premises showing the date, hour and
results of such tests. When any test shows water present in the flammable
liquid, the Fire Marshal shall be immediately notified. Such water may not be
removed until after notification of the Fire Marshal.
G. Dispensing of motor vehicle fuel. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-199435]
(1) Dispensing devices for Class I or Class II flammable liquids shall be of the
type approved by the Fire Marshal.
(2) Dispensing of Class I or Class II flammable liquids by persons other than the
service attendant or supervisor shall be prohibited, except as set forth in
Subsection G(3).
(3) Self-service stations.
(a) "Self-service stations" shall mean that portion of property where
flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored and
subsequently dispensed from fixed approved dispensing equipment into
the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station
attendant and can include facilities available for the sale of other retail
products.
(b) Approved dispensing devices, such as but not limited to coin-operated,
card-operated and remote-controlled types, are permitted at self-service
stations.
(c) Emergency controls specified in the provisions of New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code shall be installed at a
location acceptable to the Fire Marshal, but controls shall not be more
than 100 feet from the dispensers.
(d) All pump islands shall be protected against physical damage by the
installation of pipe or post bumpers (eight inches minimum diameter) in
locations approved by the Fire Marshal.
(e) Gasoline self-service stations shall provide automatic fire-extinguishing
systems installed in conformity with nationally recognized good practices
and approved by the Fire Marshal. Where a station has one self-service
35. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-11
46:15
island with dispensing units within 30 feet of a full-service island, both
shall have an automatic fire-extinguishing system installed and approved
by the Fire Marshal. All existing self-service operations shall comply
with this subsection by July 1, 1978.
H. Tents and air-supported structures. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-199436]
(1) Smoking shall be prohibited and adequate signs posted.
(2) Fire watchers shall be employed for crowds over 50 persons to enforce
Subsection H(1) above and to maintain clear exit aisles.
(3) Safety provisions shall be provided for as requested by the Fire Marshal.
I. Hazardous chemicals.37
(1) The transportation of hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles by
motor vehicles shall comply with Department of Transportation regulations.
(2) Shipments whose origin and destination are outside the Village of Webster are
confined to the use of state highways.
(3) Shipments of an intratown nature (either originating in or destined to a
Webster location) shall follow a route to be designated by the Fire Marshal.
J. Explosives, ammunition and blasting agents.38
(1) Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting
agents is to be prohibited are hereby established as follows: boundaries of the
Village of Webster.
(2) Establishment of motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting explosives and
blasting agents.
(a) Shipments whose origin and destination are outside the Village of
Webster are confined to the use of state highways.
(b) Shipments of intratown nature (either originating in or destined to a
Webster location) shall follow a route designated by the Fire Marshal.
K. Manufacture, sale and discharge of fireworks. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-199439]
(1) The manufacture or storage of fireworks is prohibited within the Village of
Webster.
(2) It shall be unlawful to explode any fireworks within the Village of Webster
without a permit.
(3) The Fire Marshal may grant a permit for supervised public display of
36. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
38. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-11 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-11
46:16
fireworks by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks or other
organizations or groups of individuals after:
(a) Proper application, in writing, at least 30 days in advance of the date of
the display.
(b) The applicant shall furnish proper proof of financial responsibility for
damage.
L. Street numbering of buildings. [Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) All occupancies within the Village of Webster shall be provided with street
numbers to assist emergency personnel in locating the same. This shall apply
but not be limited to all residential, commercial, industrial and private
structures. Said numbers shall be assigned by the Village Board or its
designee.
(2) Numbers shall be four inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inches, Arabic style (lettering shall not be accepted) and shall be mounted in a
secure fashion to the structure's front wall or to a porch or other fixed
appurtenance in front of the structure in the vicinity of the main entryway or
main path of travel leading to the main entrance from a public street or
otherwise separately mounted in an approved manner upon the face of a wall
or upon a post in the front yard of the premises.40
(3) All street numbers shall be mounted at a height between four feet and 10 feet
above the adjacent grade, street or exterior porch landing directly beneath, but
never higher than 15 feet above the adjoining grade. They shall be legible as
to contrasting background, arrangement, spacing, size and uniformity of the
whole so that the numbers may be read with ease during daylight hours by
persons possessing at least 20/40 vision as they view the numbers from the
center line of the facing street and at an elevation of five feet above the
finished surface thereof. Trees, shrubs or other obstructions shall not block
said street numbers.
(4) All existing structures shall comply with the requirements of this subsection
by November 1, 1994.
M. Open burning. Open burning shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
Monroe County Sanitary Code, Article V. All controlled burnings must first be
checked by the Fire Marshal for compliance and properly set up with notification to
the respective Fire Chiefs and Departments, the Village Clerk, the Webster Police
Department and the Monroe County Fire Dispatcher's office. [Added 6-9-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-199441]
N. Key boxes. When access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult
because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving
or fire-fighting purposes, the Fire Marshal is authorized to require a locking key
box to be installed in an accessible location. The key box shall be a type approved
40. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
41. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 46-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 46-11
46:17
by the Fire Marshal and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by
the Fire Marshal and local Fire Department. [Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 46-11 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 46-11
46:18
Chapter 50
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Sewers — See Ch. 113.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 130.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 137.
Water — See Ch. 162.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 50-1. Legislative findings.
The Village Board of the Village of Webster finds that the potential and/or actual
damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Village
of Webster and that such damage may include destruction or loss of private and public
housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to
and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve
the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 50-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed to:
§ 50-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or
erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights
or velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
are protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective
barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood
hazards to other lands.
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
A. Protect human life and health.
§ 46-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-3
50:1
§ 50-4. Definitions; word usage.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located in areas of special
flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAL—A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This
area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or
V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base floodplain or one-hundredyear
floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood-hazard area
(SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
BASEMENT—That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or the supporting foundation system.
§ 50-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-4
50:2
BUILDING — Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosed for occupancy
or storage.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18 inches
or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the lowest elevated
floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel,
concrete or other material, must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior
grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the
equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor,
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or
shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to
impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X,
or D, elevated building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid
foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones VI-V30, VE, or V, elevated building
also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the
federal standards.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL — Department of Environmental
Conservation Division of Water technical and operational guidance series (5.1.10)
stormwater management guidelines (TOGS 5.1.8).
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An Official Map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a
regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance
Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and determination
of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An Official Map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A but
no flood elevations are provided.
§ 50-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-4
50:3
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An Official Map of a community
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and the water surface elevations of the base
flood.
FLOOD LEVEL, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The highest level of flood that,
on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years, as determined in the
Federal Emergency Management Agency's Flood Insurance Study for the Village
of Webster.
FLOOD LEVEL, TEN-YEAR — The highest level of flood that, on the average,
is likely to occur once every 10 years, as determined in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Flood Insurance Study for the Village of Webster.
FLOOD OR FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A land area, adjoining a river,
stream, watercourse, bay or lake, which is likely to be flooded, as designated in the
Flood Insurance Study.
FLOODPROOFING—Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real
estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement,
i.e., the top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the top of the wood flooring
in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(b)
(1)
Flood or flooding also means the collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining
caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection B(1)(a)
above.
(2)
§ 50-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-4
50:4
as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities. The term does not include longterm
storage, manufacturing, sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits
in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the Building Inspector, Code
Enforcement Officer, or employee of an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest level, including basement or cellar, of the lowest
enclosed area. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built
so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME OR MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in
one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include recreational vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purpose of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing
on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 50-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-4
50:5
Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88) or other datum to which base flood elevations shown
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD)—As corrected in 1929,
a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation
adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND—At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood
Insurance Study or by other agencies as provided in § 50-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided that
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance. The
actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a
building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling),
or the installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE—A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or a
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 50-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-4
50:6
§ 50-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the
Village of Webster.
§ 50-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has
been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose
of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to commence when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local building, fire, health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Webster, Community Number
360437, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers: 36055C0227G, 36055C0229G,
36055C0231G, 36055C0232G, 36055C0233G, and 36055C0234G, whose
effective date is August 28, 2008, and any subsequent revisions to these map
panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study, Monroe
County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated August 28, 2008.
(3) Letter of Map Revision Case Number 13-02-0260P, effective December 3,
2013, amending Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels 36055C0229G and
36055C0233G, and Flood Insurance Study Floodway Data Table 9 and Flood
Profile 152P. [Added 10-9-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at: the office of the Building
§ 50-4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-6
50:7
§ 50-7. Construal of provisions.
§ 50-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate any other
section or provision thereof.
§ 50-9. Penalties for offenses; noncompliance.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable regulations. Any
infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not more than 15
days, or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Webster from taking such other
lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found
not compliant with the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or
owner has not applied for and received an approved variance under §§ 50-16 and 50-17
will be declared noncompliant, and notification will be sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 50-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village of Webster,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
Inspector of the Village of Webster.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program through
October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of
flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety
and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the
most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 50-6 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-11
50:8
§ 50-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 50-12. Development permit.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction
and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this
community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards
and insuring that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its
exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in
§ 50-6, without a valid floodplain development permit. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator
and may include but not be limited to plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, and
showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the
location of the foregoing.
B. Application for permit. The following information is required where applicable:
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved structure
to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permitee shall
submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. Upon
completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the permitee shall
submit to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified
by a professional engineer or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any utility
floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 50-14C, Utilities.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in
§ 50-15B, Nonresidential structures.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a licensed
professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or
relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original
stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other
material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to
revise the documents enumerated in § 50-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this
purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance
§ 50-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-12
50:9
§ 50-13. Powers and duties of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include but not be limited to the following:
capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained.
(6) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by the
local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to be located
in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other
property.
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other sources,
base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit applicant for
subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals
for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that
are greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
C. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by
an application fee determined by the Village Board.42 In addition, the applicant shall
be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Webster for any additional costs
necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The local
administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional
costs.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the following
permit application review before issuing a floodplain development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements
of § 50-12B, Application for permit, and for compliance with the provisions
and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development, including
manufactured home parks, to determine whether proposed building sites will
be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in an
area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the applicable standards of § 50-14, General
standards, and, in particular, § 50-14D, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property (e.g., streambank
erosion and increased flood velocities). The local administrator may require
the applicant to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to
complete the determination. If the proposed development may result in
physical damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§ 50-14, General standards, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may
revise the application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the
adverse effects and resubmit the application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from those
governmental agencies from which approval is required by state or federal
42. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 50-12 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-13
50:10
law.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated areas of
special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
but has neither produced water surface elevation data (these areas are
designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source,
including data developed pursuant to § 50-14D(4), as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed development
meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local administrator may
use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as historical
data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for
the purposes of this chapter.
C. Information to be obtained and retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures and whether or
not the structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates and whether or not the structures contain a
basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 50-16 and 50-17; and
(5) Notices required under § 50-13D, Alteration of watercourses.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Regional Director,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region II.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
E. Stop-work orders.
(1) All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved permit shall
be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the local administrator.
Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject to the penalties described in
§ 50-9 of this chapter.
(2) All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this
chapter and/or the conditions of the approved permit shall be subject to the
issuance of a stop-work order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stop-
§ 50-13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-13
50:11
§ 50-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and substantially
improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map designated in § 50-6. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
standards are required:
work order shall be subject to the penalties described in § 50-9 of this chapter.
F. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect
shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said
inspector to certify that the development is in compliance with the requirements of
either the development permit or the approved variance.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents enumerated in
§ 50-6, it shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or occupancy
of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or
structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the local
administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) All other development occurring within the designated flood-hazard area will
have, upon completion, a certificate of compliance issued by the local
administrator.
(3) All certifications shall be based upon the inspections conducted subject to
Subsection F above and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic information,
floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment analysis which may
have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
A. Anchoring. See § 50-15E.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within Zones A1-A30,
AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding,
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(a) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
§ 50-13 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-14
50:12
licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot above the
lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered
basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be located at or above the base flood elevation or
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding and to
resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and
outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above the
base flood elevation, unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of the
electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code
of New York State for location of such items in wet locations. When designed
for location below the base flood elevation, a professional engineer's or
architect's certification is required.
(2) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer and storm
drainage systems for buildings that have openings below the base flood
elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves or other automatic
backflow devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a
building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new subdivision
proposals and other proposed development in areas of special flood hazard
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and
subdivisions):
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
§ 50-14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-14
50:13
§ 50-15. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided
as set forth in § 50-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, and § 50-13B,
Use of other base flood and floodway data, the following standards are required:
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for individual lots or subdivision
proposals.
E. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory floodway, no
new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including
fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot at any location; or
(b) The Village of Webster agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision, FEMA
approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary data,
analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village of Webster for all fees
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Webster for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map, adopted in §§ 50-6 and
50-13B, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development
in the floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer shows that
such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels
during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Webster agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and floodway
revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the Village of
Webster for all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The
applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse
the Village of Webster for all costs related to the final map revisions.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
resident structure shall:
(1) Within Zones AI-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements shall have
§ 50-14 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-15
50:14
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above two feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as two feet above the depth number specified in feet on the
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 50-6 (at least two feet
if no depth number is specified).
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of
any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall either have the lowest floor, including basement
or cellar, elevated to or above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed so that
the structure is watertight below the base flood level with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located below the
base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements of any
nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet above
the base flood elevation with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. All structural components located below the base flood
level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and the effects of buoyancy.
(2) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified); or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely
floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in
§ 50-15B(1)(b).
(3) If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
§ 50-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-15
50:15
plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or other certification shall
be provided to the local administrator that certifies the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of § 50-15B(1)(b), including the specific elevation (in relation
to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
(4) Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on slopes.
(5) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the lowest
floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(6) The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all such certificates
noted in this section.
C. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles.
(a) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH
shall either:
[1] Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
[2] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
[3] Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 50-15C(2), (3)
and (4).
(b) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type
utilities and security' devices and has no permanently attached additions.
(2) A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation
and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
(3) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the
manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(4) Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade
at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 50-6 (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
D. Construction materials and methods for areas of special flood hazard without base
flood elevations.
§ 50-15 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-15
50:16
§ 50-16. Board of Appeals.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within Zones A1-A30,
AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new and
substantially improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding,
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
(a) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot above the
lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered
basements and are not permitted.
E. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures in areas of
special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement during the base flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as established by the Village of Webster, shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the local
administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal such
decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
§ 50-15 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-16
50:17
§ 50-17. Conditions for variances.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are subject
to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain
management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting
search-and-rescue operations during periods of flooding.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of
the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site.
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including search-and-rescue operations and maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D above and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including
technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
provided that the items in § 50-16D(1) through (12) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures and contributing structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the contributing
§ 50-16 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 50-17
50:18
structures procedures set forth in the remainder of this section, provided that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other developments necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use, provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsection A, D, E and F of this section are met.
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to public
safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest
floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice over the
signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as
required in § 50-13C of this chapter.
§ 50-17 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 50-17
50:19

Chapter 54
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 97. Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 54-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Law Regulating and Restricting Garage Sales."
§ 54-2. Purpose.
Such rules and regulations as set up in this chapter are designed to control and restrict
garage sales in order to protect the public health, safety and convenience and to restrict
such sales to casual and/or occasional occurrences only in keeping with the character of
the neighborhood where this activity is carried on and with the zoning laws of the Village
of Webster, New York. The intent of this chapter is to eliminate perpetual, prolonged
and extended garage sales in residential areas. Such sales, if carried indefinitely, tend
to become retail businesses in residential areas and zones, create a nuisance and usually
violate the zoning regulations of the Village of Webster. The provisions of this chapter
arise from the need to limit, regulate, restrict and control garage sales.
§ 54-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GARAGE SALE —
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, family groups, voluntary associations
and corporations.
VILLAGE OF WEBSTER — Includes all residential dwellings located within any type
of zone, zoned areas or zoning districts, whether or not said areas or zones are residential,
business or otherwise, within the geographic boundaries of the Village of Webster.
§ 54-4. Conditions for sales.
The sale or offering for sale of 10 or more new, used or secondhand items of
personal property at any one residential premises at any one time.
A.
Includes all sales in residential areas entitled "garage sale," "yard sale," "tag sale,"
"porch sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale," "basement sale," "rummage sale" or "flea
market sale" or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is
advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the
sale.
B.
§ 50-17 GARAGE SALES § 54-4
54:1
§ 54-5. Hours of sale.
All garage sales held pursuant to these provisions shall be conducted between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 54-6. Advertising.
§ 54-7. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not be applicable to:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct more than two garage sales within the
geographic boundaries of the Village of Webster within any calendar year.
B. It shall be unlawful for a garage sale to last longer than three consecutive days.
A. Garage sales may be advertised through the newspapers or other media.
B. A sign no larger in size than four square feet may be installed on the property where
the sale is being conducted. The sign shall be displayed only during the sale and
shall be removed within 24 hours after the sale is concluded. [Amended 6-9-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994]
C. No sign or other display advertising the sale shall be placed on the public right-ofway
or on private property other than where the sale is conducted. No lighted or
illuminated signs shall be used.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property
which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate
items do not exceed nine in number. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
chapter, any person may sell up to nine secondhand articles without being subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communications media who publishes or broadcasts anything in good faith without
knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that
the provisions of this chapter have not been complied with.
E. Any sale conducted by any legitimate business or commercial or industrial
establishment properly zoned under the zoning regulations of the Village of
Webster and any other sale conducted by a business or commercial or industrial
establishment under the protection of the nonconforming use section of the zoning
laws, or by any other vendor, dealer, etc., when the sale is conducted in a properly
zoned area and not otherwise prohibited by the laws and ordinances of the Village
of Webster and State of New York or this chapter.
F. Sales by a bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or government
institution, civic group, service club, religious or fraternal society or other tax-
§ 54-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 54-7
54:2
§ 54-8. Enforcement.
§ 54-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
Any person, firm, association, corporation or other entity conducting any such sale or
similar activity who or which shall violate or fail to comply with any provisions adopted
pursuant to this chapter or any other rules, terms, regulations or provisions adopted
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be in violation, and the violator(s) shall be
liable for a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both, and each day that such sale or violation continues without being duly licensed shall
be considered and shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 54-10. Construal of provisions.
It is not the intention of this chapter to change or amend the zoning laws, hawking and
peddling laws and/or any other laws or ordinances of the Village of Webster.
exempt organization; provided, however, that the burden of proof of establishing
the exemption under this subsection shall be on the organization or institution
claiming such exemption.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector, the Code Enforcement
Officer for the Village of Webster.
B. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to investigate any violation of this
chapter coming to the Building Inspector's attention by complaint.
C. If after investigation a violation is found to exist, the Building Inspector shall
prosecute a complaint before a Town Justice of the Town of Webster, pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
D. It shall be the duty of the Webster Police Department to bring to the Building
Inspector's attention for further investigation any alleged violations which the
Police Department becomes aware of during the course of its normal duties.
E. The person conducting the sale and the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises
where the sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly or severally responsible for
the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of
such sale or activity.
F. No such person shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises or
permit vehicles to impede the passage of the traffic on any roads or streets in the
area of the premises where the sale is being conducted.
G. All such persons shall obey reasonable orders from any member of the Webster
Police Department or the appropriate voluntary fire department in order to maintain
the public health, safety and convenience.
§ 54-7 GARAGE SALES § 54-10
54:3

Chapter 58
GASOLINE STATIONS AND REPAIR SHOPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 58-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Gasoline Service Stations and Motor
Vehicle Repair Shops."
§ 58-2. Legislative findings; purpose.
The Village Board of the Village of Webster hereby recognizes that gasoline stations in
their operation can present special hazards to the public safety and welfare of the Village
of Webster. Therefore, this chapter is enacted in order to protect the public health, safety
and welfare by regulating the existing gas stations.
§ 58-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL GARAGE — Any building, structure or lot which is used for the
repair, maintenance or equipping of automobiles.
GASOLINE STATION—A building, structure or tract of land used for the storage and
sale of gasoline, motor fuels, lubricants, accessories, supplies and any other materials
related to the maintenance or equipment of automobiles or in which repairs, adjustments,
maintenance or equipping of automobiles is conducted. The term shall include, without
limitation, the rendering of the following services: fueling, changing oil, water, batteries
or tires; replacing fan belts, air filters or oil filters; installing windshield wiper blades
or light bulbs. The term shall not include any such establishment which renders such
services or stores such materials for a single commercial or industrial establishment
rather than offering such services and materials to the public.
MAJOR REPAIR WORK — Repair work which does not consist of fueling; changing
oil, water, batteries or tires; replacing fan belts, oil filters or air filters; installing
windshield wiper blades or light bulbs; or such other minor repair and servicing
functions as are prescribed by the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles under the Motor
Vehicle Repair Shop Registration Act, Article 12-A of the State of New York Vehicle
and Traffic Law, or any similar statute.
§ 58-4. Standards for maintenance of premises.
The following standards shall apply to all gasoline service stations and commercial
garages located within the Village of Webster:
§ 54-10 GASOLINE STATIONS AND REPAIR SHOPS § 58-4
58:1
§ 58-5. Compliance required.
All gasoline service stations and commercial garages in the Village of Webster shall
comply with the foregoing standards by November 1, 1982.
§ 58-6. Jurisdiction to hear complaints.
§ 58-7. Penalties for offenses. [Added 10-12-1982 by L.L. No. 9-1982; amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any owner or lessee or other person
shall constitute an offense, and each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
A. No major repair work shall be conducted outside of the structure.
B. All automobile parts and similar articles shall be stored within the structure.
C. No more than four dismantled vehicles, vehicles under repair, vehicles awaiting
repair, or repaired vehicles awaiting pickup shall at any one time be left in the area
between the building line or front wall of the building and the front property line
for a period exceeding 30 days. Vehicles may be stored in the side yard of a service
station while awaiting repair or while under repair for a period not to exceed four
months. This includes vehicles that are not currently registered. In case of a service
station on a corner lot, the side yard is that area between the front line of the
building and the side and rear lot lines. [Amended 12-28-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
D. The site shall be maintained so that vehicles using the station shall not obstruct or
become a hazard to users of the public sidewalks or highways on which the station
or garage fronts.
A. Any Town Justice of the Town of Webster shall have jurisdiction to hear all signed
complaints filed as hereinafter provided and all actions and proceedings hereunder
and of all prosecutions for the violation of this chapter. Upon receipt by the Town
Justice of any complaint regarding noncompliance with any section of this chapter,
the Town Justice shall summon the alleged owner or operator to appear in person
before the Town Justice. If the summons is disregarded, the Town Justice may
permit the filing of an information and issue a warrant for the arrest of such owner
or operator.
B. Any person who observes the owner or operator of a gasoline service station or
commercial garage violating any section of this chapter may file a signed
complaint, under oath, with a Town Justice of the Town of Webster, specifying the
objectionable conduct.
§ 58-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 58-7
58:2
Chapter 71
LEAD PAINT REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30. Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 71-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Webster Mandatory Lead Paint
Notification Act."
§ 71-2. Legislative intent.
The Village of Webster believes that unintentional contact with lead paint particles and
residue constitutes a potential public health threat.
§ 71-3. Notification requirements affecting certain zones.
This chapter shall apply to the following zones: Central Business (CB); Residential
Multiple (RM); Neighborhood Business (N-B); Planned Unit Development (PUD); and
General Industrial (G-I).
§ 71-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall only apply if the paint removal disturbs a total area greater than two
square feet for any given project area.
§ 71-5. Notification.
§ 71-6. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.43
A. Prior notification of lead paint removal. At least 48 hours prior to any lead paint
removal, the person or business performing such removal shall, through written
notice, inform all persons or businesses within 300 feet, including all households
within a multiple-family dwelling.
B. Notification need not be made if, not later than one week prior to the removal of the
paint, the person or business performing such removal has filed written certification
that such paint to be removed was applied subsequent to 1978.
A. The Building Inspector or other code enforcement official shall enforce this
chapter.
B. Any person or business that violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, and
upon conviction, shall be punishable by a maximum fine of $250 or by
43. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 58-7 LEAD PAINT REMOVAL § 71-6
71:1
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day's violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 71-6 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 71-6
71:2
Chapter 75
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 97.
Skateboards — See Ch. 117.
Signs — See Ch. 175.
§ 71-6 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 71-6
75:1

ARTICLE I
Billiard Rooms and Pool Rooms
[Adopted 3-23-1906]
§ 75-1. License required. [Amended 1-11-196544]
No person or persons shall engage in the pursuit or business of keeping or conducting
within the corporate limits of the Village of Webster, New York, any billiard room
or poolroom for money or hire without a license therefor duly issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the Village and countersigned by the Clerk thereof.
§ 75-2. Fee. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The fee for such license shall be set from time to time by the Village Board.45
§ 75-3. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding
$250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
44. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 75-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 75-3
75:3

ARTICLE II
Circuses, Sideshows and Outdoor Exhibitions
[Adopted 4-11-1932; amended in its entirety 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 75-4. License required.46
No person, firm or corporation shall carry on, conduct or operate within the Village of
Webster, New York, a circus, sideshow or other outdoor exhibition without first having
obtained a license issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and countersigned by the
Village Clerk therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
carry on, conduct or operate within said Village a circus, sideshow or other outdoor
exhibition without first having obtained a license therefor.
§ 75-5. Fee.
The fee for such license shall be set from time to time by the Village Board.47
§ 75-6. Penalties for offenses.48
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating this article shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both, for each violation
thereof.
B. Action to recover penalties. An action may be maintained by the Village to recover
a penalty imposed for a violation of this article, and in such action an order of arrest
may be issued and executed in the manner prescribed by the Uniform Justice Court
Act for orders of arrest in justice courts. In such action it shall be lawful to declare
or complain generally for such penalty, stating the section of this article under
which the penalty is claimed and briefly setting forth the alleged violation.
46. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
47. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
48. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 75-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 75-6
75:5

ARTICLE III
Merry-Go-Rounds and Other Rides
[Adopted 7-2-1910; amended in its entirety 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 75-7. License required.49
No person, persons or corporation shall carry on, conduct or operate, for money or hire,
within the Village of Webster, New York, a merry-go-round, amusements, rides and
any mechanical rides without having obtained a license issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer and countersigned by the Village Clerk therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any
person, persons or corporation to carry on, conduct or operate for money or hire within
said Village a merry-go-round, amusements, rides and any mechanical rides without first
having obtained license therefor.
§ 75-8. Fee.
The fee for such license shall be set from time to time by the Village Board.50
§ 75-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, persons or corporation violating this article shall be liable to a penalty not
exceeding $250 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both.
49. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
50. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 75-7 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 75-9
75:7

Chapter 85
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs —See Ch. 24, Art. I.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 93.
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 123.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 156.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 85-1. Findings; policy; applicability.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
A. Excessive sound and noises is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare and
safety and the quality of life. It is a finding of the Village Board that unnecessary
noise degrades the environment of the Village to a degree which is harmful and
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants; interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation and with the conduct of
business and industry; and causes nuisances. A substantial body of science and
technology exists by which excessive sound and noise may be substantially abated.
Persons in the Village of Webster have a right to and should be ensured of an
environment free from excessive sound and noise.
B. It is the policy of the Village of Webster to prevent excessive sound and noise that
may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of persons in the Village of Webster or
degrade the quality of life in the Village. Further, the provisions hereinafter set forth
are in pursuance of and for the purpose of preserving, protecting and promoting the
public health, safety and welfare and peace and reasonable quiet for persons in the
Village of Webster.
C. This chapter shall apply to the control of sound or noise originating from stationary
and certain mobile sources within the limits of the Village of Webster.
A. All terminology defined herein which relates to the nature of sound and the
mechanical detection and recordation of sound, where applicable, shall conform to
the terminology of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its
successor body.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIRBORNE SOUND — Sound that reaches the point of interest by propagation
through the air. Approved sound-measuring equipment shall meet ANSI SI.4 1971
standards and is described under the definition of "dB(A)" below.
AIR COMPRESSOR — A device which draws in air or gas, compresses it and
delivers it at a higher pressure.
AIR-CONDITIONING AND AIR-HANDLING DEVICE — Any device that is
§ 75-9 NOISE § 85-2
85:1
designed to be used or is actually used to cool, move or condition air, including but
not limited to air conditioners, cooling towers, fans and blowers.
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually composites of sounds from many sources, near and far.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so read
is designated "dB(A)."
CONSTRUCTION — Any activity necessary or incidental to the erection,
demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, public or
private highways, roads, premises, parks, utility lines or other property, including
but not limited to related activities such as land clearing, grading, earthmoving,
excavating, blasting, filling and landscaping.
CONSTRUCTION DEVICE — Any powered device or equipment designed and
intended for use in construction. Examples of "construction devices" are air
compressors, bulldozers, backhoes, trucks, shovels, derricks and cranes.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — Any location, including land and water, where
construction takes place.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound that is not an impulse sound.
dB — The abbreviation of "decibel."
dB(A) — The A-weighted sound level in decibels, as measured by a general
purpose sound meter complying with the provision of the American National
Standards Institute specifications for sound-level meters, properly calibrated and
operated on the A-weighing network.
DECIBEL — The unit for measuring the volume of a sound, based upon the
pressure level of a sound. For the purpose of this chapter, the standard reference
pressure stated herein will be used to assure a consistent and standard reference for
measuring sound. The sound-pressure level measured in "decibels" is equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ration of the effective pressure of the sound
measured.
DISCRETE TONE — A sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure varies
essentially as a simple sinusoidal function of time.
EMERGENCY OPERATION —
EXHAUST SYSTEM — A system which removes and transports air or gas from a
device.
FREQUENCY — A function period in time which is the reciprocal of the period
The operation or parking of an authorized emergency vehicle when such
vehicle is engaged in transporting a sick or injured person, responding to or
working or assisting at the scene of an accident, disaster, public call, alarm or
fire or any other emergency.
(1)
The work or activity that is necessary to prevent or recover from an
emergency, including but not limited to work to repair electric, gas, water,
sewerage and/or telephone services.
(2)
§ 85-2 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 85-2
85:2
and which is measured by the number of oscillations or cycles per second,
expressed in hertz (Hz).
HOMEOWNERS' LIGHT RESIDENTIAL OUTDOOR EQUIPMENT — All
engine- or-motor-powered garden or maintenance tools intended for repetitive use
in residential areas, capable of being used by a homeowner. Examples are lawn
mowers, garden tools, riding tractors, snowblowers, power shovels and snowplows.
Hz — The abbreviation for "hertz," and is equivalent to cycles per second.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — A sound of short duration, usually less than one second,
and of high intensity, with an abrupt onset and rapid delay. Examples include an
explosion or discharge of a firearm.
L10 — The A-weighted sound level measured with slow response that is exceeded
10% of the time in any one-hour interval. The measurement time interval need not
be one hour, provided that the measurement results are representative of a one-hour
interval.
L90 — The A-weighted sound level measured with slow response that is exceeded
90% of the time in any one-hour interval. The measurement time interval need not
be one hour, provided that the measurement results are representative on a one-hour
interval.
MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT — The weight of the vehicle unladen, plus the
weight of the maximum load to be carried by such vehicle during the registration
period or the maximum gross weight for which the vehicle is registered, whichever
is greater.
MUFFLER — A device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal
combustion engine or other sound source.
NOISE-SENSITIVE ZONE — An area adjacent to a site, including but not limited
to any authorized school, church, house of worship, senior citizen center, day-care
center, hospital or nursing home, which requires specific noise limitations.
PAVING BREAKER — Any powered construction device that is designed to be
used or is actually used to cut or trench pavement subbase, macadam, gravel,
concrete or hard ground.
PERSON — Includes the singular and plural and also any natural person, firm,
corporation, political subdivision, government agency, association, club,
partnership, society or any other form of association or organization or any legal
entity whatsoever.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — Any highway, road street, avenue, public place, public
driveway or other public way.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is propelled by any
power other than muscular power that is designed for or capable of cross-country
travel, such as a snowmobile, motorcycle, trail bike or minibike. A "recreational
vehicle" is also classed as a motor vehicle when such recreational vehicle is
operated or driven upon a public highway. Lawn mowers, powered garden vehicles
and other similar utilitarian domestic vehicles are specifically excepted therefrom.
REFUSE-COLLECTING VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle designed to compact
§ 85-2 NOISE § 85-2
85:3
§ 85-3. Interpretation of provisions.
Any act in violation of any of the other provisions of this chapter is also deemed to be
in violation of § 85-4 of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit
the prosecution and conviction of a person on two or more charges which may constitute
violations of different sections of this chapter arising out of a single act, occasion or
set of circumstances. However, no more than a single penalty may be imposed for each
separate and distinct offense.
§ 85-4. Standards in determining unreasonable noise.
No person shall make, continue or cause or permit to be made, verbally or mechanically,
any unreasonable noise. An "unreasonable noise" shall mean any excessive or unusually
loud sound or any sound which creates inconvenience, annoyance, alarm or disturbance
and which is publicly offensive or recklessly creates a risk of the foregoing. Standards to
be considered in determining whether unreasonable noise exists in a particular situation
include the following:
and transport refuse.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement or other
physical parameter in a medium with internal forces (American National Standards
Institute terminology).
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted pressure level, measured by the use of a
metering characteristic and the weighing A, B and C (American National Standards
Institute terminology). For purposes of enforcing and interpreting the provisions
of this chapter, unless a different frequency weighing is indicated, the A-weighing
slow response shall apply.
SOUND-LEVEL METER—An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier,
an output meter and frequency-weighing networks, for the measurement of sound
levels (American National Standards Institute terminology).
SOUND-REPRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device that is designed to be used
or is actually used for the production or reproduction of sound, including but not
limited to any musical instrument, radio, television, tape recorder, phonograph or
any other sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND SOURCE — Any activity or device that produces sound.
SOUND TRUCK — Any vehicle having mounted hereon or attached thereto
sound-amplifying equipment.
A. The volume of the noise.
B. The intensity of the noise.
C. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual in the context of ordinary human
experience.
D. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural in the context of ordinary
human experience.
E. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
§ 85-2 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 85-4
85:4
§ 85-5. Prohibited noise.
The following acts and the causing thereof are declared to be in violation of this chapter:
F. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
G. The nature of the zoning district of the area from within which the noise emanates.
H. The time of day or night the noise occurs.
I. The time duration of the noise.
J. Whether the sound source is temporary.
K. Whether the noise is continuous or impulsive.
L. The presence of discrete tones.
A. Sound-reproducing devices.
(1) No person shall operate, use or cause or permit to be operated a sound
reproduction device that produces unreasonable noise.
(2) No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated any soundreproduction
device for commercial or business advertising purposes or for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale or display of
merchandise in connection with any commercial operation, including but not
limited to the sale of radios, televisions, phonographs, tape recorders,
phonograph records, tapes or compact discs, in front or outside of any
building, place or premises, or in or through any aperture of such building,
place or premises, abutting on or adjacent to a public street, park or place or in
or upon any vehicle operated, standing or being in or on any public street, park
or place where the sound therefrom may be heard upon any public street, park
or place or from any airplane or other device used for flying over the Village
of Webster or anywhere on public streets, parks or places.
(3) No person shall operate, use or cause or permit to be operated or used any
sound-reproduction device in any public place on such a manner that the sound
emanating therefrom creates unreasonable noise across a real property
boundary, subject to the following exceptions:
(a) Bell, chimes or carillons. Nothing herein contained shall preclude or
prohibit the use of loudspeakers or other sound amplifying devices to
broadcast the sound of bells, chimes or carillons or replicas thereof by a
church or other house of worship.
(b) Seasonal music. Nothing herein contained shall preclude or prohibit the
reasonable use of loudspeakers in nonresidential-zoned districts of the
Village solely to broadcast seasonal music from December 1 through
January 1 of the following year, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m.
(c) Band concerts performed in the Village bandstand.
§ 85-4 NOISE § 85-5
85:5
B. Sound-signal devices. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any soundsignal
device, including but not limited to any Klaxon, horn, whistle, bell, gong,
drum or siren, so as to create unreasonable noise, except when and where
authorized by New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
C. Emergency-warning device. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any
emergency-warning device, except:
(1) To give notice as a warning of any emergency;
(2) On an authorized vehicle when such vehicle is engaged in emergency
operations; or
(3) When such device is under test.
D. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any audible burglar alarm or any
motor vehicle burglar alarm unless such alarm shall be capable of automatically
terminating operation within 15 minutes after such alarm is first activated.
E. Shouting. No persons shall shout, yell, call, hoot, whistle or sing on public streets
or in public places in such a manner as to create unreasonable noise.
F. Containers and construction material. No person shall load, unload, handle,
transport, open, close or destroy any containers or construction material in such a
manner as to create unreasonable noise.
G. Squealing tires. No person shall operate a vehicle in such a manner as to cause
unreasonable noise by spinning or squealing the tires of such vehicle.
H. Exhausts. No person shall cause or permit the discharge onto the open air of exhaust
of any device, including but not limited to any steam engine, diesel engine, internalcombustion
engine or turbine engine, so as to create unreasonable noise.
I. Modification of noise-control devices. No person shall operate, cause or permit to
be operated any device that has been modified so as to cause the sound emitted to
be greater than that emitted by such device as originally manufactured.
J. Standing motor vehicles.
(1) No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated any motor vehicle
with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of 10,000 pounds or any
auxiliary equipment attached to such vehicle for a period longer than 20
minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than
traffic congestion, on a public right-of-way or public space so that the sound
therefrom is audible across a residential real property boundary between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(2) This subsection shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or to public
utility vehicles actually engaged in any emergency operations.
K. Vehicle or motorboat repairs and testing. No person shall cause or permit the
repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle or
motorboat in such a manner as to cause unreasonable noise across a residential real
property boundary. For purposes of the enforcement of the subsection,
§ 85-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 85-5
85:6
§ 85-6. Recreational vehicles.
No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated any recreational vehicle:
§ 85-7. Air-conditioning and air-handling devices.
Except as provided in Subsection B of this section, no person shall operate or cause
or permit to be operated an air-conditioning or air-handling device that exceeds the
maximum sound-level limitations provided in this section.
§ 85-8. Air compressors.
No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated an air compressor unless a
muffler certified by the manufacturer of such muffler to provide a dynamic insertion loss
of not less than 20 dB(A)s of the sound emitted from the exhaust of such compressor is
installed on such exhaust.
"unreasonable noise" means a sound level in excess of 65 dB(A)s when measured
at the real property line.
A. On a private property of another without the express prior written consent of the
owner and the occupant of said property. Such consent may be revoked at any time
by the grantor thereof. Where such express prior written consent has been obtained,
the operator or person at the site responsible for such operation shall keep said
consent on their person and available for immediate display at all times during the
period of such operation.
B. On any public grounds or property, including town, county, state, federal or schoolowned
land, which shall include but not be limited to parks, ballparks and
recreation areas.
C. In such a manner as to create unreasonable noise so as to unreasonably disturb or
interfere with persons in the peaceful and quiet enjoyment of their property. To this
end, no person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle before the hour of 9:00
a.m. and after the hour of 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, or sunset, whichever shall first
occur.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the safety or property
of any person.
A. In areas zoned residential, continuous sound in and from said equipment which has
crossed the real property line of the property where said equipment or device is
located shall not exceed any of the following sound levels:
(1) Fifty-five dB(A)s at any point.
(2) Fifty dB(A)s outside a living-area window when measured at a distance of not
more than three feet from the window opening of the property receiving said
sound.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply if the sound from the air-conditioner
or air-handling device produces an increase of less than five dB(A)s in the sound
level that exists in the absence of such sound.
§ 85-5 NOISE § 85-9
85:7
§ 85-9. Places of public assembly.
No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated a place of public assembly,
including but not limited to a restaurant, bar or cafe, in which the sound level is equal
to or exceeds 95 dB(A)s for more than 30 seconds at the location of business invitees or
which does not meet the levels provided for in §§ 85-11 and 85-12 of this chapter.
§ 85-10. Sound levels limited; method of measurement.
No person shall operate or cause or permit to be operated in a zoning district, as defined
in the Code of the Village of Webster, Chapter 175, Zoning, any device that produces a
sound level exceeding the applicable, permissible limits specified in §§ 85-11 and 85-12
of this chapter. The measurement of any sound or noise shall be made with a soundlevel
meter using an A-scale decibel level. The measurement shall be conducted at the
property line on which such noise is generated or perceived, whichever is appropriate
in a residential district, or at the boundary line of the receiving property. For purposes
of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, an enforcement official shall have the
right to go onto the real property of the person alleged to be in violation for the limited
purpose of obtaining accurate sound-level readings without being liable for trespass
therefor.
§ 85-11. Residential district.
Except as may otherwise be authorized by the provisions of this chapter:
§ 85-12. Commercial, business, marine and industrial operations.
A. During the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., no person shall operate or cause or
permit to be operated any device which produces a sound level across a residential
real property boundary or within any residential zoned district in excess of 65
dB(A)s of an L10 in excess of 50 dB(A)s.
B. During the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., no person shall operate, cause or permit
to be operated any device which produces a sound level across a residential real
property boundary or within any residential zoned district in excess of 55 dB(A)s
or an L10 in excess of 50 dB(A)s.
C. The sound levels specified in Subsections A and B shall be decreased by five
decibels if the sound contains impulsive or discrete tone characteristics.
A. Except as may otherwise be authorized by the provisions of this chapter, no person
shall operate or cause or permit to be operated on a sound source site a commercial,
business, marine business or industrial operation that produces a sound level
exceeding the limitations as provided in Subsections B through D of this section.
B. Continuous sound in air which has crossed the property line of such sound source
site and enters property zoned for residential use or property within a noisesensitive
zone shall not exceed the following levels:
(1) During the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.:
(a) A sound level in excess of 65 dB(A)s measured with the slow response of
§ 85-9 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 85-12
85:8
§ 85-13. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the same persons and in the same
manner as provided for in the Code of the Village of Webster, Chapter 175, Zoning.
§ 85-14. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the use or occupancy of any lot or structure
thereon and to noise produced thereby, except the following:
a sound-level meter; or
(b) An L10 in excess of 60 dB(A)s.
(2) During the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. the following day:
(a) A sound level in excess of 55 dB(A)s measured with the slow response of
a sound-level meter; or
(b) An L10 in excess of 50 dB(A)s.
C. Continuous sound in air which has crossed the property line of the sound source site
and enters property which is zoned for business or manufacturing or property where
the public in general congregates shall not exceed either of the following levels:
(1) A sound level in excess of 65 dB(A)s measured with the slow response of a
sound-level meter; or
(2) An L10 in excess of 60 dB(A)s.
D. The sound levels specified in Subsections B and C shall be decreased by five
decibels if the sound contains impulsive tone characteristics.
A. Agriculture.
B. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an
emergency and the passage of vehicles for that purpose.
C. The emission of sound in the performance of an emergency operation.
D. Public celebrations of municipal corporations.
§ 85-12 NOISE § 85-14
85:9

Chapter 90
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 85-14 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 85-14
90:1

ARTICLE I
Park Hours of Operation
[Adopted 9-9-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010; amended in its entirety at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 90-1. Hours; exceptions.
Village of Webster's park hours of operation for all parks located within the Village
will be from 5:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. everyday unless a special event is planned by the
Business Improvement District or a special event is booked through the Village Hall.
§ 90-2. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 90-1 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 90-2
90:3

Chapter 93
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 85.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 97.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 90-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 90-2
93:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-22-1905; amended in its entirety 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 93-1. Cutting of trees.51
No person shall willfully cut, chop or otherwise injure a fruit, shade or ornamental tree
standing on lands of another or of the Village or within any of the streets or public
places within the Village of Webster, New York, except for trimming of tree branches
overhanging one's private property, or in the case of a public tree, without written
permission from the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 93-2. Drinking in public.52
No persons shall have in their possession any open bottle or container containing liquor,
beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage with intent to consume while such persons are
on any public highway, public street, public sidewalk, public parking area or public
place, except those premises duly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises. "Intent to consume" includes any of the following: drinking
from the container; possession with movement of the container to the mouth; and any
circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume in any public place.
§ 93-3. Sleeping in vehicles in public places.
No person or persons shall sleep in any stationary motor vehicle at or on any street, park,
recreation area or parking area owned, leased, controlled or operated by the Village of
Webster, New York, during the hours of darkness.
§ 93-4. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.53
51. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
52. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
53. Editor's Note: See also § 93-8 of this chapter.
§ 93-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 93-4
93:3

ARTICLE II
Adult Uses
[Adopted 3-8-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
§ 93-5. Adult uses.
A. Adult use establishments, as herein defined, shall be allowable in the General
Industrial (GI) Zones only as specifically set forth herein and only to the extent not
inconsistent with local law and the New York State Penal Law relating to exposure,
obscenity or lewdness.
B. Purpose. The primary purposes of this section are as follows:
(1) To preserve the character and quality of life in Village neighborhoods and
business areas.
(2) To control such documented harmful and adverse secondary effects of adult
uses on the surrounding areas as decreased property values; attraction of
transients; parking and traffic problems; increased crime (including
prostitution, rape and assaults in the vicinity of such uses); loss of business for
surrounding nonadult businesses; and deterioration of neighborhoods.
(3) To maintain property values.
(4) To prevent crime.
(5) To protect retail trade.
(6) To restrict minors' access to adult uses.
(7) To maintain the general welfare, safety and morals for Village of Webster
residents.
(8) The purpose of the amendments adopted September 28, 1995, is to expand the
types of adult use establishments covered by this article and to fulfill more
adequately the original purposes of this article. [Added 9-28-1995 by L.L. No.
3-1995]
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [Amended 9-28-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENT—A public or private establishment or any part
thereof which presents any of the following entertainments or services on one or
more occasions:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(1)
(2) ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE —
§ 93-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 93-5
93:5
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration any one
or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
[1]
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities.
[2]
(a)
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as "adult bookstore" or "adult video store" so long
as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental
for consideration, any of the specified materials which depict or describe
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(b)
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity.
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
(b)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(c)
(3)
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration,
which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which has a
sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability
of this adult type of photographic reproductions.
(a)
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours.
(b)
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a
period of time that is less than 10 hours.
(c)
(4)
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
(5)
§ 93-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 93-5
93:6
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Any of the following:
areas are regularly shown.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a
state of nudity or seminudity.
(6)
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as
a companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(7)
ESCORT AGENCY—A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
(8)
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, massage, alcohol rub fomentation, electric or magnetic
treatment or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is
administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a
medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar
professional person licensed by the state. This definition does not include an
athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar
establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is
offered as an incidental or accessory service.
(9)
NUDE MODEL STUDIO—Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
(10)
NUDITY — Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals;
pubic region; buttock; female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.54
(11)
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
(12)
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers, for any form of
consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of
the opposite sex.
(a)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
(b)
(13)
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
54. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 93-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 93-5
93:7
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — The increase in floor areas occupied by a
sexually oriented business by more than 25% of the floor area as it exists on the
effective date of this section.
buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areolae.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks
or female breasts.
(3)
(4) Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship.
Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of
pain.
(5)
Erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an animal by a human
being.
(6)
Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation as part
of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in Subsections (1)
through (6) above.
(7)
D. Regulations. Adult use establishments, as defined above, are to be restricted as to
location in the following manner in addition to any other requirements of this Code:
(1) The property lines of any adult use establishment must be at least 500 feet from
the property lines of a residence or residentially zoned property, schools, daycare
facilities, churches (or other religious places of worship), parks,
playgrounds or governmental facilities.
(2) The property lines of any adult use establishment must be at least 1,000 feet
from the property lines of another adult use establishment.
(3) All adult uses shall be conducted in an enclosed building. Regardless of
location or distance, no one who is passing by an enclosed building having a
use governed by these provisions shall be able to visually see any specified
anatomical area or any specified sexual activity by virtue of any display which
depicts or shows said area or activity. This requirement shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, window or other opening. [Added 9-28-1995 by
L.L. No. 3-1995]
E. This section shall be enforceable by injunction.
F. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
[Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 93-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 93-6
93:8
§ 93-6. Exposure of a person.
§ 93-7. Promoting exposure of a person.
§ 93-8. Continuation of offense.
The continuation of an offense against the articles of this chapter shall constitute, for
each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 93-9. Nonconforming adult uses. [Added 9-28-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
Any adult use establishment lawfully operating on the effective date of this article that
is in violation of the location or structural configuration requirements of this article shall
be deemed a nonconforming use. The continuation of the same use of substantially the
same character and intensity shall be allowed. No substantial enlargement of such adult
A. This section is enacted pursuant to the New York State Penal Law § 245.01.
B. A person is guilty of exposure if that person appears in a public place in a state of
nudity or in such a manner that the private or intimate parts of that person's body
are unclothed or exposed.
C. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
NUDITY — Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic region.
(2) Buttock.
(3) Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.55
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
D. Exposure of a person is a violation, punishable by a fine, in an amount fixed by the
court, not to exceed $250; a term of imprisonment, fixed by the court, not to exceed
15 days; or both. Additionally, this section may be enforced by injunction.
A. This section is enacted pursuant to the New York State Penal Law § 245.02.
B. A person is guilty of promoting the exposure of a person when that person
knowingly conducts, maintains, owns, manages, operates or furnishes any public
premises or place where a person appears in a state of nudity, as defined in § 93-6C,
or where a person appears in such a manner that the private or intimate parts of that
person's body are unclothed or exposed.
C. Promoting the exposure of a person is a violation, punishable by either a fine, in an
amount fixed by the court, not to exceed $250; a term of imprisonment, fixed by the
court, not to exceed 15 days; or both.
D. Additionally, this section may be enforced by injunction.
55. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 93-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 93-9
93:9
use establishment shall be permitted.
§ 93-10. Severability. [Added 9-28-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995]
If any part of this chapter is held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective, the remainder
of this chapter will still be valid.
§ 93-9 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 93-10
93:10
Chapter 97
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 54.
Licenses and licenses — See Ch. 75.
Noise — See Ch. 85.
§ 97-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Webster Peddler's License Ordinance."
§ 97-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and good order in the
Village of Webster and to contribute to the peace, welfare and good order of its people
by licensing the occupation of peddler as herein defined and thereby identifying and
regulating the conduct of persons engaged in the same.
§ 97-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HAWKER or PEDDLER — One who goes from place to place or from house to house
or from street to street or who stands in a street or upon a sidewalk selling, bartering
or offering for sale or barter any items whatsoever, including but not limited to the
following: goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, food products and farm products.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any organization organized exclusively for
literary, religious, education, scientific, civic, charitable or similar purposes, and not part
of the profits or benefits of said organization shall inure to the benefit of its members,
officers, directors or stockholders.
SOLICITOR or PLACE-TO-PLACE SALESPERSON — One who goes from place to
place or from house to house or street to street or who stands in the street or upon
a sidewalk taking orders for any items whatsoever, including but not limited to the
following: goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, food products and farm produce,
which items are to be delivered in the future, or for service to be performed in the future
or making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing to be delivered in the future.
§ 97-4. License required.
It shall be hereafter unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to carry
on any occupation as defined in § 97-3 hereof without having obtained the license
prescribed by this chapter.
§ 93-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 97-5
97:1
§ 97-5. License fees.
All license fees shall be paid when the license is issued. License fees shall be established
by the prevailing fee schedule.56
§ 97-6. Term of license; issuance; denial; investigation.
§ 97-7. Exempt activities and persons.
The following activities or persons shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of
this chapter:
A. All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for a period of not to exceed one
year and shall, in any event, expire on the 31st day of December following the date
of its issuance.
B. All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be issued by the Village Clerk, who shall
keep an accurate and permanent record of the name, address and occupation of the
licensee, the date of issuance and expiration of the license.
C. A license may be refused to the applicant if the applicant shall have been convicted
of a misdemeanor or felony which, in the judgment of the Village Clerk, renders
the applicant unfit or undesirable to carry on the occupation of peddling, soliciting
or hawking. The Village Clerk may also refuse a license to any person who, in the
Clerk's judgment, shall be an undesirable person or unable to properly conduct the
soliciting, hawking or peddling within the Village of Webster.
D. Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Village Clerk may apply to the
Village Board therefor, and the same may be granted or refused by the Board.
E. The Village Clerk may conduct an investigation into any of the above matters to
enable the Village Clerk to determine the advisability of issuing a peddler's license
to the applicant, and said Village Clerk shall have a minimum period of two weeks
to conduct said investigation. The issuance of the license shall be delayed for such
period of two weeks and for a longer period of time, if necessary, to complete said
investigation.
A. Any sales conducted pursuant to law or by order of any court;
B. Sales of newspapers or other periodicals, classified as second-class postal matter;
C. Dissemination of written materials pertaining to a candidate for public office or a
political party;
D. Members of religious sects who sell bibles and other religious materials without
profit to themselves;
E. Fund-raising activities of a child permanently residing in Webster and attending any
public, parochial or private school located in Webster or an immediately adjacent
town that are an authorized activity of either an organization of which such person
is a member or the school that such person attends; and
56. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 97-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 97-7
97:2
§ 97-8. License fee exemptions.
License fee exemptions shall be as follows:
§ 97-9. Separate licenses required.
A license shall be secured by every peddler, hawker and solicitor or place-to-place
salesperson from the Village Clerk, as follows:
F. Persons, organizations, firms or corporations who or which call at only those places
where they have been requested by the owner or occupant to call.
A. Honorably discharged member of the armed forces who has procured a license
issued by the County Clerk as provided by the General Business Law of the State
of New York.
B. If the solicitor intends to sell goods that are being shipped into the state, a fee may
not be imposed upon the solicitor, as such a fee would violate the Interstate
Commerce Clause.
C. Nonprofit organizations and person working for such organizations shall be exempt
from payment of fees otherwise required by this chapter. However, in order to
obtain such exemption, each nonprofit organization shall be required to complete
the appropriate license application.
(1) The following information shall be provided to the Village Clerk by any
nonprofit organizations seeking the exemption provided by this chapter:
(a) Name of organization.
(b) Name of the person responsible, together with the person's address and
phone number.
(c) Certification of insurance (naming the Village as additionally insured).
(d) Estimated number of people expected to conduct the activity.
(e) Specific daily selling hours.
(f) Products to be sold.
(g) Dates for licensing.
(h) Specialty licenses required and agencies involved.
(i) Tax-exempt number or other appropriate proof of nonprofit status, for
example certificate of incorporation or affidavit.
A. For each motorized vehicle used by any of the foregoing in any such business
within the Village of Webster.
B. For each pushcart or handcart used by any of the foregoing for such business within
the Village of Webster.
C. For each person engaged in the occupation of peddler, hawker or solicitor or place-
§ 97-7 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 97-9
97:3
§ 97-10. Regulations for licensees.
to-place salesperson without either of the vehicles named in Subsections A and B
of this section.
A. All licensees hereunder shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) Each of such licensees shall carry upon the licensee's person at all times the
license issued to the licensee by the Village Clerk and shall produce such
license and exhibit the same at any time to any person who demands an
inspection thereof.
(2) In the event that the Village shall issue a metal sign to be used on vehicles used
by any of the foregoing licensees, such metal sign, bearing the year of its
issuance and its license number and the name of the business, shall be fastened
in a conspicuous place on every vehicle used in such business.
(3) None of the foregoing licensees shall use any of the public streets or public
places within the Village of Webster as standing places for their vehicles,
handcarts or pushcarts, for the conduct of their business.
(4) Such licensees shall not cry out or make loud noises in any public place or
public street for the purpose of selling of any merchandise.
(5) None of such licensees shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quality,
quantity or character of any products or services offered for sale or hire.
(6) A license will not be assignable. Any holder of such license who permits it to
be used by another person and any person who uses such license granted to
any other person shall each be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor in plying his trade to ring the
bell or knock upon or enter any building whereon there is painted or otherwise
affixed or displayed to public view any sign containing any or all or the
following words: "No Peddlers," "No Solicitors," "No Agents" or other
wording, the purpose of which purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on
the premises.
(8) It shall be unlawful to create or maintain any booth or stand or place any
barrel, boxes, crates or other obstructions upon the paved sections of any street
or sidewalk or upon any public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for
sale any goods, wares or merchandise.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent any person having an
established place for the transaction of business within said Village from soliciting
orders in such line of business from customers and filling the same, nor so as to
prevent the sale or inspection of milk, baked goods, ice or sale or delivery of
newspapers by newspaper carriers, and such articles which are governed by the
provisions of the statutes of the State of New York.57
57. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 97-9 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 97-11
97:4
§ 97-11. Hours.
No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling at any time before 9:00 a.m. or after
7:30 p.m. except upon invitation from or an appointment with the resident.
§ 97-12. Loss of license.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder or his agent or
employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application may be issued upon
payment of the required fee.58
§ 97-13. Revocation of license.
§ 97-14. Licensing for veterans.
No person duly licensed pursuant to § 32 of the General Business Law of the State of
New York shall be required to secure a license hereunder, but shall comply with all the
regulations hereof.
§ 97-15. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
A. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Village Board after a hearing
on five days' notice to the licensee, upon proof that such licensee has violated any
of the regulations of this chapter.
B. No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has a license which has
been revoked shall make further application until a period of a least six months have
elapsed since the last previous rejection.
58. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 97-11 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 97-15
97:5

Chapter 101
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Sewers — See Ch. 113.
Water — See Ch. 162.
§ 97-15 PLUMBING § 97-15
101:1

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Plumbers
[Adopted 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 101-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct the trade, business or calling of plumbing
with the Village of Webster without first having obtained a license therefor issued by the
Building Inspector of said Village or otherwise than in accordance with the terms of said
license and without having first obtained and filed with said Building Inspector a bond
as hereinafter provided. Such license shall be issued in writing on blanks furnished for
such purpose.
§ 101-2. Fees; expiration of license.
§ 101-3. Prerequisites to issuance of license.
§ 101-4. Licensing of corporation.
A. The annual license fee shall be as set by the Village Board, payable when the
license is issued, and the same license fee is payable for a period of less than one
year.59
B. Each and every license shall expire on June 30 next after the issuance thereof.
A. The Building Inspector may issue a license to any applicant therefor, provided that
such applicant holds a license issued by the Examining Board of Plumbers of the
City of Rochester, New York, or by said Building Inspector or has carried on the
trade of plumbing for a period of at least 10 years next prior to the date of the
issuance of such license, or the Building Inspector may issue such license to any
person who has qualified therefor by passing such examination as may be
prescribed by the Village Board.
B. The Building Inspector may issue a license to any domestic corporation which,
pursuant to the provisions of § 101-4, is entitled to conduct the trade, business or
calling of plumbing.
A. A domestic corporation may conduct the trade, business or calling of plumbing
within the Village of Webster and shall be entitled to a license therefor, provided
that one or more officers of such corporation separately or aggregately actually hold
or own at least 51% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of said corporation,
and provided that each of such officers holding such percentage of the stock is the
holder of a license issued as aforesaid and actively engaged in the plumbing
business of the corporation.
B. In case one or more officers of a corporation engaged in such business shall die,
being the holder of such license, the corporation may continue the business during
the time necessarily required for the administration of the estate of such deceased
officer, not exceeding two years from the date of death, provided that one or more
59. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 101-1 PLUMBING § 101-4
101:3
§ 101-5. Bond.
§ 101-6. Grounds for denial of license; appeal.
A license may be refused if the applicant shall have been convicted of a misdemeanor or
felony which, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, renders the applicant an unfit
or undesirable person or if the applicant, in the opinion of said Building Inspector, is
incapable of conducting the trade, business or calling of plumbing. Any applicant who
has been refused a license by the Building Inspector may appeal to the Village Board
from such refusal, and such license may be granted or refused by the Board.
§ 101-7. Revocation of license.
The Village Board may revoke any license issued under the authority of this article,
provided that before such revocation a public hearing thereon has been held and the
licensee has had an opportunity to be heard, and provided that the Village Board,
before such revocation, shall make a determination that such licensee is undesirable
or is incapable, except that a violation of this article shall be sufficient ground for the
revocation of such license. The granting, refusal or revocation of such license by the
Village Board shall be subject to judicial review.
§ 101-8. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this article or any subdivision or provision thereof shall be an offense and
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 101-9. Exceptions; commercial or industrial firm.
officers of the corporation is the holder of such license and, together with the legal
representatives of such deceased officer or officers, actually owns and holds at least
51% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of said corporation.
A. A bond in the sum of $2,000 shall be executed by every person or corporation
engaging in such trade within the Village of Webster and shall be filed with the
Building Inspector before such license shall be issued as hereinbefore specified.
B. Such bond shall be conditioned that said licensee will comply with the laws, codes,
ordinances and regulations of the State of New York, County of Monroe and
Village of Webster and all lawfully issued written orders of the Building Inspector
or the Building Inspector's designated representatives and that the Village of
Webster will be indemnified and saved harmless from any and all claims or
damages or liabilities caused by or arising out of any act or omission of the licensee
in the execution, performance or protection of the work of the licensee, the
licensee's agents or employees or by the licensee's failure to comply with applicable
statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. Said bond shall be in such form
and contain such sureties as shall be approved by the Village Board or its designated
representatives.
A. This article shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation doing plumbing work
on his or her or its own plumbing system, provided that such system shall be
§ 101-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 101-9
101:4
connected to a private sewage disposal system. Except as hereinafter provided, a
person, firm or corporation whose plumbing system shall be connected to public
sewers shall permit plumbing work on his or her or its premises to be done only by
licensed plumbers.
B. A commercial or industrial firm or corporation may designate one of its employees
who shall be qualified to hold a plumber's license to be responsible to the Village
for all plumbing work done on the premises of such firm or corporation, and the
Building Inspector may issue a license to such individual upon filing the necessary
bond as hereinbefore provided, and such license shall be valid for all plumbing
work performed on the premises of such commercial or industrial firm or
corporation by its own employees.
§ 101-9 PLUMBING § 101-9
101:5

Chapter 113
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Plumbing — See Ch. 101.
Water — See Ch. 162.
§ 101-9 SEWERS § 101-9
113:1

Part 1
[Adopted 7-S8a-n19it8a5ryB SyeLw.eLr.s No. 2-1985]
ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 113-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be entitled a "Local Law Regulating the Use of Public and Private
Sewers and Drains, Private Wastewater Disposal, Installation and Connection of
Building Sewers and the Discharge of Waters and Wastes into the Public Sewer Systems
and Providing Penalties For Violations Thereof in the Village of Webster, State of New
York."
§ 113-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this Part 1 shall be as defined in Part 2 of this chapter or as follows:
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials.
BUILDER — Any person, persons or corporation that undertakes to construct,
either under contract or for resale, any habitable building.
BUILDING SEWER DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge for soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer lateral,
beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER LATERAL — The extension from the building sewer drain
to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids,
pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the Village's
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, if the publicly
owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does
remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the waters of the state by
waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or
through the spread of disease. "Contamination" shall include any equivalent effect
resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of the state area
are affected.
CONTRACTOR—Any person, firm or corporation approved by the Village Board
to do work in the Village.
CRITICAL USER — A user who is required to obtain a permit, as defined in
§ 113-9.
DEVELOPER — Any person, persons or corporation that undertakes to construct
more than one housing unit on a given tract or land subdivision.
ENGINEER — The professional engineer retained as Village Engineer for the
Village of Webster.
§ 113-1 SEWERS § 113-2
113:3
FEDERAL ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500, and
any amendments thereto, as well as any guidelines, limitations and standards
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant as defined in this section. The pretreatment standard for "incompatible
pollutants" introduced into a publicly owned treatment works by a major
contributing industry not subject to Section 307(c) of the Federal Act shall be,
for sources within the corresponding industrial or commercial category, that
established by a promulgated effluent limitations guideline defining best
practicable control technology currently available pursuant to Sections 301(b) and
304(b) of the Federal Act, provided that if the publicly owned treatment works
which receives the pollutants is committed, in its NPDES permit, to remove a
specified percentage of any "incompatible pollutant," the pretreatment standard
applicable to users of such treatment works shall be correspondingly reduced for the
pollutant; and provided, further, that even when the effluent limitations guideline
for each industry category is promulgated, a separate provision will be proposed
concerning the application of such guideline to pretreatment.
LIVING UNIT — A self-contained apartment or a portion of a private dwelling
occupied by a person or persons living independent and separate from the other
occupants of the building.
MASS EMISSION RATE — The weight of material discharged to the sewer
system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the "mass omission
rate" shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of
constituents.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
NUISANCE — Anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive to
the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the
comfort or enjoyment of life or property or which affects at the same time an entire
community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the
extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
NYSDOT — The New York State Department of Transportation.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, person or group
having title to real property.
POLLUTION—An alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a
degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use of facilities which
serve such beneficial uses. "Pollution" may include contamination.
PREMISES — A parcel of real estate, including any improvements thereon, which
is determined by the Village to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using and
paying for service.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE—The waste from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will
§ 113-2 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-2
113:4
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particle greater than 1/4 inch in any dimension.[Amended 6-9-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which transports storm
surface waters and drainage but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water to which no constituent has been added, either
intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable for
disposal to storm or natural drainages or directly to surface waters.
USER—Any person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater
into a public sewer.
USER CLASSIFICATION — A classification of user based on the 1972 Edition
of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual prepared by the Executive
Office of Management and Budget.
VILLAGE BOARD or BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The duly elected Board of
Trustees of the Village of Webster or its authorized deputy or representative.
WASTE — Includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid,
gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human or animal
origin or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever
nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to
and for purposes of disposal.
WASTEWATER — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters,
including volume and flow rate and such other parameters, that serve to define,
classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE—Any water, surface or underground, including saline
waters within the boundaries of the state.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 113-2 SEWERS § 113-2
113:5

ARTICLE II
Use Regulations
§ 113-3. Use of public sewer required.
§ 113-4. Private sewage disposal.
§ 113-5. Building sewers; connections; fees and responsibilities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the Village or in any area
under the jurisdiction of said Village any human or animal excrement, garbage or
other objectionable waste. Exceptions may be granted by the Village Board to an
owner or lessee acting in the normal course of farm or garden operations but only
after specific application by such owner or lessee and upon such conditions as the
Village Board may impose.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse, either directly or through any
storm sewer, within the Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the Village,
any wastewater, industrial wastes or other polluted water. Use of separate storm
sewers and sanitary sewers is mandatory for all future construction in the Village.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer lateral shall be
connected to a private wastewater disposal system, complying with the
requirements of the Monroe County Department of Health, the New York State
Department of Health and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation dealing with septic tank installations.
B. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this Part 1, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned, emptied in a sanitary manner and
filled with suitable material.
C. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the authorized representative of the
Monroe County Department of Health, the New York State Department of Health
or the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
A. No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Village Board.
B. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and commercial
service; and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either
case, the owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Village. The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
§ 113-3 SEWERS § 113-5
113:7
the Engineer. The Village Board shall fix a permit tap-in and inspection fee for
multiple dwellings and each commercial, industrial or other nonresidential building
after recommendations of the Engineer, based on the size and nature of the
operation proposed in such commercial, industrial or other nonresidential building
as compared to the demands of a single residential structure.
C. A separate and independent building sewer lateral shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot under one ownership and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
D. Existing building sewer laterals may be used only when they are found, on
examination and testing by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this Part
1.
E. The building sewer lateral shall be tar-coated, extra heavy cast-iron soil pipe
conforming to ASTM Specification A74 and American Standards Association
(ASA) Specification A-40.1, SDR-21 PVC conforming to ASTM D-2241 or
Schedule 40 PVC conforming to ASTM D-1785. Joints shall be tight and
waterproof. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
F. The size and slope of the building sewer lateral shall be subject to the approval of
the Superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches, nor
shall the slope of the pipe be less than 1/8 inch per foot.
G. No building sewer lateral shall be laid parallel to and within three feet of any
bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to
afford protection from frost but in no event shall be less than three feet. The
building sewer lateral shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment
insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved
pipe and fittings. The ends of building sewer laterals which are not connected to the
building drain of the structure for any reason shall be sealed against infiltration by
a suitable watertight stopper, plug or other approved means.
H. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, wastewater or industrial wastes carried by such drain shall be lifted
by approved mechanical means and discharged to the building sewer lateral.
I. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer lateral shall be open
trench work unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. Pipelaying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with Sections 3 through 6 of ASTM
Specifications C12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected.
J. No cement joints will be permitted. The transition joint between cast-iron pipe and
other pipe material shall be made with special adapters and joint materials approved
by the Superintendent. Premolded gasket joints for hub and plain end cast-iron pipe
shall be used and shall be a neoprene compression-type gasket which shall be a
premolded one-piece unit designed for joining the cast-iron hub and plain soil pipe
and fittings. The assembled joint shall be sealed by compression of the gasket
§ 113-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-5
113:8
between the exterior surface of the spigot and the interior surface of the hub.
The joint shall be assembled following the manufacturer's recommendation, using
acceptable lubricant and special pipe-coupling tools designed for that purpose. The
plain spigot end shall be forced into the hub end of the pipe for the full depth of
the hub itself. Lubricant shall be a bland, flax-base, nontoxic material and shall not
chemically attack the gasket material.
K. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the building sewer lateral is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or the
Superintendent's representative. When trenches are opened for the laying of
building sewer pipes, such trenches shall be inspected by the Superintendent before
the trenches are filled, and the person performing such work shall notify the
Superintendent when the installation of the building sewer is completed. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
L. All excavations for building sewer installations or repairs shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village. All restoration work shall
be completed in accordance with the Village of Webster’s Public Works
Specifications and shall be inspected and accepted by the Superintendent of Public
Works or their designee. In regards to the restoration work with in the right-of-way,
the Village shall be guaranteed against defects in material or workmanship for 18
months. The guaranty shall be in a form provided by the Village. At the sole
discretion of the Village, a maintenance bond, certified check or letter of credit may
be demanded as part of the guaranty. Prior to the commencement of any work
within the Village right-of-way, an estimate of the restoration costs shall be
reviewed by the Superintendent of Public Works or his designee. The approved
estimate of restoration cost shall form the basis for the amount necessary for the
guaranty, if demanded.60
M. When any building sewer lateral is to serve a school, hospital or similar institution
or public building or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial buildings or
which, in the opinion of the Superintendent, will receive wastewater or industrial
wastes of such volume or character that frequent maintenance of said building
sewer is anticipated, then such building sewer shall be connected to the public
sewer through a manhole. The Superintendent shall determine if and where this type
of connection to the public sewer is required. Connections to existing manholes
shall be made as directed by the Superintendent. If required, a new manhole shall
be installed in the public sewer pursuant to § 113-6C and the building sewer lateral
connection made thereto as directed by the Superintendent. (Refer to Section 3.063
of Regulations of Sewer Use, Water Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of
Practice No. 3.) The responsibility of maintaining the lateral from the building to
the sewer main is that of the property owner.
N. The responsibility of maintaining the lateral from the building to the sewer main is
that of the property owner. [Added 5-28-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
60. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-5 SEWERS § 113-6
113:9
§ 113-6. Extensions.
A. All extensions to the sanitary sewer system owned and maintained by the Village
shall be properly designed in accordance with the Recommended Standards for
Sewage Works as adopted by the Great Lakes, Upper Mississippi River Board of
State Sanitary Engineers, and in strict conformance with all requirements of the
New York State Department of Health, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and Monroe County Department of Health. Plans and
specifications for sewer extensions shall be submitted to and approval obtained
from the Engineer and the New York State Department of Health or New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation and Monroe County Department
of Health before construction may proceed. The design of sewers must anticipate
and allow for flows from all possible future extensions or developments within the
immediate drainage area.
B. The property owner, builder or developer may construct the necessary sewer
extensions, if such extension is approved by the Village Board in accordance with
the requirements of Subsection A. The property owner, builder or developer must
pay for the entire installation, including all expenses incidental thereto. Each
building sewer installed must be installed and inspected as previously required, and
inspection fees as determined by the Village Board shall be paid. The design of
sewers shall be as specified in Subsection C. The installation of the sewer extension
must be subject to periodic inspection by the Engineer, and the expenses for this
inspection shall be paid for by the owner, builder or developer. The Engineer's
decisions shall be final in matters of quality and methods of construction. The
sewer, as constructed, must pass the exfiltration test required in Subsection D
before it is to be used. The cost of sewer extensions thus made shall be absorbed by
the developers or the property owners, including all building sewers.
C. Design.
(1) Sewer design shall be in accordance with the following provisions: Pipe
material shall be either SDR 35 P.V.C., or Class 52 ductile iron pipe, as
approved by the Village of Webster Sewer Department. No standard strength
clay pipe or nonreinforced concrete pipe shall be used. The minimum internal
pipe diameter shall be eight inches. Joints for each kind of pipe shall be
designed for manufacture such that O-ring gaskets of the snap-on type are
employed. Gaskets shall be continuous, solid, natural or synthetic rubber and
shall provide a positive compression seal in the assembled joint such that the
requirements of Subsection D are met. Joint preparation and assembly shall be
in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. At the point of
connection of a building lateral to a main sewer, a standard wye fitting and
sufficient one-eighth (45º) bend fittings shall be used. The wye fittings shall
be installed so that flow in the "arm" shall transition smoothly into the flow in
the public sewer. No lateral connection shall be made to the public sewer
which permits the flow into the public sewer from the lateral to enter at right
angles. The inside diameter of the fittings shall be same diameter as the
building lateral inside diameter. Trench widths, as measured just above the
crown of the pipe, shall not exceed the following: [Amended 6-9-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-199461]
§ 113-6 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-6
113:10
Pipe Diameter
(inches) Trench Width
8 3 feet 3 inches
10 3 feet 6 inches
12 3 feet 9 inches
14 4 feet 0 inches
(2) If the trench widths are found, during field inspection, to exceed the limits in
the above table, the sewer pipe shall be encased with a minimum of six inches
of concrete or a higher strength class pipe shall be used. Pipe shall be firmly
and evenly bedded on a minimum of three inches of No. 1A or No. 1 crushed
stone (NYSDOT specification). Pipe thickness and field strength shall be
calculated on the following criteria:
(a) Safety factor: 1.5.
(b) Load factor: 1.7.
(c) Weight of soil: 120 pounds per cubic foot.
(d) Wheel loading: 16,000 pounds.
(3) Utilizing the above information, design shall then be made as outlined in
Chapter IX of the Water Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice
No. 9, Design and construction of sanitary and storm sewers.
(4) Plastic pipe.
(a) Materials.
[1] Materials supplied for PVC sewer pipe shall be standard production
items conforming to ASTM D-3034, SDR-35 or AWWA C900
Class 150 DR18. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
[2] Joints shall be designed with an integral elastomeric gasket installed
and locked into place by the manufacturer.
[3] Class B bedding material shall be used under all plastic pipe unless
otherwise directed.
(b) Installation.
[1] The standard trench bottom is six inches below the bottom of the
pipe. If the standard trench bottom is unstable or unsuitable, the
contractor will notify the Superintendent of Public Works or the
Superintendent's representative.
[2] The bedding, haunching and initial backfill material shall meet the
requirements for Class B bedding materials.
61. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-6 SEWERS § 113-6
113:11
[3] Bedding material shall be smoothed to grade and compacted with an
approved tamper to provide a firm, stable and uniform support of the
pipe. Bell holes shall then be dug at joints. The PVC pipe shall be
completely supported by the bedding material along its entire length.
Material in the haunching area shown on the detail of construction
shall be carefully chinked around and under the pipe with hand
shovels. The material in the haunching area shall then be carefully
compacted with approved nonmechanical tampers, during which
positive means shall be employed to prevent moving or damaging
the pipe. Select fill shall be carefully placed and compacted with
approved, nonmechanical tampers to 12 inches minimum above the
top of the pipe. Mechanical tampers shall not be used until two feet
zero inches of material has been placed over the pipe. Care shall be
taken to prevent damage to or movement of the pipe.
[4] Connections to manholes shall be made using either a manhole
coupling unit grouted (with epoxy grout) into manhole wall
(coupling to be provided with elastomeric gasket seal) or an
elastomeric seal precast into manhole wall (any voids between the
pipe and manhole wall shall be filled with epoxy grout).
[5] The pipe deflection shall not exceed 5% under full load.
[6] The inspector will order a deflection test for all or for selected
sections of the pipe, using a Go-No-Go mandrel set for five-percent
deflection, upon completion of installation and prior to the end of
guaranty inspection.
[7] Installation shall be in accordance with the detail of construction.
Note that a trench box must be raised above, or sheeting left in place
below, the spring line before placing bedding and haunching
material.
(5) Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or alignment or at
intervals not exceeding 300 linear feet. The manholes shall be constructed with
a poured concrete base of 3,500 pounds per square inch, 12 inches thick, steeltroweled
concrete or mortar-bench walls and inverts and precast four-foot
diameter concrete manhole barrel sections with concentric tapered top section,
as specified by ASTM C478. The manhole frame and cover shall be the
standard design of the Village and shall be set with no less than two courses of
brick underneath to allow for later adjustment in elevation. All joints shall be
sealed against infiltration. No manholes shall be constructed with steps of
ladder rungs. Minimum clear openings in all manholes shall be 24 inches.
Manholes will have permanent ladders installed. Ladders will be of iron tied
into the barrel at one-foot intervals. The manhole bench height will be a
minimum of 3/4 of the diameter of the pipe entering and leaving the manhole.
The bench will be constructed on both sides of the invert. Two coats (12 mils
minimum per coat) of bitumastic coal tar paint shall be applied to all internal
and external areas of all manholes. [Amended 2-23-1987 by L.L. No.
2-198762]
§ 113-6 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-6
113:12
§ 113-7. Use of public sewers.
For provisions regarding the use of public sewers, refer to Part 2 of this chapter.
D. All sewers shall satisfy requirements of a final exfiltration or infiltration test before
they will be approved and sewage flow accepted from them by the Village. This
test consists of filling the pipe with water to provide a head of at least five feet
above the top of the pipe or five feet above groundwater, whichever is the highest
point of the pipeline test, and then measuring the loss of water from the line by the
amount which must be added to maintain the original level. In this test the line must
remain filled with water for at least 24 hours prior to the taking of measurements.
Exfiltration shall be measured by the drop of water level in a standpipe with a
closed bottom end, or in one of the sewer manholes available for convenient
measuring. When a standpipe and plug arrangement is used in the upper manhole
of a line under test, there must be some positive method of releasing entrapped air
in the sewer prior to taking measurements. The test length intervals for either type
of test shall be as ordered or approved, but in no event shall they exceed 1,000 feet.
In the case of sewers laid on steep grades, the length of line to be tested by
exfiltration at any one time may be limited by the maximum allowable internal
pressure on the pipe and joints at the lower end pipe and joints at the lower end of
the line. The test period wherein the measurements are taken shall not be less than
two hours in either type of test. The total leakage of any section tested shall not
exceed the rate of 100 gallons per mile of pipe per 24 hours per inch of nominal
pipe diameter. For purposes of determining the maximum allowable leakage,
manholes shall be considered as sections of forty-eight-inch diameter pipe, five feet
long. The equivalent leakage allowance shall be 4.5 gallons per manhole per 24
hours for manholes 48 inches in diameter. If leakage exceeds the specified amount,
the necessary repairs or replacements required shall be made to permanently reduce
the leakage to within the specified limit, and the tests shall be repeated until the
leakage requirement is met.
E. All sewer extensions constructed at the property owner's, builder's or developer's
expense, after final approval and acceptance by the Engineer, shall become the
property of the Village and shall thereafter be maintained by the Village. Said
sewers and their acceptance by the Village shall be guaranteed against defects in
material or workmanship for 24 months. The guaranty shall be in a form provided
by the Village. At the sole discretion of the Village, a maintenance bond, certified
check or letter of credit, not to exceed 10% of cost, may be demanded as part of the
guaranty.
F. No builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a new dwelling or
structure requiring sanitary facilities within the Village unless a suitable and
approved method of waste disposal is proposed. All new developments shall be
provided with an approved system of sanitary sewers, unless otherwise permitted
by the Village Board and New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or its authorized representative.
A. Prohibitions on discharges. No person shall discharge to a community sewer wastes
which cause, threaten to cause or are capable of causing, either alone or by
62. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-6 SEWERS § 113-7
113:13
interaction with other substances:
(1) A fire or explosion.
(2) Obstruction of flow in a sewer system or injury of the system or damage to the
wastewater collection, treatment or disposal facilities.
(3) Danger to life or safety of personnel.
(4) A nuisance or prevention of the effective maintenance or operation of the
sewer system through having a strong, unpleasant odor.
(5) Air pollution by the release of toxic or malodorous gases or malodorous gasproducing
substances.
(6) Interference with the wastewater treatment process.
(7) The Village's effluent or any other product of the treatment process, residues,
sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with
the reclamation process.
(8) A detrimental environmental impact or a nuisance in the waters of the state or
a condition unacceptable to New York State.
(9) Discoloration or any other condition in the quality of the Village's treatment
works effluent in such a manner that receiving water quality requirements
established by law cannot be met.
(10) Conditions at or near the Village's treatment works which violate any statute
or any rule, regulation or ordinance of any public agency or state or federal
regulatory body.
(11) Quantities or rates of flow which overload the Village's collection or treatment
facilities or cause excessive Village collection or treatment costs or may use a
disproportionate share of the Village facilities.
B. Prohibitions on storm drainage and groundwater. Stormwater, groundwater,
rainwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage or yard drainage will not be
discharged through direct or indirect connections to a public sewer unless a permit
is issued by the Village. If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a
public sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and meet such
other conditions as required by the Village.
C. Limitations on wastewater strength. Articles VII and VIII of Part 2 of this chapter
shall be adhered to.
D. Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when the set limits for those substances
are exceeded or when in the opinion of the Engineer they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts of any
flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such traps shall
not be required for prime living quarters or dwelling units. All traps shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Engineer and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil traps shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme
§ 113-7 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-7
113:14
changes in temperatures. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight
and watertight.
E. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand traps shall be maintained by the owner, at
the owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and shall be
readily accessible and open to inspection by the Superintendent of Public Works at
any time.
F. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a five-day
biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter containing more
than 350 milligrams per liter suspended solids or containing more than 15
milligrams per liter of chlorine requirements or containing any quantity of
substances having the characteristics described in Subsection A or having an
average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Village
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Engineer. Where necessary, in the
opinion of the Engineer, the owner shall provide, at the owner's expense, such
pretreatment as may be necessary to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300
milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter by weight
or reduce the chlorine requirements to 15 milligrams per liter or reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided
for in Subsection C or control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed
pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Engineer and the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, and no construction
of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
Failure to comply with one or more of the remedial procedures as required by the
Engineer will constitute a violation of this Part 1.
G. Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at the owner's expense. The pretreatment facilities will be
open for inspection by the Superintendent or the Superintendent's representative
upon request.
H. Prohibition on unpolluted water. Unpolluted water, including but not limited to
cooling water, process water or water blown down from cooling towers or
evaporative coolers will not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to
a public sewer unless a permit is issued by the Village. The Village may approve
the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal
is available. If a permit is granted for the discharge of such water into a public
sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such
other conditions as required by the Village.
I. Limitations on radioactive wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any radioactive waste into a community sewer except:
(1) When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials by New York State
Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate
the use of radioactive materials; and
(2) When the waste is discharged in strict conformity with current Atomic Energy
§ 113-7 SEWERS § 113-7
113:15
§ 113-8. Protection from damage.
Commission regulations and recommendations for safe disposal and when the
person is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all other applicable
regulatory agencies.
J. Limitations on the use of garbage grinders. Waste from garbage grinders shall not
be discharged into a community sewer except wastes generated in preparation of
food normally consumed on the premises or where the user has obtained a permit
for the specific use from the Village and agrees to undertake whatever selfmonitoring
is required to enable the Village to equitably determine the user charges
based on the waste constituents and characteristics. Such grinders must shred the
waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow
conditions prevailing in the public sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for
grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials or garden refuse.
K. Limitations on point of discharge. No person shall discharge any substances
directly into a manhole or other opening in a community sewer other than through
an approved building sewer, unless upon written application by the user and
payment of the applicable user charges and fees, the Village issues a permit for such
direct discharges.
L. Holding tank waste. A user proposing to discharge holding tank waste into a public
sewer must secure a permit. Unless allowed by the Village under the terms and
conditions of the permit, a separate permit must be secured for each separate
discharge. This permit will state the specific location of discharge, the time of day
the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge and the wastewater
constituents and characteristics. If a permit is granted for discharge of such waste
into a community sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and
shall meet such other conditions as required by the Village.
M. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial concern whereby
an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Village
for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern.
N. All of the preceding standards are to apply at the point where industrial wastes are
discharged into the public sanitary sewage system, and any chemical or mechanical
corrective treatment required must be accomplished to practical completion before
the wastes reach that point. The laboratory methods used in the examination of all
industrial wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. However, alternate methods for the
analysis of industrial wastes may be used, subject to mutual agreement between the
Village Board and the user. The frequency and duration of the sampling of any
industrial waste shall be in accordance with the requirements set forth in the permit
issued under the provisions of Part 2, Article XI, of this chapter.63
A. No person shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Village
63. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-7 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-8
113:16
sewage works.64
B. A contractor must present a certificate of insurance showing suitable liability
insurance before a permit will be issued for construction of building sewers, sewer
extensions or private wastewater disposal.
C. When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment
to Village facilities, the Village may assess a charge against the user for the work
required to clean or repair the facility and add such charge to the user's charges and
fees.
64. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-8 SEWERS § 113-8
113:17

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 113-9. Administration.
Administration of this Part 1 shall be in accordance with Article XI of Part 2 of this
chapter.
§ 113-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A violation of this Part 1 shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 113-11. Licenses.
A. Each and every plumber, contractor or excavator or other person, firm or
corporation, other than the property owner, will be required to have a license issued
by the Clerk of the Village before they will be permitted to do any work in the
Village insofar as this Part 1 is concerned.65
B. If the property owner desires to install the building sewer lateral from the outside
face of the property owner's building wall to the municipal sewer main, the property
owner may do so as long as the property owner follows this Part 1 and the
completed installation is inspected and approved as outlined in § 113-5 of this Part
1. [Amended 5-28-2009 by L.L. No. 2-200966]
C. If, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees of the Village, the work performed by the
contractor within the Village violates the provisions of this Part 1 or any other local
law of the Village or if the contractor's work is, in the opinion of the Village Board,
substandard, then in that event the Village Board may revoke the license for the
contractor to do work in the Village.
65. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 101, Plumbing, Art. I, Licensing of Plumbers.
66. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-9 SEWERS § 113-11
113:19

Part 2
[Adopted 2-11-1985 By L.L. NoI.n 1d-u1s9t8r5ia; lA Smewenerd eUds eIn Its Entirety 6-9-1994 By L.L.
No. 2-1994]
ARTICLE IV
Title and Purpose
§ 113-12. Short title.
This Part 2 shall be known as the "Village Sewer Use Industrial Pretreatment Law."
§ 113-13. Purpose.
The purposes of this Part 2 are as follows:
A. To control discharge into the sanitary and storm sewers of the Village of Webster
sewage system or tributaries thereto.
B. To prohibit the discharge of:
(1) Excessive volumes and/or inordinate rates of flow into the Village of Webster
sewerage system.
(2) Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes, including industrial waste which
may create in any way a poisonous, hazardous, explosive, flammable or toxic
condition for sewage maintenance and/or operating or maintenance difficulties
in the Village of Webster sewerage systems as it now exists or may be
constructed, modified or improved in the future.
C. To prohibit and/or regulate by permit the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes which require greater expenditures for treatment that those required
for equal volumes or normal sewage; to surcharge users for permitted contributions
requiring treatment costs greater than normal sewage charges.
D. To require the treatment, before introduction in the Village of Webster sewerage
system, local sewer collection systems and all other public sewers tributary thereto,
of such wastes as may otherwise impair the strength and/or durability of the
structures appurtenant to the system, by direct or indirect chemical, biological or
physical action; interfere with the normal treatment processes; pass through the
sewage treatment plant into the receiving waters untreated, or only partially treated,
or of such concentration as may exceed established discharge limits; or interfere
with the proper disposal of sludge generated by the treatment plant.
E. To provide the authority and procedure for the Village of Webster to promulgate
rules and regulations, to investigate and prepare findings of facts, to issue permits,
to hold hearings, to issue decisions, orders and opinions and to give notice and make
public all rules and decisions affecting substantial rights or persons or property.
F. To provide cooperation with the Monroe County Department of Health, New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, New York State Department of
Health, United States Environmental Protection Agency and any other agencies
which have requirements or jurisdiction for the protection of the physical, chemical
§ 113-12 SEWERS § 113-13
113:21
and bacteriological quality of watercourses within or bounding the county.
G. To protect the public health and to prevent nuisances.
H. To enforce promulgated final standards and/or procedures set by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 113-13 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-13
113:22
ARTICLE V
Word Usage
§ 113-14. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in
this Part 2 and in any regulations adopted pursuant to this Part 2 shall be as follows:
ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended.
APPROVED LABORATORY PROCEDURE — Any method approved by the
Superintendent for the determination of flow measurement or pollution
concentration of discharges to the public sewers.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF USER —
BOD (denotes "biochemical oxygen demand") — The results obtained using an
approved laboratory procedure to measure the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter or in satisfying the oxygen demand of
other materials present.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which received the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
CBOD (denotes "carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand") — The results
obtained using an approved laboratory procedure to measure CBOD by adding a
nitrification inhibitor in the analytical procedure described above for BOD.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The results obtained using an approved laboratory
procedure to measure the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water,
sewage or industrial wastes and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the
If the user is a corporation: the president, secretary or treasurer or a vice
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for
the corporation; or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state or local government facility: a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the government facility, or their designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections A(1) through (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the Village.
(4)
§ 113-14 SEWERS § 113-14
113:23
end of a specified time.
COD (denotes "chemical oxygen demand") — The approved laboratory procedure
to measure the oxygen requirement of that portion of the organic matter in a sample
that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant.
CONTESTED CASE—A proceeding in which the legal rights, duties or privileges
of a party are determined by the Village of Webster after the party has had an
opportunity for hearing.
CONTROL MANHOLE — An accessible manhole at the connection between a
private sewer and the public sewer.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of heat transfer,
condensation, air conditioning, noncontact cooling, refrigeration or other sources.
COUNTY — The County of Monroe.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Monroe County Department of Health.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Village of Webster Department of
Public Works.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication by the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) of proposed Categorical Pretreatment Standards which will be applicable to
such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section
307 of the Act.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, from the handling, storage and sale of produce and from the
packaging and canning of food.
GREASE, OIL or FATS — Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
INDUSTRIAL USER — The discharge of pollutants into a publicly owned
treatment works from any nondomestic source as regulated under Section 307(b),
(c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any discarded matter, including liquid, gaseous or
solid substance, or a combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery on any
natural resources, except garbage.
INTERFERENCE — An inhibition or disruption of the publicly owned treatment
works, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge process use or disposal
which is a cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any
requirements of the publicly owned treatment works discharge permit or to the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the publicly owned treatment works
in accordance with established state and federal regulations.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR
PRETREATMENT STANDARD—Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act
which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.
§ 113-14 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-14
113:24
NEW SOURCE —
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which, when
analyzed, show pollutant concentrations which do not exceed the following
characteristics:
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may
be a discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to
the publication by the EPA of proposed pretreatment standards under Section
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
there after promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at
which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process
or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source should be considered.
(c)
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a
modification rather than a "new source" if the construction does not create
a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of
Subsection A(1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a "new source" as defined under Subsection A(1) has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction
program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment;
or
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or
removal of existing building, structure or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of "new
source" facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities
or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for
feasibility, engineering or design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 113-14 SEWERS § 113-14
113:25
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or
duly authorized office of said Agency.
OTHER WASTES — Discarded matter not normally present in sewage or
industrial wastes.
P (denotes "phosphate") — The concentration of phosphate as phosphorus
expressed in milligrams per liter.
PARCEL CHARGE — The charge applied to all assessed properties in the Village
of Webster which may be subject to a nominal parcel charge on a benefits derived
basis, except where a direct charge basis on assessed valuation is in part or wholly
the basis of sewer use charges.
PARTY — Each person or agency named or admitted as a party of properly
seeking and entitled as of right to be admitted to any administrative or enforcement
procedure.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's SPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation).
PERMIT — A temporary written document issued to allow the use of a Village of
Webster sewerage system for specific wastes over a limited period of time.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, agency, association, society,
corporation, institution or group.
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS —That portion of the total extractable grease,
oils or fats as defined in this section which is not retained on an activated alumina
absorption column after lubricating with hexane.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in gram
Characteristics.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): 2,500 pounds per million gallons
(300 milligrams per liter) or less.
(a)
Chlorine demand: 416 pounds per million gallons (50 milligrams per
liter) or less.
(b)
Chemical oxygen demand (COD): 5,000 pounds per million gallons (600
milligrams per liter) or less.
(c)
Suspended solids: 2,500 pounds per million gallons (300 milligrams per
liter) or less.
(d)
Phosphate as phosphorus: 42 pounds per million gallons (five milligrams
per liter) or less.
(e)
(1)
The numbers and values of characteristics are subject to revision by the
Village of Webster in accordance with Article XIV, if data obtained during
the previous year on the available treatment capacity of the POTW indicate a
revision is needed.
(2)
§ 113-14 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-14
113:26
atoms per liter of solution. Values above 7.0 represent acid conditions.
PRETREATMENT—The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a publicly
owned treatment works.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensation of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle having a dimension greater than 1/4 inch in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER—The sewers, manholes, intercepting sewers, sewage pumping,
treatment and disposal works and any other plant, works or equipment and
accessories within any municipality that discharges its sewage and liquid into the
Village of Webster sewerage system.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse of body of water into which
treated sewage is discharged.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — For purposes of this Part 2, the procedures by
which the Village of Webster will carry out and implement the requirements of this
Part 2.67
SANITARY SEWAGE — Sewer discharging from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels, but not commercial kitchens
therein), office, commercial and industrial buildings and institutions and filter
backwash from swimming pools.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which transports sewage and to which storm-,
surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SCAVENGER WASTES — The matter collected from privies, septic tanks,
cesspools, chemical toilets, camper and marine holding tanks, sludge from
treatment of industrial waste and other domestic commercial and industrial waste.
The term does not include industrial wastes transferred on site and discharged to the
Village sewer system, provided that the wastes are wholly generated on site, that
the discharge is to a manhole located before the monitoring station for that facility
and that prior notification is given to the POTW receiving the discharge.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundsurface
and stormwater as defined above, with industrial wastes or other wastes also
considered "sewage" within the meaning of the definition.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT (also "water pollution control plant," "publicly
owned treatment works" or "POTW") — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage and industrial wastes; the handling of sludge
resulting from such treatment, and the discharge of treated effluent into a designated
receiving waters.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
67. Editor's Note: The Sewer Use Industrial Pretreatment Rules and Regulations are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 113-14 SEWERS § 113-14
113:27
SEWER DISTRICTS — The Webster townwide Sanitary Sewer District.
SEWERAGE SURCHARGE—The demand payment for the use of a public sewer
and/or sewage treatment plant for handling any sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes accepted for admission thereto in which the characteristics thereof exceed
the maximum values of such characteristics in normal sewage.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user (see "NYSDEC")
having one or more of the following attributes:
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in volume of flow exceeds, for any period
or duration longer than five minutes, more than five times the average twenty-fourhour
concentration or flow during normal operation.
SPDES — State Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormwaters and
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than cooling waters and
unpolluted waters.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of
Webster or the Superintendent's duly authorized agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The results obtained using an approved laboratory
procedure to determine the dry weight expressed in milligrams per liter of solids
that either float on the surface, are in suspension or are settleable and can be
removed from sewage by filtration.
THIRTY-DAY AVERAGE CONCENTRATION — The weighted arithmetic
mean; the sum of the observations (sampling of waste) constituting the sample
(statistical sample), divided by their number. The sample shall consist of all
observation in a thirty-day period. The minimum sample shall consist of two data.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which
when discharged to a public sewer in sufficient quantities may be detrimental to
the sewerage system, interfere with any biological sewage treatment process or
constitute a hazard to human beings or animals or inhibit aquatic life or create a
hazard in the receiving waters. This includes, but is not limited to, the United States
(1) Subjection to promulgated Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Having a substantial impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the operation of the treatment works.
(2)
Manufacturing industries using, on an annual basis, more than 10,000 pounds
or 1,000 gallons of raw material containing priority pollutants/substances of
concern and discharging a measurable amount of these pollutants to the sewer
system from the process using these pollutants.
(3)
Discharging more than 5% of the flow or load carried by the treatment plant
receiving the waste.
(4)
Discharging an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the treatment plant (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewater).
(5)
§ 113-14 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-14
113:28
Environmental Protection Agency priority pollutants.
UNIT CHARGE — In the Village of Webster, the sewer charge may be based
on a standard volume of sewage flow from an average household; this volume, as
determined by methods described herein, is subject to revision by the Village of
Webster if data accumulated under actual conditions indicates a need for such a
revision.
USEPA—The United States Environmental Protection Agency or duly authorized
official of said agency.
VILLAGE — The Village of Webster, New York.
VILLAGE BOARD — The governing body of the Village of Webster.
VOLUME CHARGE — In the Village of Webster sewerage system, the sewer use
charge may be based in part or wholly on the volume of discharge in the sewerage
system. The charge shall be based on a specific cost per 100 cubic feet or per 1,000
gallons; the specific cost is determined based on the overall cost of treating sewage
and is subject to revision by the Village of Webster.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 113-14 SEWERS § 113-14
113:29

ARTICLE VI
Use Regulations
§ 113-15. Limitation of use.
§ 113-16. Enforcement.
All requirements, directives and orders calling for the mandatory use of the Village of
Webster sewerage system or public sewers tributary thereto for the proper discharge of
sewage, including industrial wastes and other wastes, shall be established and given by
the local municipality having jurisdiction, the Monroe County Department of Health,
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or other state or federal
agencies having jurisdiction.
§ 113-17. Formal sewer use charges.
Annual unit sewer charges shall be based on the total cost of treating normal sewage.
§ 113-18. Private sewage disposal requirements.
A. The use of the Village of Webster sewerage system and public sewers tributary
thereto shall be strictly limited and restricted, except as provided in Subsection B
hereof, to receive and accept the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes and other
wastes generated on, or discharged from, real property lying within the bounds of
the Village of Webster sewerage system as established and altered, changed,
modified, reduced, enlarged, combined and/or consolidated by action of the Village
of Webster. Trucked or hauled wastewaters or other pollutants may not be
discharged to the public sewer system or any private sewer tributary thereto without
a permit as provided for in Articles X and XI.
B. The discharge of sewage, including industrial wastes and other wastes, generated
on or discharged from real property lying outside the bounds of the Village of
Webster into the Village of Webster sewerage system and public sewers tributary
thereto shall be made only with the express consent of the Superintendent and upon
the issuance of a permit setting forth the terms and conditions for such discharge.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available or not required under the provisions
of § 113-16, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
B. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a permit from the Superintendent. A permit and inspection
fee in such amount as may be established by the Village Board shall be paid to the
Village at the time the application is filed.
C. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. The
Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction,
and in any event the applicant for the permit shall notify the Superintendent when
the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are
covered.
§ 113-15 SEWERS § 113-18
113:31
D. All private sewage disposal systems shall be built in accordance with the
requirements and specifications of the Village of Webster and the Monroe County
Health Department.
§ 113-18 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-18
113:32
ARTICLE VII
Regulated Discharges
§ 113-19. Discharge of unpolluted waters.
No person shall discharge or provide a connection for discharging or draining into a
sewer tributary any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water, nor shall
any person drain any catch basin, lake, swamp, pond or swimming pool, except with
the permission of the Superintendent evidenced by a properly issued permit or if such
connection or drainage is into a designated storm sewer. Cooling water discharges to
the waters of the state require SPDES permits and are subject to state and federal
regulations.
§ 113-20. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged or allow to run, leak or escape
into any public sewer, pipe, channel, sewer appurtenance or waterway connecting with
any public sewer, or into any private sewer connected with a public sewer, any of the
following described materials, substances or wastes:
A. Any pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the public sewer,
including but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flash point of less than
140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
B. Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having a pH higher than 10.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or the sewerage systems or personnel employed in its
operation and maintenance.
C. Any solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with proper operation of the sewerage system.
Examples of substances which may cause such obstructions are construction
materials, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, coffee grounds, fur, wax, cement, hops, spent
grain, whole blood and filter media.
D. Any waters or wastes containing toxic, hazardous or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or to constitute a hazard to
humans or animals or to create a public nuisance or to create any hazards in the
receiving waters.
E. Any liquid or vapor having heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in
the treatment plant resulting in interference or causing damage, but in no case heat
in such quantities that the temperatures exceeds 65° C. (150° F.) at the discharge
point or 40° C. (104° F.) at the treatment plant.
F. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in
excess of 100 milligrams per liter or in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough.
§ 113-19 SEWERS § 113-21
113:33
§ 113-21. Substances subject to review.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes or any wastes listed within the rules and
regulations of the Village of Webster found to harm the sewerage system structures,
the sewage treatment process or the equipment, to have an adverse effect on the
receiving waters or which would endanger life, limb or public property or constitute
a nuisance. The criteria used in forming these rules and regulations of the Village
of Webster include such factors as the quantities of said wastes in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials or construction of the sewers, nature of
treatment facilities and the likelihood of harm, injury or nuisance. The
characteristics of the effluent subject to review will be determined from the sample
wastewater collected at a control manhole prior to entering the public sewers.
B. The following substances, materials or wastes are prohibited in the first instance but
may be subject to review, provided that waivers shall not be granted that are at
variance with prevailing state and federal regulations or conditions of discharge
permits or sludge disposal permits:
(1) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter and containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C.
and 65° C.).
(2) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded or triturated.
(3) Any water or wastes containing objectionable or toxic substances in amounts
determined to be potentially objectionable or toxic.
(4) Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which shall be established
in this Part 2 or the rules and regulations to meet the requirements of the state,
federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
(5) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration which
exceed limits established by the Superintendent or applicable state or federal
regulations. See § 113-29.
(6) Materials which contain or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not limited
to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
(b) Excessive discoloration at the treatment plant or in the receiving waters,
such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(c) Except as provided for under Article XIII, unusual biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD) or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant additional
load on the sewage treatment works.
§ 113-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-21
113:34
§ 113-22. Action by Village.
The Village of Webster, after a hearing, shall either prevent the discharge of
unacceptable water and wastes or issue a permit which is properly conditioned upon
findings and the standards of safety prescribed by this Part 2 or the rules and regulations
of the Village of Webster. The rules and regulations of the Village of Webster shall
include surcharges, pretreatment requirements, control over quantities or rates of
discharge, time of discharge and holding facilities and any measure or combination
of measures which are necessary to preserve the sewerage system, its structures and
equipment and the health, safety and well-being of the employees, the community and
the biota of the receiving waters.
§ 113-23. Emergency action.
The Superintendent shall take any temporary action necessary to protect the public
health, safety or welfare without a prior hearing in the event of any discharge which,
in the belief of the Superintendent, will cause serious, imminent harm or injury or
adversely affect the sewerage system structures or equipment, any person or the biota
of the receiving waters. If possible under the circumstances of the emergency, the
Superintendent will give informal notice of the Superintendent's emergency action to
the affected party. Review of any emergency action by a hearing will be accomplished
without delay to determine what, if any, permanent restriction is necessary. The
Superintendent, acting upon the belief that an emergency exists, shall be indemnified
against any personal liability that may arise in the performance of the Superintendent's
duties to protect the public health, safety, welfare or property of the Village of Webster.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as
defined herein.
(7) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable, or only
partially amenable, to treatment or reduction in concentration by the sewage
treatment plant process employed or are amenable to treatment only to such a
degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
§ 113-21 SEWERS § 113-23
113:35

ARTICLE VIII
Regulated Concentrations
§ 113-24. Generally prohibited substances.
Water bearing miscellaneous substances in concentrations above the standard set for
normal sewage shall not be discharged into the Village of Webster sewerage system
before a finding by the Superintendent determines that such concentration will not
adversely affect any of the biochemical, chemical or other sewage treatment process,
sewage system or receiving waters. The following is a partial list of such substances:
§ 113-25. Permissible concentrations of toxic substances.
A. Antibiotics.
B. Elemental biomine, iodine, chlorine or fluorine.
C. Creosols or creosotes.
D. Phenol and phenol compounds that convert to phenol in the sewerage system.
E. Sulfonamides or toxic dyes (organic or mineral).
F. Berylium and berylium compounds.
G. Mercury and mercury compounds.
H. Molybdenum and molybdenum compounds.
I. All strong oxidizing agents, such as chromates, dichromates, permanganates,
peroxides, etc.
J. Any strong reducing agents causing hazardous conditions in the sewage system.
K. Chemical compounds producing toxic, flammable or explosive gases, either upon
acidification, alkalinization, oxidation or reduction.
L. Wastes from industrial processes or hospital procedures containing viable
pathogenic organisms.
A. With the exception of sewer users covered by Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, the concentration in sewage of any of the following toxic substances
shall not exceed the twenty-four-hour average or be discharged into the public
sewer.
B. Sewer users covered by Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall comply
with applicable federal standards. For these users, substances not regulated by the
Pretreatment Categorical Standard shall not exceed the concentration limits
specified below. For substances regulated by Categorical Pretreatment Standards,
the determination of concentration shall be at the discharge into the sewer with the
dilution attributes to nonprocess flow excluded as determined by the combined
waste stream formula (40 CFR 403.6).
C. The Village of Webster may, in accordance with Article XIV, revise the following
§ 113-24 SEWERS § 113-25
113:37
§ 113-26. Special concentration limits.
When findings of the Village of Webster show that the volume of a single toxic industrial
waste discharge or the combined toxic industrial waste discharge of a group of industries
within a single contributory area is so large as to raise a question of the ultimate
concentration of toxic substances entering a sewage treatment plant or in cases where it
is not known that the toxic substances in the concentrations involved will be effectively
removed by the sewage treatment plant without causing deleterious effects of any kind to
the treatment process, the treatment plant sludge or the receiving waters after treatment,
the Village of Webster may rule that separate or special concentrations limits shall
be used by the contributors in that area. Concentration limits at variance with Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards will not be granted.
§ 113-27. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Upon the promulgation of final Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard for a
particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard for sources in that subcategory
shall take precedence for and become the limitations of that category of industrial user on
the date the federal standard becomes effective until and unless a removal credit is given.
In consideration of removal allowance, the revision of any Categorical Pretreatment
Standards to reflect treatment plant removal of pollutants shall follow the formal process
required under 40 CFR 403.7. The Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements.
limits or insert additional items when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the need
for a rule change is indicated, or as provided for in § 113-27. The following list
contains the permitted toxic substances and levels of concentration:
Substance
24-Hour Average
(mg/l)
30-Day Average
(mg/l)
Arsenic and compounds of arsenic
express as arsenic (As)
1.0 0.5
Barium (Ba) 4.0 2.0
Cadmium (Cd) 0.80 0.40
Chromium, total (CN) 1.60 0.80
Cyanide, total (CN) 3.0 1.50
Cyanide, free (CN) 1.0 0.50
Copper (Cu) 1.6 0.80
Iron (Fe) 10.0 5.0
Lead (Pb) 1.6 0.80
Manganese (Mn) 8.0 4.0
Nickel (Ni) 0.4 0.2
Selenium (Se) 4.0 2.0
Soluble silver (as Ag) 2.0 1.0
Zinc (Zn) 4.0 2.0
§ 113-25 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-27
113:38
ARTICLE IX
Industrial Wastes
§ 113-28. Industrial wastes requiring approval.
The following are industries whose wastes shall require pretreatment and/or approval
before discharge into public sewer: bleaching and dyeing, bottling, brewing, cotton
textile manufacture or processing, dairies, dairy products, distilling, fat rendering, film
processing, food processing, galvanizing, glue manufacturing, laundromats, lens
grinding operations, manufacture of syrups, jams or jellies, meat packing, metal pickling
or plating, munitions manufacturing, optical goods manufacturing, oil refining,
photographic processing, public laundering, pulp and paper making, rubber production,
salt works, slaughterhouses, soap making, sugar refining, tanning, wool scouring or
washing or any industry producing wastes with strong acid or alkaline properties or
which may form deposits in or cause damage to the sewers or to appurtenances of
sewage treatment works. In addition to the industries listed here, any industry category
for which pretreatment requirements have been promulgated in final form by USEPA are
included. The process or processes employed in the pretreatment of such wastes shall, in
each case, conform to the rules and regulations of the Village of Webster and shall be
inspected and permitted by the Superintendent as set forth under Article XI.
§ 113-29. Radioactive wastes.
Any institution or industry discharging radioactive material or fission products into the
sewerage system must be registered with the Village of Webster as well as with other
regulatory agencies as the law requires. The registration shall include all copies of
state and federal permits governing the waste discharge. The active elements and the
concentrations permitted to be discharged into the public sewers shall be in conformance
with the State Sanitary Code, as limited and specified by the Public Health Law, and be
at all times within the limits set by this Part 2 and other county, state or federal agencies.
§ 113-30. Wastes which require permit.
A. All significant industrial users will be required to obtain a permit. The
Superintendent will prepare a list of all users of the public sewer system meeting
the definition of a significant industrial user, identifying the criteria used to list each
such user and indicating whether a user listed under Criteria 2, 3, 4 or 5 needs to be
so listed. This list will be reviewed annually and updated within 90 days of a change
in a user's status. The list will be sent annually, or whenever changed to all users on
that list, and will also be submitted to the USEPA at that time.
B. Whenever any industrial waste is produced in such quantities and discharged into
the sewerage system that it may, in the opinion of the Village of Webster, injure the
public sewers into which it may be discharged, adversely affect the treatment of
sewage, not yield readily to treatment by processes employed in the sewage
treatment works or adversely affect the receiving waters, it will not be permitted
into the public sewers without a permit.
§ 113-28 SEWERS § 113-30
113:39

ARTICLE X
Scavenger Wastes
§ 113-31. Permit required.
The discharge of scavenger wastes will be permitted only with the approval of the
Superintendent. Persons desiring to discharge scavenger wastes into such facilities shall
be required to obtain a permit from the Superintendent.
§ 113-32. Conditions for discharge.
The discharge of scavenger wastes shall be made only at a location as shall be stated
on the permit or as may be ordered by the Superintendent. The time and conditions for
permissible discharge shall be as set forth on the permit or as may be ordered by the
Superintendent.
§ 113-33. Application for permit; conditions.
§ 113-34. Charges.
Discharge of scavenger wastes shall be made under individual tickets for each load to
be discharged under the terms of the permit. Rates charged for the tickets shall be those
rates determined by the Village of Webster.
A. The applicant for a permit shall be the owner or lessee of the vehicle or vehicles
hauling scavenger wastes. All permits issued by the Superintendent shall be for a
maximum of one year.
B. All acts performed under the terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to
supervision or inspection by the Superintendent. False or deliberately misleading
information on an application for a permit invalidates any permit issued subsequent
to the approval of said application and exposes the applicant to possible
enforcement action under Article XV. Failure to adhere to the terms or conditions
of the permit or violation of the provisions of this Part 2 regulating scavenger waste
disposal shall be grounds for suspension of revocation of the permit by the
Superintendent. Hearings to reinstate a permit shall be initiated by petition of the
party desiring reinstatement. No permit shall be issued unless the scavenger waste
hauler is properly licensed and/or permitted by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and has a valid waste hauler's permit in accordance
with all applicable New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
requirements.
§ 113-31 SEWERS § 113-34
113:41

ARTICLE XI
Permits and Tests
§ 113-35. Consent to inspect.
All users of the Village of Webster sewerage system or any public tributary sewer are
deemed to have consented to inspection necessary for the orderly administration of this
Part 2. Inspection will be accomplished during the hours of operation or at period of
sewer use with or without prior notice to the users; inspectors shall announce their
presence at the time of inspections. Inspections shall be performed in such a manner as
to reasonably observe and quantify, if necessary, the characteristics of the discharged
waters and wastes discharged into the sewerage system. The power to inspect will be
exercised in accordance with Article XII of this Part 2.
§ 113-36. Compliance with terms of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, directly or indirectly, into public
sewers, or into any private sewer discharging into a public sewer, sewage combined with
industrial wastes, or industrial wastes or other wastes, the characteristics of which in
combination do not conform to the concentration limits prescribed for normal sewage
as defined in § 113-14, or to discharge any toxic substances or any other objectionable
material or substances as specified under Articles V, VII, VIII and IX herein, except
upon such terms and conditions as set forth in the permit issued under the established
rules and regulations of the Village of Webster.
§ 113-37. Applications.
All applicants for a permit to discharge sewage combined with industrial wastes or other
wastes into public sewers shall fill out and file with the Superintendent an application
provided by the Village of Webster as a prerequisite for issuance of a permit. All
information required by the Village of Webster shall be furnished by the applicant
in complete cooperation with the Superintendent. The following is a partial list of
information to be furnished by the applicant:
§ 113-38. Terms and conditions.
The Village of Webster must impose through the Superintendent certain terms and
A. A plot of the property showing accurately all sewers, drains and connections to the
public sewer.
B. Plans and specifications covering any proposed changes to be performed during the
permit period.
C. A complete listing of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or expected
to be produced at said property or premises, including a description of the
characteristics of each waste, such as the average daily volume and maximum rates
of discharge and representative analyses.
D. The name, address and phone number of the authoritative representative of the user
or of the person or firm knowledgeable about the overall operation of the user's
facility who will serve as the contact during the permit period.
§ 113-35 SEWERS § 113-38
113:43
conditions as follows as part of the permit:
A. A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit's duration, which in no
event shall exceed five years.
B. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is not transferable without prior
approval of the Superintendent in accordance with § 113-48 of these regulations
and that a transfer is not effective until the new owner or operator has been provided
with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.
C. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements
as required under this section, under § 113-39, Sampling and testing, or by the
NYSDEC or USEPA, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
the sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type, per a schedule
established in the permit.
D. A statement that violation of the pretreatment standards or other requirements
established by the permit or by the provisions of this Part 2 shall be cause for
imposition of the enforcement and penalty provisions in accordance with
Subsection O of this section.
E. A limitation upon the volume of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes, the rate
of flow permitted and/or the time of discharge from the premises.
F. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at the permittee's own expense,
of facilities or equipment for intermittent or continuous flow and/or quality
measurements of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes discharged from the
premises into a public sewer.
G. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at the permittee's own expense,
of detention tanks or other facilities or equipment for reducing the maximum rates
of discharge of sewage to a specified percentage of the twenty-four-hour rate as
shall be required by the rules and regulations of the Village of Webster.
H. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at the permittee's own expense,
of such pretreatment treatment facilities as shall be required by the rules and
regulations of the Village of Webster. The Superintendent shall establish and
enforce a schedule for the installation of pretreatment facilities.
I. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at the permittee's own expense,
of a suitable control sampling manhole or manholes in any sewer discharging to a
public sewer.
J. The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at the permittee's own expense,
of grease, oil and solid material interceptors, separators or traps that are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing such substances in excessive
quantities or any other harmful ingredients.
K. The plans for any of the facilities or equipment required to be installed and
maintained by the permittee must be submitted to and approved by the
Superintendent.
L. Subsequent to the commencement of operation of any preliminary treatment
§ 113-38 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-38
113:44
facilities, periodic reports shall be made by the permittee to the Superintendent
setting forth adequate data upon which the acceptability of the sewage, industrial
wastes or other wastes, after treatment, may be determined. The frequency of these
reports will be determined by the Superintendent.
M. Where preliminary or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the permittee at the permittee's expense.
N. Such other terms and conditions as may be necessary to protect the sewerage
system and water pollution control facilities and to carry out the intent and
provisions of these rules and regulations.
O. A violation by the permittee of the permit conditions shall be cause for revocation
or suspension of the permit after a hearing and determination by the Village of
Webster; or, if the violation is found to be within the emergency powers of the
Superintendent under § 113-23 or 113-27, the revocation is immediate upon receipt
of a notice; however, a hearing shall be held as soon as possible.
P. The installation and maintenance by the permittee of facilities to prevent the
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
Part 2. Operation procedures for each facility shall be submitted to the
Superintendent for review. The Superintendent shall be given notices of any
accidental discharge for the Superintendent's review.
Q. The development and implementation of a slug control plan, where an evaluation
by the Village of Webster indicates that such a plan is needed to avoid potential
damage to the public sewer system, interference with its operations or the causing
of or contributing to a violation of any treatment plant permit. Such slug control
plan will contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
(1) A description of discharge of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
(2) A description of stored chemicals.
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the treatment plant of slug discharges,
including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under § 113-20, and a
requirement to submit a follow-up written report within five working days.
(4) Where the Superintendent decides them to be necessary, procedures to prevent
adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance
storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
R. In addition to reports required by the Village for the issuance and monitoring of
permits, industrial users, significant industrial users and facilities subject to
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, as defined herein, shall submit the
following reports as required by 40 CFR 403.12:
§ 113-38 SEWERS § 113-38
113:45
(1) Facilities subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards:
(a) Baseline monitoring report.
(b) Compliance schedule progress report, where applicable.
(c) Report on final compliance with Categorical Standards.
(d) Not-less-frequent-than-semiannual report on continued compliance.
(e) Notice of potential problems, including slug loading.
(f) Discharge of hazardous waste into the public sewer system, as required
under Subsection S below.
(g) Notice of substantial changes in the discharge.
(2) Significant industrial users:
(a) Not-less-frequent-than-semiannual report on continued compliance.
(b) Notice of potential problems, including slug loading.
(c) Discharge of hazardous waste into the public sewer system.
(d) Notice of substantial changes in the discharge.
(3) Industrial users:
(a) Periodic report on continued compliance.
(b) Notice of potential problems, including slug loading.
(c) Discharge of hazardous waste into the public sewer system.
(d) Notice of substantial changes in the discharge.
S. Hazardous waste discharge.
(1) Unless exempted under Subsection S(2) below, the industrial user shall notify
the Village of Webster, the EPA Regional Waste Management Director and
the Hazardous Waste Branch of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, Avon Regional Office, in writing, of any
discharge into the Village sewer system of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification
must be made at the frequency specified in Subsection S(3) and (4) below, and
must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261,
the EPA hazardous waste number, the type of discharge (continuous, batch or
other) and the certification described in Subsection S(5).
(a) If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste
per calendar month to the sewer system, the notification shall also contain
the following information to the extent that such information is known
and readily available to the industrial user:
[1] An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
§ 113-38 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-38
113:46
§ 113-39. Sampling and testing.
Whenever sewage or other wastes, including industrial wastes, are believed to have
characteristics other than prescribed for normal sewage, as defined in Article V herein,
or are believed to contain toxic substances or other material or substances excluded
from public sewers pursuant to this Part 2 or its implementing of rules and regulations,
and are discharged into public sewers from any premises, the Superintendent shall
have the power to take samples and make tests necessary to determine the nature and
concentration of such wastes and shall have the right to reassess the determination by
taking samples and testing at any time or by periodic rechecks without notice to the
person discharging such wastes.
wastes.
[2] An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream discharged during that calendar month.
[3] An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
(b) All initial notifications by current industrial users shall be made by
February 20, 1991. Industrial users who commence discharging after
August 23, 1990, shall provide the notification no later than 180 days
after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste.
(2) This hazardous waste notification requirement does not apply to pollutants
already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of Subsection C. In
addition, dischargers are exempt from the hazardous waste discharge reporting
requirements in Subsection S(1) above during a calendar month in which they
discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous waste, unless the wastes are
acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
(3) Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a
calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification for each
hazardous waste discharged. Subsequent months during which the industrial
user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification under this Subsection S. However, notifications
of any changed discharges must be submitted as required under Subsection
R(1)(g), (2)(d) and (3)(d) above, where applicable.
(4) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify
the Village of Webster, the EPA Regional Waste Management Director and
the Hazardous Waste Branch of the Regional Office, in writing, of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such
regulations.
(5) In the case of any notification made under Subsection R, the industrial user
shall certify that it has a program generated to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.
§ 113-38 SEWERS § 113-39
113:47
§ 113-40. Control manholes.
When required by rules and regulations of the Village of Webster, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner
at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
§ 113-41. Measurement and analyses of wastes.
All measurements, test and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which
reference is made in this Part 2 or in the rules and regulations of the Village of Webster
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water, published by the American Public Health
Association, or any other method certified as accurate by the Superintendent and shall
be determined upon samples from said control manhole or other approved access points.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect
of constituents upon the sewerage system and water pollution control facilities and to
determine the existence of hazard to life, limb and property. If a permit is to be issued,
sampling should be performed in such a manner that the portion of the flow obtained is
typical and representative of the waste discharge and is in accordance with applicable
state and federal requirements.
§ 113-42. Determination of concentration.
A. Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made at the control manhole or
manholes which are specifically identified in the user permit, if such a permit has
been issued.
B. In the event that a control manhole or manholes have not been required, the samples
shall be taken at a suitable and accessible point or points to be selected by the
Superintendent and which are specifically identified within the user's permit, if such
a permit has been issued.
C. An aliquot portion of the sample(s) taken will be made available to the person
whose premises are being sampled, if the person so requests, at or prior to the time
the sample is collected.
A. The pollutant concentration of any sewage, industrial waste or other wastes shall be
determined from representative samples of the effluent discharged to public sewers,
taken by the Village of Webster at sampling stations as described under § 113-38,
113-39 or 113-40 of this Part 2, at any period or time and of such duration and in
such manner as the Superintendent may elect or at any place or manner mutually
agreed upon between the person and the Superintendent. The intent of any sampling
procedure is to establish the pollutant concentration in the sewage discharged
during an average of typical working day. This concentration may be derived
according to the best judgment of the Superintendent by combination of repeated
subsamplings during any one day, by combination of series of such days or by
§ 113-39 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-42
113:48
§ 113-43. Volume determination.
The Superintendent may use, as the figure representing the number of cubic feet and/or
gallons of sewage discharged into the sewerage system, the amount of water supplied
to the premises by the Village of Webster, the Monroe County Water Authority or
other water suppliers as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered; if the
premises are supplied wholly or in part with sources other than the Village of Webster
or Monroe County Water Authority systems, such sources, including but not limited to
wells, rivers or lake water, shall have metering devices installed, at the owner's expense,
for measuring the volume of water used for the purpose of computing waste discharges
from these sources and for billing purposes; if such premises are used for an industrial
or commercial purpose of such nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot
be entirely discharged into the sewerage system, the estimate of the amount of sewage
discharged into the sewerage system made by the Superintendent; the volume of sewage
discharged into the sewerage system as determined by measurements and samples taken
at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the public sewerage
system, at the owner's expense, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
permit issued by the Superintendent; or a figure determined by the Superintendent by
any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method.
§ 113-44. Disputed concentration.
In the event that the pollutant concentration of the waste discharged from a premises
to a public sewer as determined under § 113-42 of this article is disputed by a person,
a program of resampling and gauging with subsequent analytical determination may be
instituted as follows:
combination of a number of multiple samples. The analysis of samples taken shall
be performed in a laboratory designated by the Superintendent and the surcharge
and/or the acceptability of the wastes shall be determined from said analyses.
B. All charges shall be based on the analysis of the wastes from any plant- or premisesrelated
total volume of wastes as determined under Subsection A of this section
related to the total volume of wastes discharged. The concentration of pollutants in
sewage, industrial waste or other waste, once determined as prescribed under
§ 113-41 of this Part 2 or the rules and regulations, shall be used in calculating the
sewer surcharge in accordance with the billing procedure of the Village of Webster
for the collection of charges and shall remain in effect until the person shall prove
or the Village shall determine that a change in the manufacturing process,
production or waste treatment of said company warrants a reanalysis for the
determination of a new pollutant concentration of its wastes discharged from such
premises into the public sewerage system. The new pollutant concentration shall
then be used in calculating new charges and shall become effective as of the date of
the subsequent billing period.
C. Whenever the wastes discharged from a premises to the public sewer might be
expected to show appreciable periodic variations during the year due to
manufacturing process or production variation due to seasonal changes, the
Superintendent may prorate the results to two or more series of analyses taken to
reflect these variations and thereby determine an average pollutant concentration.
§ 113-42 SEWERS § 113-44
113:49
§ 113-45. Draft permit.
A draft permit will be issued on the basis of the Superintendent's action on the
application for permit (§ 113-37). The draft permit will incorporate such terms and
conditions as the Village determines to be appropriate for the monitoring and control
of the permitted discharge. The draft permit shall be issued to the applicant for the
applicant's review. The applicant shall have 30 days from the date the draft permit is
issued to file with the Superintendent any written objections in regard to the permit terms
and conditions. If no comments are received within 30 days, the Superintendent may
issue a formal permit.
§ 113-46. Formal permit.
Upon approval of the draft permit or after resolution of permit conditions by the
Superintendent, a formal permit will be issued to the applicant.
§ 113-47. Duration of permit.
Discharge permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed five years. A user must apply
in writing for a renewal permit no more than 90 days and not less than 60 days prior
to expiration of the current permit. The terms and conditions of a permit are subject to
modification by the Superintendent as applicable water quality standards, SPDES permit
conditions or other applicable laws or regulations are changed, or for other just cause.
Users shall be notified of any proposed changes in their permit by the Superintendent at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any change or new condition in a
permit shall include a provision for reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 113-48. Transfer of permit.
Discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be transferred to a new owner, to a new user or for different
premises unless approved by the Superintendent.
A. The person must submit a request for resampling and gauging of the wastes to the
Superintendent and bind himself or herself to bear all of the expenses incurred by
the District in the resampling and gauging and subsequent analysis of the wastes.
B. A consultant or agency of recognized professional standing in the employment of
the person must confer with representatives of the Superintendent in order that an
agreement may be reached as to the various factors which must be considered in a
new sampling program.
C. The consultant or agency of recognized professional standing employed by the
person must be present or represented during the resampling operation.
D. Resampling must be performed when all waste-producing processes are
contributing wastes of usual concentrations at the usual rate.
E. The results of the resampling and the reanalysis in a laboratory approved by the
Superintendent shall be considered to be the current analysis of the wastes
discharged to the public sewerage system and shall be used for determining the
surcharge and/or acceptability of the wastes.
§ 113-44 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-48
113:50
ARTICLE XII
General Provisions
§ 113-49. Powers and authority of inspectors.
§ 113-50. Malicious tampering.
Any persons who maliciously, willfully or recklessly break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of
the Village of Webster sewerage system or public sewer tributary thereto shall be in
violation of this Part 2 and subject to the penalties provided herein.
§ 113-51. Public and confidential information.
A. As provided under Article XI, § 113-35, the Superintendent-authorized
representative or designated representatives of the USEPA, NYSDEC and Monroe
County Health Department may enter upon private lands for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 2 and its implementing the rules and regulations. Inspectors
may review and copy any records required to be kept on site according to the
provisions of a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of Article XI of this
chapter or the requirements for record keeping contained in 40 CFR 403.12. The
Superintendent or the Superintendent's representatives shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes used in any industrial operation beyond that point having
a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or the on-site
facilities for waste treatment.68
B. While performing the necessary work on private lands referred to in the section
above, the Superintendent or the Superintendent's duly authorized representatives
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises as established by the owner
and/or occupant of the premises, and the owner and/or occupant shall be held
harmless for injury or death to Village employees, and the Village shall indemnify
the owner and/or occupant against loss or damage to their property by Village
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the owner and/or occupant and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the owner and/or the occupant to maintain safe conditions as required in Article XI,
§§ 113-38 and 113-40.
C. Refusal to permit the entry upon private lands required to perform the necessary
work referred to in this section shall be punishable by such penalties as may be
prescribed under Article XV of this Part 2.
A. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
available to the public for inspection and/or copying unless the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that
such information, if made public, would divulge processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Wastewater
68. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-49 SEWERS § 113-51
113:51
constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential.
B. Confidential information shall not be made available for inspection and/or copying
by the public but shall be disclosed upon written request to governmental agencies
for uses related to this Part 2, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit, State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit or
the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceeding involving
the person furnishing the report.
C. Where a request is made to the Superintendent to treat information as confidential,
the Superintendent shall treat it as such unless the Superintendent notifies the user,
in writing, of the Superintendent's denial of the request. The decision of the
Superintendent shall be effective 10 days after the date of the notice. If review of
the Superintendent's decision is commenced under the contested cases provision of
§ 113-64 before the expiration of the 10 days, the Superintendent shall continue to
treat the information as confidential unless the Village Board upholds the
Superintendent's initial decision denying the request for confidentiality. The
decision of the Village Board shall be effective five days after service upon the user
of the final decision.
§ 113-51 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-51
113:52
ARTICLE XIII
Charges
§ 113-52. Imposition of sewer surcharge.
In addition to any other tax, fee, charge or sewer rent imposed or levied for the
construction, maintenance, operation, repair, improvement and management of the
Village of Webster sewerage system or any public sewer tributary thereto, the owner
or lessee of any parcel of real property connected with such system or sewer, including
but not limited to real property connected to such system by means of a private sewer
or drain discharging into the Village of Webster sewer systems or any public sewer
tributary thereto, shall pay a sewer surcharge for the use of the Village of Webster
sewerage system or tributary public sewer for discharging:
§ 113-53. Sewer surcharge formula.
The formula for the sewer surcharge shall be computed by the Superintendent. The
amount of the surcharge shall be the product of the surcharge factor and the established
sewerage system charge for operation and maintenance. The general form for the
determination shall be as follows:
SF = a(BOD - 300)
300
+ b(SS - 300)
300
+ c(CLD - 25)
25
+ d(P - 30)
30
Where:
SF = Surcharge factor.
BOD = Milligrams per liter of biochemical oxygen demand, as defined in
§ 113-14.
SS = Milligrams per liter of suspended solids, as defined in § 113-14.
CLD = Milligrams per liter of chlorine demand, as defined in § 113-14.
P = Milligrams per liter of phosphorus, as defined in § 113-14.
a = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat a pound of
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).
A. Any sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in
which the characteristics resulting from the pollutants contained therein exceed the
maximum values as stated in the definition of normal sewage in this Part 2 and the
rules and regulations.
B. Any waters, such as stormwater connections from any building or yard, any drain
from catch basins, lakes, swamps or ponds or swimming pool drains, cooling waters
or any other source of waters as defined in § 113-14 or 113-19, except with
permission of the Superintendent evidenced by a properly issued permit.
C. Any groundwaters which enter the Village of Webster sewerage system by
infiltration of local or private sewage collection systems.
§ 113-52 SEWERS § 113-53
113:53
b = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat a pound of
suspended solids (SS).
c = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat a pound of
chlorine demand (CLD).
d = Proportion of operation and maintenance cost to treat a pound of
phosphorus (P).
NOTES:
1. Items a, b, c and d are decimal portions of the total operation and maintenance cost
for the sewerage system. The values shall be determined by the Administrator on
a yearly basis from data accumulated during each preceding year from the actual
operation and maintenance costs.
2. If any of the values for BOD, SS, CLD or P as determined by laboratory analysis
are less than the respective normal values stated in § 113-14, the factor for the
pollutant shall be eliminated from the formula.
Example 1. Treatment charge based on volume.
An industry discharges into the public sewer system wastes which have been found to
contain the following:
BOD: 630 milligrams per liter; normal value 300 milligrams per liter
SS: 280 milligrams per liter; normal value 300 milligrams per liter
CLD: 50 milligrams per liter; normal value 25 milligrams per liter
P: 45 milligrams per liter; normal value 30 milligrams per liter
Monthly volume of discharge = 100,000 gallons
Normal operation and maintenance sewer charge = $0.70/1,000 gallons
Values for a, b, c and d are, respectively: 0.53, 0.35, 0.08 and 0.04
SF = 0.53(630 -
300)
300
+ 0.08(50-25)
25
+ 0.04 (45 - 30)
30
SF = 0.53 (1.1) + 0.08 (1.0) + 0.04 (0.5)
SF = 0.68
NOTES:
1. The factor for SS is dropped because SS is less than 300 milligrams per liter.
2. Surcharge factors are rounded off to two decimal places.
Normal sanitary sewer operation and maintenance charge =
100,000 x 0.70
1,000 gallons
= $70.00 per month maintenance charge
§ 113-53 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-53
113:54
Surcharge = (0.68) ($70.00) = $47.60
Total sewerage treatment charge = $70.00 + $47.60 = $117.60 per month
This example illustrates sewer use by large commercial or industrial establishments and
not average residential users with normal sewage.
Example 2. Treatment charge based on unit rates.
A commercial establishment discharging wastes into the public sewer system is rated
at 20 equivalent units. (One unit is equivalent to a dwelling unit or lot or 60,000
gallons per year of water consumption.) The unit charge is $45 per unit per year. The
establishment discharges wastes into the public sewer system which has been found to
contain the following concentrations of pollutants:
BOD = 450 MG/L
SS = 200 MG/L
CLD = 15 MG/L
P = 60 mg/l
Values for a, b, c and d are, respectively: 0.3, 0.3, 0.1 and 0.2
Normal sanitary sewer charge = (20 units x $45.00)) + $1.00; fixed district parcel
charge = $901.00 per year.
SF = 0.3 (450 - 300) + 0.2 (60 - 30) 300 30
NOTE: The factors for SS and CLD are dropped because values are below normal
limits.
SF = (0.3)(0.5) + (0.2)(1) = 0.35
Portion of unit charge which is cost of treatment =
$27.55
$45.00
= $0.61
Surcharge = (0.35) ($0.61) ($901.00) = $192.36
Total sewer charge = $901.00 + $192.36 = $1,093.36
Both of these examples illustrate sewer use by large commercial or industrial
establishments and not average residential users with normal sewage.
The sewer surcharge for unpolluted water discharge into the Village of Webster
sewerage system or tributary public sewer shall be:
A. In the case of a volume charge as in Example 1, double the normal sanitary sewer
treatment charge based on the volume of metered water; and/or
B In the case of unit charge, the product of the following:
(1) Unit charge portion due to treatment cost.
(2) Pollutant surcharge factor, if any, as computed by formula.
(3) Normal sewer charge (see Example 2).
§ 113-53 SEWERS § 113-53
113:55
NOTE: When excessive volumes of water (stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
etc.) enter the Village of Webster sewerage system directly or by inflow or infiltration
of the local sewage collection systems, the Village shall take the following actions:
(1) Notice shall be given to the property owner or local governmental unit
responsible for the sewage collection system contributing excessive volumes
of water into the Village of Webster sewerage system.
(2) Within 30 days after notification to the property owner or local governmental
unit, an informal timetable for the elimination and/or control of the excessive
water infiltration shall be filed with the Village.
(3) A property owner or local governmental unit failing to provide said timetable
or not substantially complying with the scheduled abatement of excessive
inflow or infiltration to the timetable filed with Village shall be surcharged
for the excessive water.
(4) The surcharge shall be based in proportion to the determined excess volume
of water entering the Village of Webster sewerage system.
§ 113-54. Collection of surcharges.
The surcharge for permittees with a permanent connection to the Village of Webster
sewerage system or a tributary public sewer shall be surcharged on the Village charges.
Other users requiring a permit, as provided in Article XI, will be charged administrative
cost and the surcharge in the fee required to obtain the permit from the Superintendent.
§ 113-55. Computation of surcharge.
The Superintendent shall compute all surcharges using the formula in § 113-53 and
factors adopted by the Village of Webster. The data used to compute the surcharge will
be supplied by inspections, by the application for permit and/or any method determined
by the Village of Webster after the Superintendent's review of the facts which, in the
Superintendent's belief, give, as nearly as possible, accurate volume determination and/
or the average pollutant concentration. All surcharges shall be based on the analysis
of wastes from any plant or premises in relation to the total volume of wastes and
waters, except in the case of special contract in accordance with § 113-57. The data, once
established as the average pollutant concentration, shall be used until inspection or other
reliable proof justifies a change in the average pollutant concentration.
§ 113-56. Credit for overpayment.
Adjustment of an account for which payment has been received that results in an
overpayment shall be made. Said overpayment shall be a credit to the account.
§ 113-57. Special contracts.
A. The Village of Webster may negotiate special contracts for handling sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes. One of the following conditions must exist before
a special contract can be negotiated:
(1) If an industry or establishment has a New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation approved permit to discharge in a classified
§ 113-53 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-57
113:56
watercourse.
(2) If the total volume or contribution of waste to the public sewer system is
greater than 1,000,000 gallons per day or 5% of the average design capacity of
water pollution control facility receiving the waste.
(3) If the contributor is a local, state or federal governmental agency.
(4) If scavenger waste or other waste is so unusual that it is not covered by the
scavenger waste or surcharge provisions of this Part 2.
B. The terms and conditions of special contracts shall not be at variance with Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
§ 113-57 SEWERS § 113-57
113:57

ARTICLE XIV
Village Procedures
§ 113-58. Public information.
A. The Village of Webster shall adopt a set of rules and regulations containing the
following:
(1) A description of its organization, stating the general policy and method or
operation and designating where applications, requests and submissions shall
be made.
(2) The nature and requirements of all formal and information procedures in
applying for a permit, in requesting a hearing and for submitting or opposing
a rule or regulation.
(3) A procedure to make available for public inspection all rules and regulations,
orders, statements of policy or interpretations used by the sewerage system in
the discharge of its functions. No rule, regulation, order or decision is valid
against any person or party until it has been made available for public
inspection. This provision is not applicable in favor of any person or party who
has actual knowledge thereof.
(4) An administrative procedure establishing the Village of Webster enforcement
policy and procedures for violations of this Part 2 or permits issued thereunder.
B. The Village of Webster shall:
(1) Publish annually, in the designated official newspaper as well as the largest
daily newspaper of Village of Webster, a list of industrial users who, during
the previous 12 months, were significantly in violation of applicable
pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For purposes of
this provision, "significant noncompliance" is defined as meeting one or more
of the following criteria:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average
limit for the same pollutant parameter.
(b) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month
period equal or exceed by any magnitude the product of the daily
maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH).
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
long-term average) that the Superintendent determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through
(including endangering the health of sewage treatment plant personnel or
the general public).
§ 113-58 SEWERS § 113-58
113:59
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health or welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the
Superintendent's exercise of emergency authority under § 113-23 of this
Part 2 to halt or prevent such a discharge.
(e) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance.
(f) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports,
such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance with a discharge standard or a
limitation within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
(h) Any violation which the Superintendent determines to have been willful,
knowing or negligent.
(i) Any other violations which the Superintendent determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the Village of Webster
pretreatment program, or violations which remain uncorrected 45 days
after notification of noncompliance.
(2) Make available to the public, for inspection and/or copying, information and
data on POTW users obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permit and monitoring programs and inspections, unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent that such information, if made public, would divulge processes
or methods of productions entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential.
C. Confidential information.
(1) Confidential information shall not be made available for inspection and/or
copying by the public but shall be disclosed upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this Part 2, the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or the State Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit, provided that the
governmental agency making the request agrees to hold the information
confidential in accordance with state or federal laws and regulations. The
Superintendent shall give written notice to the user of any disclosure of
confidential information to another governmental agency.
(2) Where a request is made to the Superintendent to treat information as
confidential, the Superintendent shall treat it as such unless and until the
Superintendent notifies the user, in writing, of the Superintendent's denial of
the request. The decision of the Superintendent shall be effective 10 days after
the date of the notice. If review of the Superintendent's decision is commenced
under the contested cases provisions of this Article XIV before the expiration
§ 113-58 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-58
113:60
§ 113-59. Procedure for adoption or amendment.
The Village of Webster, prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any provision of
this Part 2, shall:
§ 113-60. Filing of provisions.
§ 113-61. Publication of provisions.
The Village of Webster shall compile, index and publish all effective sewer use law
provisions. The compilation shall be supplemented as often as necessary.
§ 113-62. Petitions.
An interested party may petition the Village of Webster requesting the promulgation,
amendment or repeal of a sewer use law provision. Within 30 days after submission of
a petition, the Village of Webster shall either deny the petition in writing, stating its
reasons, or shall initiate rulemaking proceedings in accordance with § 113-59.
of the 10 days, the Superintendent shall continue to treat the information
as confidential unless the Village Board upholds the Superintendent's initial
decision denying the request for confidentiality. If the review of the
information for which confidential treatment is sought could present a conflict
of interest for any member of the Village Board, that member shall take
no part in the Board's decision. Any material considered in a confidentiality
proceeding may not be disclosed by any Board member if the request for
confidentiality is upheld by the Board. The decision of the Board shall be
effective five days after service upon the user of the final decision.
A. Publish notice at least 10 days prior to the intended action. Notice shall include a
statement of either the terms or substance of the intended action or a description of
subjects and issues involved; the time and place of the hearing; and the manner in
which interested persons may present their views.
B. Afford all interested parties reasonable opportunity to submit data, views or
arguments, orally or in writing. Reasons for adoption and refusal of a proposed rule,
as well as the decision of the Village of Webster, shall be recorded and available
for public inspection. If the Superintendent believes emergency action is required
under § 113-23 or 113-27, the Village of Webster may waive notice and proceed
without prior notice or hearing to adopt an emergency provision. The emergency
provision shall be effective for a period of not longer than 120 days unless it is
readopted under Subsections A and B of this section.
A. The Village of Webster shall file a certified copy of each sewer use law provision
with the Clerk of the Village of Webster. The Clerk shall keep a permanent file
which may be inspected upon request.
B. The provision shall be effective 10 days after the filing, except if the provision has
been adopted under the emergency procedure § 113-59B, then the provision is
effective upon filing.
§ 113-58 SEWERS § 113-63
113:61
§ 113-63. Declaratory opinions.
§ 113-64. Hearings.
A. The Superintendent will give a declaratory opinion when either of two conditions
exists:
(1) A formal request for a declaratory opinion of a petitioner's position in relation
to the policy contained in this Part 2 or the provisions adopted by the Village
of Webster or a permit. This request must be acknowledged within 10 working
days.
(2) The Superintendent formally informs a party of an existing violation or
violations of this Part 2 which, in the Superintendent's opinion, will make the
party subject to enforcement and penalties as contained in Article XV.
B. The Village of Webster shall be informed of all declaratory opinions of the
Superintendent, and such opinions are not binding on the Village of Webster but
shall be reviewed, with notice, upon a formal request of any party of the Village
Board. After review, the Village Board will issue a declaratory ruling to be filed
with the Clerk of the Village of Webster and outline administrative remedies as
contained in this Part 2 available for resolution of the condition or conditions
causing a violation.
A. In a contested case, all parties shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing after
reasonable notice. The hearings shall be conducted by the Village Board or a
Hearing Officer appointed by the Board. The notice shall include:
(1) A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing.
(2) A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is
to be held.
(3) A reference to the particular sections of the law and/or rules and regulations
involved.
(4) A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. If the agency or other party
is unable to state the matters in detail at the time the notice is served, the initial
notice may be limited to a statement of issues involved. Thereafter, upon
application, a more definite and detailed statement shall be furnished.
B. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to respond and present evidence and
argument on all issues involved.
C. Unless precluded by law, informal disposition may be made of any contested case
by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent, order or default.
D. The record upon appeal for a determination of the Board in a contested case shall
include:
(1) All pleadings, motions and intermediate rulings.
(2) The corrected transcript of the hearing.
§ 113-63 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-64
113:62
§ 113-65. Rules of evidence.
§ 113-66. Examination of evidence.
(3) Any relevant exhibits or copies produced at the original hearing.
(4) The report of the hearing officer, if the matter was referred thereto.
A. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. The rules
and regulations of evidence as applied in nonjury civil cases in Supreme Courts of
this state shall be followed. When necessary to ascertain facts not reasonably
susceptible of proof under those rules and regulations, evidence not admissible
thereunder may be admitted (except where precluded by statute) if it is of a type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
The Village of Webster shall be cognizant of the rules and regulations of privilege
recognized by law. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted
in the record. Subject to these requirements, when a hearing will be expedited and
the interest of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of the
evidence may be received in written form.
B. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts if the
original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an opportunity
to compare the copy with the original.
C. A party may conduct cross-examinations required for a full and true disclosure of
the facts.
D. Notice may be taken of judicially cognizable fact. In addition, notice may be taken
of generally recognized technical or scientific fact within the Village of Webster
special knowledge. Parties shall be notified either before or during the hearing or
by reference in preliminary reports or otherwise of the material noticed, including
any staff memoranda or data, and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest
the material noticed. The experience, technical competence and specialized
knowledge of the Village of Webster may be utilized in the evaluation of the
evidence.
A. Hearing officer.
(1) In the event that the case is referred to an officer for a hearing, the hearing
officer shall conduct such hearing in accordance with the rules set forth in
§§ 113-64 and 113-65 above.
(2) The hearing officer shall make a report containing the hearing officer's
proposed findings of fact and findings of law along with the hearing officer's
recommendation to the Board and the basis thereof within 30 days after the
completion of the hearing.
(3) The Board shall thereafter examine the record as defined in § 113-64D and, at
an open meeting, shall render a final decision by a majority of those present.
The decision of the Board shall include its finding of fact and findings of law
unless waived by all parties. The Board shall in no way be bound or limited by
the recommendation of the hearing officer in making its final decision. At the
§ 113-64 SEWERS § 113-66
113:63
§ 113-67. Decisions and orders.
A final decision or order adverse to a party in a contested case shall be in writing
or stated in the record. A final decision shall include findings of fact and conclusions
of law, separately stated. Findings of fact, if set forth in statutory language, shall be
accompanied by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying facts supporting
the findings. If, in accordance with rules and regulations of the Village of Webster, a
party submitted proposed findings of fact, the decision shall include a ruling upon each
proposed finding. Parties shall be notified, either personally or by mail, of any decision
or order. Upon request, a copy of the decision or order shall be delivered or mailed
forthwith to each party and to each party's attorney of record.
§ 113-68. Ex parte consultations.
Unless required for the disposition of ex parte matter authorized by law, members or
employees of the Village of Webster assigned to render a decision or to make findings
of fact and conclusions of law in a contested case shall not communicate, directly
or indirectly, in connection with any issue of fact with any person or party, nor in
connection with any issue of the law with any party or its representative, except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. A member of the Village Board may:
§ 113-69. Actions with regard to permits.
aforesaid open meeting, the parties shall be given notice and afforded an
opportunity to present oral or written arguments on their behalf in the manner
of an appellate review and shall base its statements upon the record and
evidence before the hearing officer.
B. In the event that the hearing is conducted before the Village Board and not referred
to an officer for a hearing, the final determination shall be made by the majority of
those present at the hearing. A transcript shall not be required but may be requested
by any party and paid for by the party requesting the same.
A. Communicate with other members of the Village Board; and
B. Have the aid and advice of one or more personal assistants.
A. When denial of a permit is required to be preceded by notice and opportunity for
hearing, the provisions of this Part 2 concerning contested cases shall apply.
B. When a permittee has made timely and sufficient application for the renewal of a
permit or a new permit with reference to any activity of a continuing nature, the
existing permit does not expire until the application has been finally determined by
the Village Board, and, in a case in which the application is denied or the terms of
the new permit are limited, until the last day for seeking review of the order of the
Village of Webster or a later date fixed by order of the reviewing court.
C. No revocation, suspension, annulment or withdrawal of any permit is lawful unless,
prior to the institution of Village Board proceedings, the Village of Webster gave
notice by registered mail to the permittee of facts or conduct which warrants the
intended action and the permittee was given an opportunity to show compliance
with all lawful requirements for the retention of the permit. If the Superintendent
§ 113-66 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-69
113:64
§ 113-70. Review of contested cases.
§ 113-71. Injunctions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part 2, the Village of Webster may authorize
the Village Attorney to institute the appropriate legal proceedings, including seeking
injunctive relief. The power of injunction shall be invoked in the following cases:
finds that the public health, safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency
action and incorporates a finding to that effect in its order, summary suspension of
a permit may be ordered pending proceedings for revocation or other action. These
proceedings shall be promptly instituted and determined.
A. A party who has exhausted all administrative remedies available within the Village
of Webster and who is aggrieved by a final decision in a contested case is entitled
to review.
B. Review of a rate-making determination shall be accomplished by petition to the
Village of Webster.
C. Review of other decisions are instituted by filing a petition in the Supreme Court of
the Seventh Judicial District within 30 days after the final decision of the Village
Board or, if a rehearing is requested, within 30 days after the decision thereon.
Copies of petition shall be served upon all parties.
D. The filing of the petition does not itself stay enforcement of the Village Board's
decision, although a stay may be granted upon appropriate terms by the Village
Board.
E. Within 30 days after the service of the petition or within further time allowed by
court, the Village Board of the Village of Webster shall transmit to the reviewing
court the original (or certified) copy of the proceeding under review.
A. To stop an illegal discharge after all administrative procedures have been used and
failed.
B. To stop an illegal discharge which is causing the Village to violate its discharge
standards and the length of time necessary to institute any existing legal remedies
would result in a fine or penalty to the Village.
§ 113-69 SEWERS § 113-71
113:65

ARTICLE XV
Penalties
§ 113-72. Penalties for offenses.
A. A violation of the provisions of Articles VI to XII of this Part 2 or the rules and
regulations adopted by the Village of Webster authorized by Articles VI to XII shall
be subject to a penalty not to exceed $10,000 for any one case and an additional
penalty not to exceed $10,000 for each day of a continuing violation after a final
decision and order has been entered with notice to the party adversely affected by
the decision to impose the penalty. The exact amount of penalty in each case shall
be determined by the Village Board of the Village of Webster and in no case shall
be less than $300 per day.
B. The penalty shall become part of the Village of Webster charges and shall be
collected as a charge in accordance with the County Law of New York.
C. In enforcing against violations of this Part 2 or permits issued thereunder, the
Superintendent and the Village Board shall employ the administrative procedure
under § 113-58, which sets forth the Village of Webster enforcement policy and
procedures. The Superintendent shall assist appropriate state and federal agencies,
as necessary, in their review of or action against violators.
D. Whenever it appears that any person is violating or threatening to violate any
provision of this Part 2 or any decision of the Village Board or any duly issued
order of the Superintendent, the Village Board may authorize suit in the name of
the Village against such person in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain
such person from continuing such violation or from carrying out the threat of
violation. The Village Board may direct an action for an injunction against any
person violating or threatening to violate any provision of this Part 2 or any of the
decisions of the Village Board or any duly issued order of the Superintendent.
However, in the event of an emergency situation in which time, in the opinion of
the Mayor, does not allow the awaiting of a Board meeting, the Mayor may order
an immediate action for a temporary court injunction pending formal Board
approval at the Board's subsequent meeting.
E. Proceedings under this Part 2 do not preclude enforcement of any ordinances,
criminal statutes or laws of the State of New York by either the Village of Webster
or the State of New York.
§ 113-72 SEWERS § 113-72
113:67

ARTICLE XVI
When Effective; Liability
§ 113-73. When effective.
This Part 2 shall be effective 30 days after enactment.
§ 113-74. Disclaimer of liability.
A. The standards herein are based upon available scientific and engineering
considerations which may be revised as experience indicates. However, damages
may nevertheless still occur within the stated limits. This Part 2 shall not create
liability on the Village of Webster or any officer or employee thereof for damages
that result from compliance or noncompliance with this Part 2 or any administrative
decision lawfully made or not made thereunder.
B. Further, compliance or noncompliance with this Part 2 is not intended nor shall it
be construed to preclude a separate civil action for any actual damages caused by
persons or property injured by those persons emitting such chemicals or offensive
materials which result in such damages.
§ 113-73 SEWERS § 113-74
113:69

Part 3
[Adopted 4-14S-2ew01e6r BRyenLt.sL. No. 1-2016]
ARTICLE XVII
Sanitary Sewer Rents
§ 113-75. Background; rent established; definitions; payment schedule; sewer
rent fund; nonconsumption of water; penalty for nonpayment.
A. Background.
(1) In recent decades, federal and state legislation has been enacted along with
strict regulatory action dealing with the collection, treatment, and discharge of
human wastewater. The Village of Webster manages and maintains over 21
miles of a sanitary collection sewer within its borders. Volumes from the
sewers flow into collection system and are treated at Village of Webster
POTW, eventually discharging into Lake Ontario. It is critically important that
the Village maintain, repair, improve and replace, when necessary,
components of its sanitary sewer collection and treatment systems.
(2) Article 14-F of the New York State General Municipal Law allows for
municipalities to impose sewer rents on real property, to be used solely for the
maintenance, repair and improvements of the sanitary sewer system. These
funds will help further facilitate the Village of Webster's compliance with the
federal, state, and county guidelines on sanitary sewer systems by establishing
a steady stream of dedicated funding to perform the necessary maintenance,
repairs and improvements to the sewer systems and facilities. Compliance with
federal, state, and county code further enhances and protects the public health,
safety and welfare.
B. Establishment of sewer rents. Pursuant to Article 14-F of the New York State
General Municipal Law (the Sewer Rent Law), and in order to defray the cost of
maintaining and improving the Village's sanitary sewer system, sewer rents are
hereby established. The revenue collected by these sewer rents shall be used for the
general operation, maintenance, repairs and improvements of the municipality's
sanitary sewer system in accordance with state law.
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL/RENTAL (CIR) PROPERTIES — Includes all
real property classifications codes, as determined by the Town of Webster Assessor,
other than classification codes 210 and 220, including, but not limited to; churches,
motels, hotels, apartments, institutions, stores, and commercial, industrial and other
residential and nonresidential establishments. The number of applicable sewer units
shall be determined by dividing the annual water consumption on said premises by
60,000 gallons. Each of said premises, however, shall constitute a minimum of one
rental unit.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) TREATMENT PLANT
— The portion of the POTW which is designated to provide treatment (including
recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial wastewater.
§ 113-75 SEWERS § 113-75
113:71
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES — All one- and two-family dwellings with
Assessor's real property classification codes of 210 and 220.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, and institutions to
which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted
through either direct or indirect connection or lack of maintenance or neglect.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and commercial establishments, together with such
groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be inadvertently present.
SEWAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, regulating, pumping,
transporting and treatment of sewage, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains,
pumps, equipment, facilities, and treatment plants.
SEWER RENT UNIT — A sewer rent unit is equal to 60,000 gallons of use as
measured by a water supply meter or calibrated sewer flow meter. All singlefamily
homes shall be considered one sewer rent unit regardless of actual water
use. All two-family homes shall be considered two units regardless of actual water
use. All other properties shall have the sewer rent units calculated by dividing the
use by 60,000. One unit shall be the minimum number of units used to calculate
the sewer rent for any property. Any sewer user whose sewer rent is based on
annual water consumption may elect to measure the actual amount of its sewage
discharge into the sewer system. All measuring devices, equipment, sub-meters,
and installations shall be installed at the sewer user's expense in accordance with the
Village of Webster Sewer Department's specifications, inspection and approval. All
flow measuring devices, if used, shall be calibrated annually at the owner's expense.
All expenses incurred by the Village at any time in connection with its inspection
and approval of such installations which relate to measurement of sewage discharge
into the sanitary sewer system shall be reimbursed to the Village by the sewer user
upon notice thereof.
D. Sanitary sewer rents; payment schedule.
(1) The owners of real property within the Village of Webster and those outside
the Village using the Village's sanitary sewer system or any part thereof shall
be required to pay a sanitary sewer rent for the purpose of defraying the costs
of operating, maintaining, repairing, replacing and otherwise improving the
sanitary sewer system.
(2) The Village Board of Trustees shall annually at the time that the Village
budget is adopted establish by resolution a per-unit sewer rent. These rents
shall be included in the Village's annual fees and charges schedule.69
(3) The Village Board shall assess the applicable sewer rents for residential
properties against the real property at the same time and in the same manner
as Village property taxes, and such amounts shall be set forth in a separate
column in the annual property tax roll. The amount so levied for sewer rent
charges shall be collected and enforced in the same manner and at the same
time as provided by law for collection and enforcement of other Village taxes
69. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Village offices.
§ 113-75 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 113-75
113:72
and assessments.
(4) The Village shall assess the applicable sewer rent charges for commercial/
industrial/rental properties against the real property on a quarterly basis. The
invoice shall be presented to the property owner. The payment of the invoice
and any penalties for late payment shall be in accordance with the Village's
annual fees and charges schedule.
(a) The first charge for sewer rent for properties charged on a quarterly basis
by metered water use shall be calculated by multiplying the previous
year's annual water use by 0.25.
(b) Subsequent rents shall be calculated based upon actual use as supplied by
the water supplier.
(c) The quarterly charge shall be calculated by dividing the quarterly use by
60,000 gallons and then multiplying the quotient by the per-unit rent fee
established in Subsection D(2). The minimum charge per quarter shall be
25% of the annual per-unit fee as established.
E. Sewer rent fund. All revenues generated from sanitary sewer rents, including
interests and penalties, shall be kept in a separate account to be designated as the
"Sewer Rent Fund." All such funds, together with the interest thereon, shall be used
in accordance with General Municipal Law § 453 and this article.
F. Basis for rent schedule; nonconsumption of water. If water is not consumed or
utilized, and a connection is maintained with the Village's sanitary sewer system, a
flat sewer rent per quarter shall be imposed and shall also be included in the
Village's annual fees and charges schedule.
G. Lien; penalty for nonpayment. Sewer rents shall constitute a lien on the date
payable upon the real property served by the sewer system or such part or parts
thereof for which sewer rents have been established and imposed, and such lien
shall continue thereon until paid or satisfied. The lien shall be prior to and superior
to every other lien or claim except the lien of an existing tax, assessment or other
lawful charge imposed by or for the Village.
§ 113-75 SEWERS § 113-75
113:73

Chapter 117
SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 85. Zoning — See Ch. 175.
§ 117-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
the Village of Webster, to regulate and enforce regulations concerning the use of
skateboards, skates (roller/inline), and scooters within the Village and to control the
construction of skateboard ramps to ensure that the operation of skateboard ramps will
not interfere with the quiet enjoyment of property owners within the Village.
§ 117-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
IN-LINE SKATES — Shoes, skates, or footwear with a single row of roller wheels.70
ROLLER SKATES — Shoes, skates, or footwear with two or more sets of roller
wheels.71
SCOOTER—A narrow board of wood, plastic, fiberglass or similar material with roller
skates or other types of wheels attached to each end with a steering rod that is attached
to the front wheels to allow for maneuvering.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform which is mounted on wheels, having no selfcontained
mechanism or other devices with which to steer or control the direction of
movement thereof while being used, operated or ridden.
SKATEBOARD RAMP — Any structure or improvement located on private property
which is used for the purpose of riding or propelling skateboards, motorcycles,
motorized bicycles, trail bicycles or roller skates.
§ 117-3. Restrictions on skateboard, scooter or skates use.
A. No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboard in any of the following
areas:
(1) Any public park in the Village of Webster.
(2) Any public parking lot or public parking garage in the Village of Webster.
(3) On Main Street, including sidewalks between Phillips Road and Barrett Drive.
70. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
71. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 113-75 SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND SKATES § 117-3
117:1
§ 117-4. Skateboard ramps.
§ 117-5. Penalties for offenses.74
(4) On South Avenue, including sidewalks between Main Street and Park Avenue.
(5) On North Avenue, including sidewalks between Main Street and New York
State Route 104.
(6) On private property without the owner's permission.
B. Further, no person shall use, operate or ride on any skateboard, scooter, or skates
(roller/inline) in any place within the Village of Webster in a manner to create a
nuisance or in such an unsafe or dangerous manner as to put himself/herself or
others in danger of death or serious bodily injury.
A. Skate ramps shall be prohibited:
(1) Within any right-of-way or private roadway.
(2) In any location forward of the rear or the building line, as extended, of the
principal structure upon a particular lot, except in the case of a portable
skateboard ramp less than three feet in height.72
B. No skateboard ramp shall be in excess of six feet in height. Skateboard ramp use
must comply with all current or future noise ordinances.73
C. Skateboard ramps must comply with all minimum rear yard and side yard zoning
setback requirements.
D. Skateboard ramps shall be used only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Any police officer who shall observe any person using, operating or riding upon a
skateboard, scooter, and skates (roller/inline) in violation of this chapter may take
possession of the skateboard, scooter and/or skates (roller/inline). In the case of a
first offense, the skateboards, scooters and skates (inline/roller) will be returned to
the rider at the Webster Police Station upon the appearance of the rider, if the rider
is 18 years or older, or an appearance there of the rider accompanied by his or her
parent or guardian, if the rider is under the age of 18 years. In the case of a second
offense, the, skateboards, scooters and skates (inline/roller) shall be taken from the
rider and not returned to him or her for a period of 15 days and not returned until
the appearance at the Webster Police Station as aforesaid. In the case of a third
offense, the skateboards, scooters and skates (inline/roller) shall be taken from the
rider for a period of 60 days and not returned until appearance at the Webster Police
Station. In the case of any further offenses, the skateboards, scooters and skates
(inline/roller) shall be taken from the rider, forfeited to the Village of Webster and
destroyed.
72. Editor's Note: Original § 117-4B, regarding fees for the construction of permanent skateboard ramps, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73. Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Noise.
74. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 117-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 117-5
117:2
B. A person who violates any regulation under this chapter or who continues to work
on, operate or use a skateboard ramp after service of such notice, in writing, from
the Building Inspector to discontinue such activities shall forfeit and pay a fine of
not more than $250 or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or
both, for each offense. Each week any such violation continues unresolved shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 117-5 SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS AND SKATES § 117-5
117:3

Chapter 123
SNOWMOBILES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 85.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 93.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 156.
§ 123-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the use of snowmobiles within
the corporate limits of the Village of Webster, to provide for the safe and proper use of
snowmobiles within the Village and to minimize the detrimental effects of their use upon
the community and upon the environment.
§ 123-2. Application of state law. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
The use of snowmobiles within the corporate limits of the Village of Webster shall be
governed by the Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation Law of the State of New
York and any other applicable law, except as otherwise provided herein. This chapter
is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by § 25.09 of the Parks, Recreation and
Historic Preservation Law.
§ 123-3. Use on private property and playground areas.
§ 123-4. Use on sidewalks.
Snowmobiles may be used on sidewalks only to cross such sidewalks in order to cross
streets or highways and shall stop and yield the right-of-way to any other users of the
sidewalks.
A. The use of snowmobiles on all highways and roadways shall be governed by the
Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation Law.
B. "Use" shall mean to ride in or on, other than as a passenger, or operate or control
the operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not it is in motion.
C. The definitions contained in § 21.05 of the Parks, Recreation and Historic
Preservation Law shall apply to this chapter.
A. Snowmobiles may be used on private property only with the consent of the owner
or lessor thereof.
B. Snowmobiles may not be used on any Village playground areas.
§ 117-5 SNOWMOBILES § 123-5
123:1
§ 123-5. Area of use.75
No snowmobile shall be used in the Business District of the Village unless an emergency
has been declared by a duly authorized state, county, town or Village official. For the
purposes of this chapter, the Business District is that area zoned as Central Business as
depicted on the Official Zoning Map of the Village of Webster as filed in accordance
with §175-5C.
§ 123-6. Maximum speed; exception.
No person shall operate a snowmobile except on private lands at a speed greater than 10
miles per hour.
§ 123-7. Age of operator.76
No person under the age of 18 shall operate a snowmobile except as provided in § 25.19,
Operation by Youthful Operators, of the Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation
Law.
§ 123-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a traffic
infraction or of a violation, as such terms are used in Article 27 of the Parks, Recreation
and Historic Preservation Law, and shall be punishable as provided in said Article 27,
and shall be fined a minimum of $10.
75. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
76. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 123-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 123-8
123:2
Chapter 127
SOLID WASTE
§ 123-8 SOLID WASTE § 123-8
127:1

Part 1
[AdRoepftuesde 1D0i-s2p3o-s1a9l67]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 127-1. Title.
This Part 1 shall be known as the "Refuse Disposal Ordinance of the Village of
Webster."
§ 127-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 shall be to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare
of the people of the Village of Webster and their property values by controlling the
storage, collection and disposal of refuse within the Village of Webster.
§ 127-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 1, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
GARBAGE — All putrescible (or decayable) wastes, except sewage and body wastes,
including garden and yard-tree vegetables and fruits, animal offal and carcasses of dead
animals, and shall include all such substances accumulated on or removed from all
public and private establishments and properties, including residences, but excluding
recognizable industrial by-products, discarded wood or lumber, grass clippings, weeds,
leaves or stones.[Amended 3-13-1972]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, association,
society or group.
REFUSE — Rubbish, garbage and trash.
REFUSE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity carrying
on the business of receiving, collecting, transporting or disposing of garbage, rubbish,
trash or other wastes, for hire and/or salvage within the Village of Webster.
RUBBISH — General, dry material produced routinely by household, commercial or
industrial establishments, such as paper, cans, bottles and other containers and ashes.
TRASH — Brush, lawn rakings and similar waste materials and bulky objects, such as
discarded household appliances, equipment or furniture not exceeding 42 inches in any
dimension or 60 pounds in weight.[Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
§ 127-1 SOLID WASTE § 127-3
127:3

ARTICLE II
Storage of Refuse
§ 127-4. Receptacles required. [Amended 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 4-10-1997
by L.L. No. 1-1997]
Every owner, lessee or occupant of any building, premises or place of business within
the Village of Webster shall provide or cause to be provided at all times suitable and
sufficient receptacles for receiving and containing garbage, rubbish or trash that may
accumulate or be used upon said premises. No receptacle for domestic use shall exceed
32 gallons in capacity or 60 pounds in weight when filled, except toters with a capacity
up to 90 gallons. All receptacles containing garbage shall be watertight with proper tight
covers and handles. Such receptacles shall be securely closed at all times.
§ 127-5. Accumulation, burial and burning prohibited.
§ 127-6. Deposit on public or private property.
No person shall throw, deposit or burn or cause to be thrown, deposited or burned any
refuse or leaves in or upon any public highway, street or place, including gutters or
drainage ditches, or on any property not owned by that person within the Village of
Webster.
A. The owner or occupant of the real property shall be responsible for the regular
collection and/or disposal of all refuse which may accumulate on the property
owned or occupied by that person.
B. No person shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of refuse on any premises
owned by that person within the Village of Webster, except for the purpose of
collection, which shall normally occur at intervals not less frequent than every
seven days.
C. Refuse shall not be buried or burned in an open fire or in an open container within
the Village of Webster. [Amended 3-13-1972]
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance of compost
or mulch piles, provided that no garbage is deposited in such piles, and further
provided that such compost or mulch piles do not develop obnoxious odors, attract
rodents or otherwise create a hazard to the health or enjoyment of neighboring
property owners.
§ 127-4 SOLID WASTE § 127-6
127:5

ARTICLE III
Licensing of Refuse Collectors
§ 127-7. License required for collecting. [Amended 3-13-1972]
No person shall engage in the business of receiving, collecting, transporting or disposing
of garbage, rubbish, trash or other wastes for hire within the Village of Webster without
first obtaining a license to do so from the Village Clerk and paying an annual fee
therefor.
§ 127-8. Applications.
Applications shall be upon forms supplied by the Village Clerk. At the time of making
such application, the applicant must furnish to the Village Clerk a schedule of intended
pickup days on the various streets within the Village, a schedule of rates and charges for
residential customers and a list of vehicles to be used by the applicant.
§ 127-9. Bonding.
A bond in the sum of $2,500 shall be executed by every person or corporation engaging
in refuse collection business within the Village of Webster and shall be filed with
the Village Clerk before such license shall be issued. Such bond shall be conditioned
that said licensee will comply with the laws, codes, ordinances and regulations of the
State of New York, County of Monroe and Village of Webster and all lawfully issued
orders of the Village Board; and that the Village of Webster will be indemnified and
saved harmless from any and all claims for damages or liabilities caused by or arising
out of the failure of the licensee, or the licensee's agents or employees, to comply
with applicable statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. Said bond shall be in
such form and contain such sureties as shall be approved by the Village Board or its
designated representatives.
§ 127-10. Conditions for licensing.
Every license issued by the Village Clerk pursuant to this Part 1 shall be subject to the
following conditions and to such other reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the
Village Board.
A. Vehicles used by licensed refuse collectors in the collection and transportation of
garbage within the Village of Webster shall be watertight Packer trucks. All other
kinds of waste must be transported in a watertight and secured condition.
[Amended 3-13-1972]
B. Any firm having one or more such vehicles shall be allowed to use one service truck
for use in emergency situations or where Packer trucks cannot be used.
C. The vehicles used by collectors and the routes of collection shall be subject to
inspection and reasonable visitation by the Superintendent of Public Works or the
authorized agents of the Superintendent of Public Works. [Amended 3-13-1972]
D. The licensee shall be required to display a nontransferable sticker or plate on each
truck used in the operation showing payment of the license fee. In case of an
emergency or breakdown of a licensee's truck, the Superintendent of Public Works
§ 127-7 SOLID WASTE § 127-10
127:7
§ 127-11. License refusals. [Amended 3-13-1972]
A license may be refused if the applicant shall have been convicted of a misdemeanor or
felony. In the event of the existence of such convictions, as determined by the application
forms submitted by the applicant, the Clerk shall refer the application to the Village
Board for its action to grant or refuse the application. The license shall be refused if the
Superintendent of Public Works notifies the Clerk that the applicant fails to meet and/
or demonstrate ability to meet the requirements of this Part 1 to the Superintendent's
satisfaction. The applicant may appeal the refusal of a license by the Village Clerk at the
recommendation of the Superintendent of Public Works to the Village Board, and the
Board may grant or refuse the license based upon the applicant's appeal and the report of
the Superintendent of Public Works.
may authorize any license holder to use additional trucks for a period not to exceed
10 days. [Amended 3-13-1972]
E. All licenses issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of one year, expiring on
January 1 of the calendar year after the date of issuance. Each licensee shall pay the
annual license fee per vehicle, as determined by the Village Board, due on January
1 of each year. [Amended 3-13-1972]
F. Violations of any of the foregoing regulations, or of any other provisions of this
Part 1, shall be cause for revocation of the license of any person holding a license
hereunder. The Village Board shall have power to revoke any such license for cause
shown after hearing upon five days' written notice specifying the alleged violation
to the license holder by certified mail, directed to the license holder's principal
office at the address filed with the Village Clerk with the licensee's application.
G. All trucks must have a minimum liability insurance for personal injury of $500,000
per person and $1,000,000 per accident and for property damage, $50,000.
[Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
H. No collector shall cease or discontinue business in the Village of Webster unless 30
days' written notice has been given to the Village Clerk and to all customers
serviced within the Village. This subsection shall not be construed to include the
sale or lease of such garbage collection business, a collection route or any part
thereof; provided, however, that in the event of such sale or lease, the transferor
shall notify the Village Clerk within five days after such transfer, and the transferee
shall make application and file a bond, as herein provided, within 20 days of such
transfer, and, upon failure to do so, the license may be immediately revoked by the
Village Clerk, as herein provided.
§ 127-10 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 127-11
127:8
ARTICLE IV
Collection of Refuse
§ 127-12. Consent required for collection.
No vehicle used by the licensed refuse collector shall travel into a residential driveway
for the purpose of collecting garbage or refuse without the consent of the homeowner.
§ 127-13. Curb pickup. [Amended 3-13-1972; 3-13-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989;
3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992; 4-10-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
Rubbish, trash, recyclables, garbage, brush, Christmas trees and garden and yard or tree
vegetables and fruits may be set at the curbside in proper containers or form to be
collected. The Village or its contractors will pick up bulky item that are not considered
trash, for example, appliances and furniture.
§ 127-12 SOLID WASTE § 127-13
127:9

ARTICLE V
General Regulations
§ 127-14. Complaint procedures; list of collectible material.
§ 127-15. Littering.
The refuse collectors shall not permit refuse to fall or collect upon the street or ground
from which they are collecting, nor shall they permit refuse to sift out or fall from any
vehicle or in any way become distributed upon or along private property or on the public
streets or other thoroughfares.
A. Each collector shall, without charge, furnish each customer with a card which shall
contain the name and phone number of the person to call in case of complaints, and
each customer shall be furnished with a list of any material which will be picked up
by the collector and notice of any extra charge to be levied.
B. Each collector shall pick up six receptacles and/or items of trash or rubbish each
week. All items of trash or rubbish for pickup shall be carryable to the curb by a
property owner or occupant without dragging, pushing or wheeling, such that one
person can lift the item onto or into a truck. All items shall not exceed 42 inches in
any dimension or 60 pounds in weight. Specific items to be excluded from the
collector's responsibility for pickup and made the property owner's responsibility to
dispose of include stumps, logs greater than 10 inches in diameter, grass, tires,
batteries, gasoline and oil tanks, 55 gallon drums, hazardous materials, rugs and
construction, demolition and remodeling wastes. These excluded items and all other
items not in compliance with the trash or rubbish pickup specifications are the
responsibility of the property owner. [Added 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-1992]
C. Rugs cut up and construction, demolition and remodeling wastes generated by the
property owner, not involving a contractor, placed in trash receptacles conforming
to trash specifications and the weekly limit of six items will be picked up by the
collector. The Village or its contractors will pick up bulky items that are not
considered trash, for example, appliances and furniture. [Added 3-9-1992 by L.L.
No. 1-1992]
§ 127-14 SOLID WASTE § 127-15
127:11

ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 127-16. Superintendent of Public Works to enforce. [Amended 3-13-1972]
It shall be the responsibility of the Superintendent of Public Works and the authorized
representatives of the Superintendent of Public Works to enforce the provisions of this
Part 1.
§ 127-17. Penalties for offenses.
A. Any person who violates this Part 1 shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a
fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both.
[Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Any person who violates § 127-5A, B or D shall not only be guilty of an offense
and be subject to a fine but shall resolve the noncompliance within seven days or
the Village will appropriately resolve the noncompliance and charge the expense
thereof to the property so affected by including it in the next annual tax levy against
said property. [Added 3-9-1992 by L.L. No. 1-199277]
77. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 127-16 SOLID WASTE § 127-17
127:13

ARTICLE VII
Inconsistent Provisions
§ 127-18. Construal of provisions.
In the event that the provisions of this Part 1 are inconsistent with the provisions of
any other ordinance, law or regulation of the Village of Webster heretofore adopted,
the provisions of this Part 1 shall be applicable and shall supersede such inconsistent
prior provision. However, in such event, only the prior provisions inconsistent with any
provisions of this Part 1 shall be deemed superseded and all other provisions in any such
heretofore adopted ordinance, law or regulation not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Part 1 shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 127-18 SOLID WASTE § 127-18
127:15

Part 2
[AdoptedR1e2u-9s-e1 A99n1d BRyecLy.cLl.i nNgo. 5-1991]
ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
§ 127-19. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known as the "Reuse and Recycling Law."
§ 127-20. Findings.
The Village of Webster finds that:
§ 127-21. Purposes.
This law is adopted pursuant to Chapter 845 of the Laws of 1975 of the State of New
York, as amended, Chapter 541 of the Laws of 1976 of the State of New York, as
amended.78 and Chapter 552 of the Laws of 1980 of the State of New York, as amended,
to:
§ 127-22. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTHORIZED RECYCLING FACILITY OR FACILITIES — Any and all permitted
or specifically exempt facility or facilities for processing, reprocessing and/or recycling
recyclable materials. This term shall exclude incineration facilities, waste-to-energy
facilities and landfills.
CONTAINER — A blue box container for recyclable materials or any other durable
container for recyclable materials readily identifiable by the hauler as a container for
recyclable materials.
A. Removal of certain materials from the solid waste stream will decrease the flow of
solid waste to landfills, aid in the conservation of valuable resources and reduce the
required capacity of existing and proposed solid waste disposal facilities.
B. The New York Solid Waste Management Act of 1988 requires all municipalities to
adopt a local law or ordinance by September 1, 1992, requiring that solid waste
which has been left for collection or which is delivered by the generator of such
waste to a solid waste management facility shall be separated into recyclable,
reusable or other components for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
A. Institute a plan for the management of recyclable materials generated or originated
in the Village of Webster to promote the safety, health and well-being of persons
and property within the Village of Webster.
B. Implement the express policy of the State of New York encouraging waste stream
reduction through recycling.
78. Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law § 120-w.
§ 127-19 SOLID WASTE § 127-22
127:17
FACILITY — Any solid waste management resource-recovery facility employed
beyond the initial solid waste collection process which is to be used, occupied or
employed for or is incidental to the receiving, transporting, storage, processing or
disposal of solid waste or the recovery by any means of any material or energy product
or resource therefrom, including recycling centers, transfer stations, processing systems,
resource-recovery facilities, sanitary landfills, plants and facilities for composting or
landspreading of solid wastes, secure land burial facilities, reprocessing and recycling
facilities, surface impoundments and waste oil storage, incinerators and other solid waste
disposal, reduction or conversion facilities.
HAULER—Any person licensed by the Village of Webster who collects and transports
solid waste and/or recyclable materials within the Village of Webster.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any "hazardous waste" as defined under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., or "hazardous substance" as
defined under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq., or "hazardous waste" as defined under the New York
Environmental Conservation Law § 27-0901 et seq., as each such law may be amended
from time to time, and the regulations promulgated thereunder and any analogous or
succeeding federal, state or local law, rule or regulation and any other material which
any governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from
time to time cannot be processed at the facility because it is harmful, toxic or dangerous.
OTHER RECOVERABLE MATERIALS — Any material, substance, by-product,
compound or any other item generated or originated within the Village and separated
from solid waste at the point of generation for separate collection, sale, external reuse
or reprocessing and/or disposition other than by disposal in landfills, sewage treatment
plants or incinerators. "Other recoverable materials" do not include recyclable materials
as defined herein.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation,
estate, trust, association, county, city, town, Village, school district, improvement
district, governmental entity or other legal entity.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Any solid waste generated or originated within the
Village, as designated in the rules and regulations promulgated under Monroe County's
Solid Waste Management Law, which may include but not be limited to the following:
Containers.
ALUMINUM — Aluminum products and containers fabricated primarily of
aluminum and commonly used for soda, beer, beverages or other food or drink
products.
(1)
GLASS FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — New and used glass
food and beverage containers which have been rinsed and are free of food
contamination, including clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored glass
bottles. "Glass" shall not include ceramics, plate glass, auto glass, Pyrex,
leaded glass, mirrored glass, flat glass or makeup, perfume or medicine bottles.
(2)
METAL CANS — Containers fabricated primarily of steel or tin or bimetal
cans of steel, tin and/or aluminum, but not including aluminum cans.
(3)
(4) PLASTICS — Includes high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density
A.
§ 127-22 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 127-22
127:18
RECYCLING or RECYCLED—Any method, technique or process utilized to separate,
process, modify, convert, treat or otherwise prepare solid waste so that its component
materials or substances may be beneficially used or reused.
SOLID WASTE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes generated or
originated within the Village, including but not limited to materials or substances
discarded or rejected, whether as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the
owners at the time of such discard or rejection or for any other reason, or which are
being accumulated, stored or physically, chemically or biologically treated prior to
being discarded, having served their intended use, or which are a manufactured byproduct,
including but not limited to garbage, refuse and other discarded solid materials,
including solid waste materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural
polyethylene (LDPE), polystyrene and polyethylene terephthalate (PET);
commonly used for soda, milk and other containers.
Paper.
BOXBOARD — Woodpulp-based material which is usually smooth on both
sides but with no corrugated center; excludes material with wax coating.
(1)
CARDBOARD, CORRUGATED — Woodpulp-based material which is
usually smooth on both sides with a corrugated center, commonly used for
boxes; excludes material with wax coating.
(2)
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — White and colored office bond, duplicating paper,
computer paper and other high-quality paper.
(3)
GLOSSY PAPER; MAGAZINES — Magazines, glossy catalogs and other
glossy paper.
(4)
NEWSPRINT—Common, inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly
from woodpulp and used for newspapers. This term excludes magazines.
(5)
B.
Other.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS—Material resulting from
the construction, renovation, equipping, remodeling, repair and demolition of
structures and roads and material consisting of vegetation resulting from land
clearing and grubbing, utility line maintenance and seasonal and storm-related
cleanup. Such material includes but is not limited to bricks, concrete and
other masonry materials, soil, rock, wood, wall coverings, plaster, drywall,
plumbing fixtures, nonasbestos insulation, roofing shingles, asphaltic
pavement, glass, plastics, electrical wiring and components, carpeting, foam
padding, linoleum and metals that are incidental to any of the above.
(1)
LARGE APPLIANCES—Stoves, refrigerators, dishwashers, dryers, washing
machines, water heaters and other large appliances and scrap metal, excluding
air conditioners, microwaves and televisions.
(2)
(3) WOOD WASTE — Includes logs, pallets and other wood materials.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, branches up to four inches in
diameter and other like vegetative garden materials.
(4)
C.
§ 127-22 SOLID WASTE § 127-22
127:19
operations and from community activities, sludge from air or water pollution control
facilities or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material,
incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris and offal, but not including
sewage and other highly diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in
gaseous form or hazardous waste as defined in this Part 2.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation of recyclable materials and other
recoverable materials from solid waste at the point of generation for separate collection,
sale or other disposition.
WASTE STREAM REDUCTION PROGRAM—Includes source separation, recycling
programs, changes to the packaging portion of the waste stream to reduce solid waste
generated, the activities and enterprises of scrap dealers, processors and consumers and
other programs designed to reduce the volume of solid waste or enhance reclamation
and recovery of solid waste or recyclable materials otherwise destined for the municipal
waste stream. For purposes of this definition, such "waste stream reduction programs"
shall not include the processing of waste for incineration or disposal by landfill or other
means.
§ 127-23. Waste delivery and disposal; source separation.
§ 127-24. Collection of recyclables.
A. Solid waste generated or originated within the Village which has been left for
collection or which is delivered by the generator of such waste to a facility shall be
handled and disposed of as follows:
(1) Prior to initial collection or transport, such solid waste shall be sourceseparated
into recyclable materials and remaining solid waste as provided in
the rules and regulations promulgated under Monroe County's Solid Waste
Management Law.
(2) Source-separated recyclable materials shall not be commingled with other
solid waste during collection, transportation, processing or storage following
collection.
(3) All source-separated recyclable materials generated or originated within the
Village must be delivered to an authorized recycling facility or handled
through a waste stream reduction program.
B. Disposal of solid waste which is barred from authorized recycling facilities by rules
or by any law, regulation or ordinance shall not otherwise be regulated by this Part
2.
A. Only persons acting under the authority of a hauler or the Village shall collect, pick
up, remove or cause to be collected, picked up or removed any recyclable materials
placed in or adjacent to a container for collection. Each such unauthorized
collection, pickup or removal shall constitute a separate violation of this Part 2;
provided, however, that where the haulers or the Village has refused to collect
recyclable materials because they have not been separated, placed or treated in
accord with the provisions of this Part 2, the person responsible for initially placing
those materials for collection may and shall remove those materials from any curb,
§ 127-22 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 127-24
127:20
§ 127-25. Haulers.
Haulers shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 127-26. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
sidewalk, streetside or other designated collection place.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent any person from making arrangements for the reuse,
private collection, sale or donation of recyclable materials, provided that recyclable
materials to be privately collected, sold or donated shall not be placed curbside or
at any other designated collection place on or immediately preceding the day for
collection of such recyclable materials.
A. Haulers shall indemnify and hold harmless the Village of Webster for any pending,
threatened or actual claims, liability or expenses arising from collection and
disposal by the hauler in violation of this Part 2.
B. Haulers shall offer or cause to be offered collection services for all recyclable
materials to all residential, commercial, industrial and institutional customers for
whom they provide solid waste collection services on the same days as solid waste
collection services are provided unless otherwise authorized by the regulations.
C. Haulers shall not accept for collection solid waste which has not been sourceseparated
in conformity with the regulations promulgated under Monroe County's
Solid Waste Management Law, unless the hauler reports the violation to the
appropriate public official pursuant to § 127-26 herein.
A. Inspections and appearance tickets.
(1) All portions of vehicles and containers used to haul, transport or dispose of
recyclable materials, including such containers placed outside of residences,
shall be subject to inspection to ascertain compliance with this Part 2 and the
rules, regulations or orders promulgated hereunder by any police officer, peace
officer, hauler or any other public official designated by the county or Village.
(2) Police officers, peace officers and the specified public officials are hereby
authorized and directed to issue appearance tickets for violations of this Part
2.
B. Penalties.
(1) Civil sanctions. The Village may commence a civil action to enjoin or obtain
any other available legal or equitable remedy for any failure to comply with
this Part 2.
(2) Criminal penalties. In addition to the civil sanctions provided herein, failure to
comply with this Part 2 or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder
shall be a violation as defined in § 55.10 of the Penal Law, and penalties may
be imposed thereunder. Appeals may be taken by the aggrieved party in the
same way as any appeal of a violation under Penal Law § 55.10.
(3) Any penalties or damages recovered or imposed under this Part 2 are in
§ 127-24 SOLID WASTE § 127-26
127:21
addition to any other remedies available at law or equity.
§ 127-26 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 127-26
127:22
Chapter 130
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 127-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 127-26
130:1

ARTICLE I
Construction Site Stormwater Pollution Prevention and Erosion and Sediment
Control
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 130-1. Introduction; purpose.
A. Land disturbance activities and associated increases in impervious cover alter the
hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and
volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition.
This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne
pollutants. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development sites.
B. During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion by wind and
water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality, and
causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded
soil also necessitates maintenance and/or repair of sewers and ditches, and the
dredging of waterways. In addition, clearing and/or grading during construction
tends to increase soil erosion and causes the loss of native vegetation necessary for
terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and to provide a healthy living environment for
citizens of the Village of Webster. Improper design and construction of stormwater
management practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation. Impervious surfaces allow less
water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and
stream base flow. Regulation of land disturbance activities by means of
performance standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a particular site or
an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and
sedimentation from development.
C. As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard public health, protect
property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by
guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance
of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results
in the movement of earth on land in the Village of Webster. It seeks to meet those
purposes by achieving the following objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES General
Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater
Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised;
(2) Require land disturbance activities to conform to the substantive requirements
of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for Construction
Activities or as amended or revised;
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities in
order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and
streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
§ 130-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-1
130:3
§ 130-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY—The activity of an active farm, including grazing and
watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using land for growing agricultural
products, and cutting timber for sale, but shall not include the operation of a dude ranch
or similar operation, or the construction of new structures associated with agricultural
activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an
application for a land disturbance activity.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Village of Webster to conduct
site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EARTHWORK — Construction activities, including clearing, grading, excavating, soil
disturbance or placement of fill that result in land disturbance.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
FINAL STABILIZATION — All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with density of 80% has been
established or equivalent measures such as the use of mulches or geotextiles have been
employed on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures.
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including clearing,
grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that results in land disturbance
of equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet, or activities disturbing less than 25,000
square feet of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale,
even though multiple separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at
different times on different schedules.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to practice
engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or a certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication which is
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
disturbance activities which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows from any
specific site during and following development to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source
pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management practices and
to ensure that these management practices are properly maintained and
eliminate threats to public safety.
§ 130-1 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-2
130:4
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL —
The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual, most recent version,
including applicable updates that serves as the official guide for stormwater management
principles, methods and practices.
PHASING—Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the stabilization of each
section before the clearing of the next.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles and
practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a licensed professional engineer,
registered landscape architect, certified professional in erosion and sediment control
(CPESC), or soil scientist.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction site erosion
controls, any person with an in-depth understanding of the principles and practices of
erosion and sediment control, stormwater management and the proper procedures and
techniques for the installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the
site.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment, growth,
composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SITE — A parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is
performed as a single unified operation:
SITE PLAN APPROVAL — The examination and subsequent authorization to proceed
with a project based upon a drawing prepared to specifications and containing necessary
elements, which show the arrangement, layout and design of the proposed use of a single
parcel of land as shown on said plan.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES—A permit under
the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS — A permit under
the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for
compliance with EPA established water quality standards and/or to specify stormwater
control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land disturbance activity associated with
a development, including: land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or
foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as
garages.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural practices
that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or
peak flow discharge rates.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER—An employee or officer designated by
§ 130-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-2
130:5
the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward the
plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after construction
activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK—Lakes, bays, sounds, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets,
canals, the Atlantic ocean within the territorial seas of the state of New York and all
other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public
or private (except those private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with
natural surface or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including
treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition are not waters
of the state. This exclusion applies only to man-made bodies of water which neither were
originally created in waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted
from impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERWAY—A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to the public
storm drain.
§ 130-3. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all land disturbance activities that will disturb greater
than or equal to 25,000 square feet of land unless exempted under § 130-7C of this
article. This article also applies to land disturbance activities that are less than 25,000
square feet disturbance if such activities are part of a larger common plan of
development or sale that will disturb greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet, even
though multiple separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at
different times on different schedules.
§ 130-4. Compatibility with other permits and requirements.
A. Compliance with this article does not relieve the applicant of the obligation and
responsibility to obtain separate coverage under the NYSDEC SPDES General
Permit for Construction Activities if required. For projects also applying for
coverage under the NYSDEC SPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges
from Construction Activity, the applicant shall submit a copy of the stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), a notice of intent (NOI) with a certification
statement, including the date demonstrating submission to the NYSDEC, a letter of
permission from the NYSDEC granting approval to disturb five acres or greater of
land at one time (if applicable) and any related documents to the Village of Webster
for review and approval.
B. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements and
where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other federal, state, or local law, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the provisions that are more restrictive or impose more stringent
§ 130-2 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-4
130:6
§ 130-5. Legislative authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York, the
Village of Webster Board has the authority to enact laws for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, or general welfare of the Village of Webster, including the protection
and preservation of the property of its inhabitants. By the same authority, Village of
Webster Board may include in any such law provisions for the appointment of any
municipal employees to effectuate and administer such law.
§ 130-6. Standards for construction activities.
§ 130-7. Land disturbance activity approval process.
requirements shall take precedence.
C. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require additional
compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or local law such as Chapter
130, Article II, Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention.
A. The Village of Webster requires the use of technical standards for erosion and
sediment controls. These are detailed in the Village of Webster Design Criteria and
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation's Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control. For the design of water quality
and water quantity controls (postconstruction stormwater runoff control practices),
the NYSDEC's technical standards are detailed in the New York State Stormwater
Management Design Manual.
B. Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with the
aforementioned technical standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate
equivalence to these technical standards and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a
licensed/certified professional.
A. Requirements of application.
(1) Any applicant requesting site plan approval or a permit for land disturbance
activity which would require the disturbance of greater than or equal to 25,000
square feet of land shall also include with a submission a SWPPP that shall be
reviewed and approved by the Village of Webster prior to issuance of the final
site plan approval or a permit.
(2) No applicant shall be granted site plan approval or a permit which would
require the disturbance of greater than or equal to 25,000 square feet of land
without the review and approval of a SWPPP by the Village of Webster.
(3) Furthermore, prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval all projects
that would result in the disturbance of greater than or equal to 25,000 square
feet of land will be required to comply with all applicable provisions of
Chapter 130, Article II, Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention. As
part of the SWPPP the applicant shall include a signed statement that all
applicable requirements of Chapter 130, Article II, Postconstruction
Stormwater Pollution Prevention, have been met to the satisfaction of the
Village of Webster.
§ 130-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-7
130:7
§ 130-8. Financial guarantees.
The Village of Webster may, at its discretion, require the applicant to submit a financial
guarantee in a form acceptable to the Village of Webster prior to issuance of site plan
approval or a permit in order to insure that the stormwater pollution prevention and
erosion and sediment control practices are implemented and maintained by the applicant
as required by the approved SWPPP. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be the
total estimated construction cost of the stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and
sediment control practices approved, plus a contingency. The financial guarantee shall
contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the SWPPP. The
financial guarantee shall be released in full only upon satisfaction of the requirements
listed in § 130-11 of this article. At its discretion, the Village of Webster may allow for a
(4) Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or
developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant,
together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and
shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in § 130-13.
(5) Each application shall include a comprehensive and complete SWPPP that
shall be prepared in accordance with § 130-9 of this article.
(6) Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction,
or development involving the movement of land shall be in accordance with
the submitted SWPPP.
(7) All land disturbance activities as defined in § 130-2 of this article not subject
to site plan or permit approval shall be required to submit a SWPPP to the
Stormwater Management Officer designated by the Village of Webster who
shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this article.
B. Review and approval of application: two copies shall be submitted to the Building
Department and eight copies to the Zoning Board of Appeals79 for review.
C. Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from review under this article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the protection of
public health, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads are subject
to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by Village of
Webster.
79. Editor's Note: Local Law No. 3-2020, adopted 11-12-2020, abolished the existing Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals and created a new Zoning Board of Appeals. Pursuant to this local law, the reference to "Planning Board" in
this subsection was changed to "Zoning Board of Appeals."
§ 130-7 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-8
130:8
partial release of the financial guarantee based on the completion of various development
stages.
§ 130-9. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
A. The Village of Webster shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer who
shall accept and review all SWPPPs and forward such plans to the applicable
municipal board. A consultant cannot be appointed as a Stormwater Management
Officer. The Stormwater Management Officer may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees, engage the services of a New
York State licensed professional engineer to review the plans, specifications
and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule established by
said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed/certified professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this article.
B. Prior to final approval of a land disturbance activity, a SWPPP shall be prepared by
the applicant in accordance with the specifications outlined by the Village of
Webster and submitted to the Stormwater Management Officer designated by the
Village of Webster for review by the appropriate board. This plan must be prepared
in accordance with sound engineering practices by a qualified professional as
defined in § 130-2 of this article. The final plan must be signed by a New York
State licensed professional engineer (PE), who will certify that the design of all
stormwater pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control practices meet
the requirements outlined in the Village of Webster design criteria and the New
York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control and shall be
adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of
Village of Webster.
C. The requirements to have a SWPPP prepared by a qualified professional and to
have the final plan signed and certified by a New York State licensed professional
engineer (PE) are not applicable to land disturbance activities that meet technical
standards and are five acres or less occurring on a single-family residence, which is
not part of a larger common plan of development, or an agricultural property. In
addition, these land disturbance activities must not discharge directly to a 303(d)
impaired water body or must not be located in a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
watershed.
D. Minimum requirements. All SWPPPs shall provide the following background
information and erosion and sediment controls:
(1) Background information about the scope of the project, including location,
type and size of project and contact information that includes the name,
address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the
property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the subject
property or properties;
(2) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a general location
§ 130-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-9
130:9
map and a one inch equals 50 feet topographic base map of the site which
extends a minimum of 100 feet beyond the limits of the proposed
development. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all
improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing
vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s), including receiving
waters (name of the water), streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands as
well as drainage patterns that could be affected by the construction activity;
existing and final slopes; locations of utilities, roads, soils types, forest cover,
and significant natural and man-made features not otherwise shown; locations
of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas, proposed
concrete clean out basin(s) and construction entrance; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharges(s); and resources protected under other chapters of this
Code or by easements;
(3) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(4) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of construction
activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation and grading, utility and
infrastructure installation, final grading and landscaping, and any other
activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Sequencing shall identify the
expected date on which clearing will begin and the estimated duration of
exposure of cleared areas. Consistent with the New York State Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control, not more than five acres
shall be disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP and
a letter of permission from the NYSDEC.
(5) A description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used to control
litter and prevent construction chemicals and construction debris from
becoming a pollutant source in the stormwater discharges; a description of
construction and waste materials expected to be stored on-site with updates as
appropriate; a description of controls that will be implemented to reduce
pollutants from these materials including storage practices to minimize
exposure of the materials to stormwater; and a description of spill prevention
and response measures.
(6) A description of the temporary and permanent structural and vegetative
measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control
for each stage of the project, from initial land disturbance to project closeout,
including who will be responsible for the maintenance and implementation of
said features at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that
adequate vegetative cover is established and preserved. For temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, the seeding mixtures and rates, types
of sod, method of seedbed preparation, depth of topsoil, expected seeding
dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of
mulching shall be provided.
(7) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s), size(s) and
length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice;
(8) Illustration of all necessary erosion and sediment control measures, including
the siting and sizing of any temporary sediment basins and provide the
§ 130-9 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-9
130:10
dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each throughout
all phases of construction and completion of development of the site.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate
plans may be required at the close of each season;
(9) Identification of all temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(10) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and sediment control
practices, including the timing of initial placement and duration that each
practice should remain in place;
(11) Identification of the parts or components of the SWPPP that require
maintenance. Furthermore it shall also provide a schedule of required
maintenance and identify the party responsible for such work;
(12) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from exposed soils,
store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from
exposed areas of the site to the degree attainable;
(13) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the site;
(14) Assurance that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired
for the site prior to initial land disturbance. Copies of the applicable
environmental permits shall be provided to the Village of Webster;
(15) Assurance that the applicant or their responsible individual shall be on site at
all times when earthwork takes place and shall inspect and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices; and
(16) Assurance that all contractors and subcontractors involved in soil disturbance
and/or stormwater management practice installation and maintenance shall be
identified in the SWPPP. All such contractors and subcontractors shall sign a
copy of the following certification statement before undertaking any land
disturbance activity at the site: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand
and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the SWPPP. I also
understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a
violation of the water quality standards." The certification must include the
name and title of the person providing the signature, address and telephone
number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description)
of the site; and the date the certification is made. The certification statement
must be included in the SWPPP.
E. Modifications to the plan after approval.
(1) Major amendments of the SWPPP shall be submitted to the Village of Webster
and shall be approved or disapproved.
(2) The applicant shall amend the SWPPP whenever:
(a) There is a significant change in design, construction, operation, or
maintenance which may have a significant effect on the potential for the
discharge of pollutants to the waters of the United States and which has
§ 130-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-9
130:11
§ 130-10. Inspections.
not otherwise been addressed in the SWPPP; or
(b) The SWPPP proves to be ineffective in providing the proper stormwater
pollution prevention and erosion and sediment control as required by this
article. Amendments to the SWPPP may be reviewed by the Village of
Webster. A copy of the newly amended SWPPP must be provided to the
Village of Webster within five business days.
(3) Additionally, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new contractor or
subcontractor that will implement any measure of the SWPPP. The Village of
Webster may request copies of signed contractor certification statements from
new contractors/subcontractors working on the site.
(4) Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by Village of Webster
by written authorization to the applicant.
A. Village of Webster Inspections.
(1) The Village of Webster or designated agent as defined in § 130-2 shall make
inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the
work completed or shall notify the applicant that the work fails to comply with
the SWPPP. In addition, the Village of Webster reserves the right to enter the
work site at any reasonable time for purposes of inspection. The SWPPP and
the records of any inspections completed by the owner or their agent shall be
maintained at the site in the site logbook from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization. To obtain inspections,
the applicant shall notify Village of Webster at least 48 hours before the
following activities occur:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Erosion and sediment control measures have been installed and
stabilized.
(c) Site clearing has been completed.
(d) Rough grading has been completed.
(e) Final grading has been completed.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Final landscaping.
(h) Closeout inspection.
(2) The above inspection timetable does not relieve the owner of the obligation
under this or any other permit or regulation to conduct regular inspections as
set forth in said permit and/or regulation.
(3) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be notified, in
writing, of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No
§ 130-9 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-10
130:12
§ 130-11. Duration, maintenance and closeout.
further earthwork shall be conducted on the site, except for site stabilization
until the violations are corrected and approved by the Village of Webster.
B. Property owner/developer inspections.
(1) The applicant shall employ a responsible individual as defined in § 130-2 of
this article who will oversee the implementation of the SWPPP on a daily
basis. The responsible individual shall be on site at all times when construction
or grading activity takes place and shall inspect and document the
effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices. The applicant shall
also employ the services of a qualified professional in erosion and sediment
control who will inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within 24 hours of
any storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. A monthly
summary of reports will be copied to the site logbook and delivered to Village
of Webster within five days after the month's end.
(2) The requirement to employ a qualified professional to inspect and document
the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices is not applicable
to land disturbance activities five acres or less occurring on a single-family
residence, which is not part of a larger common plan of development or on an
agricultural property. In addition, these land disturbance activities must not
discharge directly to a 303(d) impaired water body or must not be located in a
total maximum daily load (TMDL) watershed.
A. Duration.
(1) For a project that requires a NYSDEC SPDES Permit, the SWPPP approved
by the Village of Webster shall be in effect until:
(a) The site has been finally stabilized;
(b) A notice of termination (NOT) is submitted to the NYSDEC in
accordance with the general permit; and
(c) A final inspection has been completed by the Village of Webster.
(2) For projects that do not require a NYSDEC NOT, the SWPPP is in effect until
a final inspection is conducted and the Village of Webster has issued the
applicant written approval.
B. Maintenance.
(1) The applicant shall at all times properly operate and maintain all stormwater
management facilities and erosion and sediment control measures which are
installed or used by the applicant to achieve compliance with the conditions of
this article. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds
whenever their design capacity has been reduced by 50%. The land
disturbance activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that will result in
substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of the State
§ 130-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-11
130:13
§ 130-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
of New York.
(2) At the end of the construction season when soil disturbance activities will be
finalized or suspended until the following spring, it may be desirable to reduce
the frequency of the required weekly site inspections to monthly inspections.
In order to reduce inspection frequencies, the applicant must complete
stabilization activities before proper installation is precluded by snow cover or
frozen ground. If vegetation is used as a stabilization method, seeding,
planting, and/or sodding must be scheduled to avoid fall frosts and to allow for
proper germination/establishment. Installations and maintenance must be done
according to the New York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and
Sediment Control.
C. Closeout. The applicant must satisfy the following project closeout requirements:
(1) Reestablish grade of all permanent stormwater facilities;
(2) Inspect grading of all drainage structures and provide elevation as-builts to the
Village of Webster;
(3) Establish perennial vegetative cover to a density of 80% over 100% of the site;
(4) Removal of all debris and temporary erosion and sediment control practices;
(5) Provide a written certification by a New York State licensed/certified
professional that the site has undergone final stabilization (as defined in
§ 130-2) and that all temporary erosion and sediment controls not needed for
long-term erosion control have been removed.
(6) Complete any other measure deemed appropriate and necessary by the Village
of Webster to stabilize the project site.
A. Stop-work order. The Village of Webster may issue a stop-work order for violations
of this article. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall be required to halt all land
disturbance activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to
the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in effect until the Village of
Webster confirms that the land disturbance activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in
a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance
with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
B. Notice of violation. When the Village of Webster determines that an activity is not
being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it shall issue a
written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall
contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant;
(2) The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land
upon which the violation is occurring;
§ 130-11 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-12
130:14
§ 130-13. Fees.
Fees will be determined at the annual meeting of the Village Board.80
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development
activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the
completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against
the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the
municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of
notice of violation.
C. Violation and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain
any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any terms of this article. Violations of any provision or requirement of
this article or violation of any statement, plan, application, permit or certification
approved under the provisions of this article shall be considered an offense
punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment. Each day on which any violation of any
of the provisions of this article occurs shall constitute one offense and each
successive day of violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Upon
conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $250 for each offense. In addition to any other
penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted
of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be required to bear the expense
of such restoration.
D. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. Occupation permits may not be granted
until corrections to all stormwater management practices have been made and
accepted by the Village of Webster.
80. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 130-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-13
130:15

ARTICLE II
Postconstruction Stormwater Pollution Prevention
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 130-14. Introduction; purpose.
§ 130-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY—The activity of an active farm, including grazing and
watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using land for growing agricultural
products, and cutting timber for sale, but shall not include the operation of a dude ranch
or similar operation, or the construction of new structures associated with agricultural
activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an
application for a stormwater management permit.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that
conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general
public use.
DESIGNATED AGENT — Individual(s) directed by the Village of Webster to conduct
site inspections and/or perform other municipal duties.
EROSION CONTROL — Measures that minimize erosion.
A. Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the
hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and
volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition.
This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne
pollutants. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development sites.
B. The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and
welfare of the public residing in the watersheds within the Village of Webster.
Therefore, the Village of Webster establishes this set of water quality and quantity
policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff and
to, in addition to the above, safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to
the environment in Village of Webster, and comply with the NYSDEC State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer systems (MS4s), for the purpose
of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the
regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and
other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in
stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest
and will prevent threats to public health and safety.
§ 130-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-15
130:17
FEE IN LIEU — A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater
performance standards required by this article.
HOTSPOT—An area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff,
with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS COVER—Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g.,
building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
"hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Construction activity, including clearing,
grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that results in land disturbance
of equal to or greater than 25,000 square feet, or activities disturbing less than 25,000
square feet of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale,
even though multiple separate and distinct land disturbance activities may take place at
different times on different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the
right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the
land.
LETTER OF CREDIT — A document issued by a bank, which guarantees the payment
of a customer's drafts for a specified period and up to a specified amount.
LICENSED/CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person currently licensed to practice
engineering in New York State, a registered landscape architect or a certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as a
property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater
management practices.
NEW YORK STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL — The most recent version of this publication which is
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
NEW YORK STATE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL — The
most recent version of the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual,
including applicable updates that serve as the official guide for stormwater management
principles, methods and practices.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — A stormwater management measure located outside the
subject property boundary.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A bond underwritten by a surety in the contract amount to
guarantee that the contractor will perform the required work according to the contract
specifications.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A person knowledgeable in the principles and
practices of erosion and sediment controls, such as a New York State licensed
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, certified professional in erosion
§ 130-15 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-15
130:18
and sediment control (CPESC), or soil scientist.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Reconstruction or modification to any existing, previously
developed land such as residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or road/highway,
which involves soil disturbance. Redevelopment is distinguished from development or
new development in that new development refers to construction on land where there
had not been previous construction. Redevelopment specifically applies to construction
areas with impervious surface.
RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL — As related to inspection of construction site erosion
controls, any person with an in depth understanding of the principles and practices of
erosion and sediment control, stormwater management and the proper procedures and
techniques for the installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control features.
SILVICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities that control the establishment, growth,
composition, health and quality of forests and woodlands.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES—A permit under
the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to
developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS STATE
POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES) — A nationally
approved program with permits issued in accordance with the Environmental
Conservation Law that authorizes stormwater discharges from certain construction
activities to waters of the United States.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction activity
on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after construction
activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing
or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
WATER QUALITY STANDARD VIOLATION — An increase in turbidity that will
result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of the State of
New York.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public
storm drain.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic
vegetation."
§ 130-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-16
130:19
§ 130-16. Applicability.
A. This article shall be applicable to land disturbance activities as defined in § 130-15
of this article and those activities meeting Condition "A," "B," "C" or "D" below
shall include water quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction
stormwater runoff controls) as set forth in § 130-22 as applicable unless eligible for
an exemption or granted a waiver by the Village of Webster in accordance with
§ 130-20 of this article:
(1) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities discharging a
pollutant of concern to either an impaired water identified on the Department's
303(d) list of impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have been identified
as a source of the impairment.
(2) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities disturbing
five or more acres.
(3) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activity disturbing
between 25,000 square feet and five acres of land during the course of the
project, exclusive of the construction of single-family residences and
construction activities at agricultural properties.
(4) Condition D: stormwater runoff from land disturbance activities that are
smaller than 25,000 square feet disturbance if such activities are part of a
larger common plan of development, even though multiple separate and
distinct land disturbance activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
B. All plans, documents and information required by this article must be reviewed by
the Village of Webster to ensure that established water quality standards will be
maintained during and after development of the site and that postconstruction
runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans.
C. When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project
as defined in § 130-15 of this article, decisions on permitting and on-site
stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria
found in the current New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual.
Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review
by Village of Webster. This applies to all redevelopment projects that are greater
than or equal to 25,000 square feet.
D. The following activities may be exempt from the requirements of this article:
(1) Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the protection of
life, property or natural resources.
(2) Agricultural activity as defined in this article.
(3) Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads are subject
to this article.
(4) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
§ 130-16 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-16
130:20
§ 130-17. Compatibility with other permits and requirements.
§ 130-18. Legislative authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of New York, the
Village of Webster Board has the authority to enact laws for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, or general welfare of the Village of Webster, including the protection
and preservation of the property of its inhabitants. By the same authority, Village of
Webster Board may include in any such law provisions for the appointment of any
municipal employees to effectuate and administer such law.
§ 130-19. Compliance.
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by Village of
Webster.
A. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other local law,
rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article
should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this
article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other local law,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health and/or the
environment shall be considered to take precedence.
B. Construction activities that involve land disturbance may also require additional
compliance measures detailed in other regulations and/or local laws.
A. No person(s) shall receive any of the building, grading or other land disturbance
approvals or permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting
the requirements of this article to the satisfaction of the Village of Webster.
B. Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator desiring
approval or a permit for a land disturbance activity shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this article and shall submit all required plans, documentation and
information as required under this article to the Village of Webster for review and
approval.
C. Unless otherwise accepted by this article, the following items shall be submitted
prior to the issuance of a permit or site plan approval:
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) (see § 130-23).
(2) Maintenance easement(s) (see § 130-24).
(3) Maintenance agreement(s) (see § 130-24).
(4) Any applicable fees (see § 130-29).
D. The SWPPP shall be prepared to meet the requirements of §§ 130-22 through
130-24 of this article. The maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the
§ 130-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-19
130:21
§ 130-20. Waivers and mitigation requirements.
requirements of § 130-24 of this article, and applicable fees shall be those as set
forth in § 130-29 of this article.
E. The SWPPP and all other documents required by this article must be reviewed by
the Village of Webster to ensure that established water quality standards will be
maintained after development of the site and that postconstruction runoff levels are
consistent with any local and regional watershed plans. Information shall be
submitted as a single, logical package, with all information bound together.
F. The application process will be reviewed as follows. Two copies will be submitted
to the Building Department and eight copies to the Zoning Board of Appeals.81
A. All person(s) shall comply with the requirements of this article, unless a written
request is filed to waive the requirements in part or whole for land disturbance
activities that disturb less than one acre of land. Requests to waive any requirements
of this article shall be submitted to the Village of Webster for approval.
B. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole
or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the
following conditions applies:
(1) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair
attainment of the objectives of this article.
(2) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater
discharges have been established in a stormwater pollution prevention plan
that has been approved by the Village of Webster and the implementation of
the plan is required by local law. These practices are encouraged in order to
minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions
in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the
use of nonstructural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from
the site. These nonstructural practices are explained in detail in the manual,
Better Site Design: A Handbook for Changing Development Rules in Your
Community. Applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural
practices must ensure that these practices are documented and remain
unaltered by subsequent property owners.
(3) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site
facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to
provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which
would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity
responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater
practice.
(4) The Village of Webster finds that meeting the minimum on-site management
requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical
81. Editor's Note: Local Law No. 3-2020, adopted 11-12-2020, abolished the existing Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals and created a new Zoning Board of Appeals. Pursuant to this local law, the reference to "Planning Board" in
this subsection was changed to "Zoning Board of Appeals."
§ 130-19 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-20
130:22
§ 130-21. Fee in lieu-of and dedication or easement of land.
characteristics of a site.
(5) Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce:
(a) The generation of stormwater from the site;
(b) The size and cost of stormwater storage; and
(c) The pollutants generated at the site.
C. In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the Village of Webster may
grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management
provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be
eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Village of Webster that the variance will not result in the following impacts to
downstream waterways:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
(2) Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(3) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(4) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
D. Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater
management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by
meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the Village of Webster.
Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an
easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation (dedication or
easement of land, see § 130-21B below). These lands should be located
adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to
protect water quality and aquatic habitat;
(2) The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage
improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that
currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in
accordance with the purposes and standards of this article;
(3) Monetary contributions (Fee in lieu-of, see § 130-21A below) to a dedicated
fund for stormwater management activities.
E. No waivers or mitigation plans will be considered for land disturbance activity that
disturbs one acre or greater of land.
A. Fee in lieu-of. Where the Village of Webster waives all or part of the minimum
stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the
provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed
development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as
determined by the Village of Webster. All monetary contributions shall be made to
§ 130-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-21
130:23
§ 130-22. General design and performance criteria for stormwater management.
a dedicated fund for stormwater management activities. The fee structure shall be
based on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of the
development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be made by the
applicant prior to the issuance of any permit or approval for the development.
B. Dedication or easement of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant
may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an
agreement with the Village of Webster for the granting of an easement or the
dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site
stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the
applicant and the Village of Webster prior to the recording of plats or, if no record
plat is required, prior to the issuance of the permit.
A. The applicant shall consult the Village of Webster Design Criteria, the New York
State Stormwater Management Design Manual and the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control for standards and specifications
related to stormwater management design criteria. Stormwater management
practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this article. If there
is a conflict between any of the standards, the more stringent standard shall apply.
Where stormwater management practices are not in accordance with technical
standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical
standards set forth in this section (§ 130-22) and § 130-23 of this article and the
SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed/certified professional.
B. The following design and performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater
management at all sites:
(1) All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the
peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design
storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek
to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater
runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practicable to provide treatment for both water quality
and quantity.
(2) All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge
untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body
without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact
of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method
acceptable to the Village of Webster. In no case shall the impact on functional
values be any greater than that allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (COE)
or the NYSDEC responsible for natural resources.
(3) An attempt shall be made to maintain annual groundwater recharge rates, by
promoting infiltration through the use of structural and nonstructural methods.
At a minimum, an attempt shall be made for annual recharge from the post
development site to mimic the annual recharge from predevelopment site
conditions.
§ 130-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-22
130:24
§ 130-23. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements.
(4) In order to protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel
protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the Village of Webster
Design Criteria and/or the New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual.
(5) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources may be subject
to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain
stormwater management practices.
(6) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential
pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots," may require the use of specific
structural stormwater treatment practices and pollution prevention practices.
(7) Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the Village of Webster
to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements.
(8) The calculations for determining peak flows (WQv) as found in the New York
State Stormwater Management Design Manual shall be used for sizing all
stormwater management practices.
A. A SWPPP is required as part of the compliance with this article. This plan must be
prepared by a qualified professional and must indicate whether stormwater will be
managed on site or off site and, if on site, the general location and type of practices
and shall also include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations,
etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential
impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the
water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed
for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The plan must be signed by
a New York State licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the
design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements
outlined in the New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual. No
building or grading permit or site plan approval shall be issued until a satisfactory
stormwater pollution prevention plan, or a waiver thereof, has undergone a review
and been approved by the Village of Webster after determining that the plan or
waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article.
B. The applicant shall employ a responsible individual as defined in § 130-15 of this
article who will oversee the implementation of the SWPPP on a daily basis. The
applicant shall also employ the services of a qualified professional in erosion and
sediment control who will inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. The documentation will be kept in a site logbook.
Inspection reports will be completed every seven days and within 24 hours of any
storm event producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. A monthly summary of
reports will be copied to the site logbook and delivered to Village of Webster within
five days after the month's end.
C. All SWPPPs shall provide the following information:
(1) All information listed in Chapter 130, Article I, Construction Site Stormwater
Pollution Prevention and Erosion and Sediment Control, § 130-9;
§ 130-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-23
130:25
(2) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(3) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s) and size(s)
of each postconstruction stormwater management practice. The map(s) will
also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of
surface area to be adapted to various uses. A written description of the site plan
and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
required;
(4) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the
stormwater management system for the applicable design storms, including
calculations such as a description of the design storm frequency, intensity and
duration; time of concentration; soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients;
peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; infiltration
rates, where applicable; culvert capacities; flow velocities; data on the increase
in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the New York
State Stormwater Management Design Manual, and documentation of sources
for all computation methods and field test results;
(5) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions with
predevelopment conditions;
(6) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each
postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(7) The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include
detailed maintenance and repair procedures, including a schedule to ensure
their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of
a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the
equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review
and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need
for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the
plan;
(8) The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the
site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance
easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements will be recorded
with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the
property. See § 130-24 of this article for additional information;
(9) The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance
agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the on-site
stormwater management measure(s) in accordance with the specifications of
this article. See § 130-24 of this article for additional information;
(10) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a qualified professional and the final plan
must be signed by a New York State licensed professional engineer, who shall
certify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the
requirements in this article;
(11) A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and
surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a
§ 130-23 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-23
130:26
§ 130-24. Maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description
should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography,
wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention
should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development;
(12) The Village of Webster may also require a concept plan to consider the
maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of
whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum
potential;
(13) The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the
site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the
maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to
ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared
by a registered landscape architect or by the soil and water conservation
district and in compliance with landscaping specifications outlined in the New
York State Stormwater Management Design Manual;
(14) The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have
been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan.
A. Maintenance easement. The applicant or owner of the site must execute a
maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of
land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide
for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Village
of Webster, or their contractor or agent, to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this article and to if necessary implement emergency repairs to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. The easement dimensions shall
be as directed by the Village of Webster and the easement agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the County Clerk, with a copy provided to the Village of
Webster.
B. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent stormwater
management practices installed in accordance with this article shall ensure they are
operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this article. Proper operation and
maintenance also includes as a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities and
systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which are installed
or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this article.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new
maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the stormwater management practices shall not exceed design
criteria or cause or contribute to water quality standard violations in
accordance with § 130-15 of this article.
§ 130-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-24
130:27
C. Maintenance agreements.
(1) The maintenance and proper operation of all privately owned stormwater
management facilities, including nonstructural practices, shall be ensured
through the creation of a formal and enforceable maintenance agreement that
must be approved by the Village of Webster and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval.
This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to
access and inspect the stormwater management practices, and will outline the
procedures and schedule to be followed to perform routine maintenance as
necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management
practice. In addition, the legally binding agreement shall identify the parties
responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices
and include plans for periodic inspections by the owners, or their designated
agent, to ensure proper performance of the facility. The maintenance
agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of the stormwater
control facility maintenance agreement.
(2) The Village of Webster, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, may accept
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for
maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article
and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or
otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
D. Requirements of maintenance agreements. All stormwater management facilities
must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and
repair needs to ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and
accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include removal of silt, litter and
other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and
vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any
maintenance needs found must be identified, in writing, along with the schedule
and methods to be employed to complete the maintenance. The maintenance repairs
and restoration schedule are to be approved by the Village of Webster prior to
commencing the work and the Village of Webster shall inspect the facility upon
completion of the work. The inspection and maintenance requirement may be
increased by the Village of Webster as deemed necessary to ensure proper
functioning of the stormwater management facility.
E. Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the
operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records
of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records
for at least five years. These records shall be made available to the Village of
Webster during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
F. Maintenance guarantees for privately owned stormwater facilities. Where
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control facilities are to be
operated and maintained by the applicant or by a corporation that owns or manages
a commercial or industrial facility, the applicant, prior to construction, may be
required to provide the Village of Webster with an irrevocable letter of credit from
an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and
maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion control facilities both
§ 130-24 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-24
130:28
§ 130-25. Inspection and right of entry.
during and after construction, and until the Village of Webster acknowledges
compliance with all details of approved site plan. If the applicant or landowner fails
to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and erosion and sediment
control facilities, the Village of Webster may draw upon the account to cover the
costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and inspection
costs, until the Village of Webster acknowledges compliance with all details of
approved site plan.
G. Performance bond/security. The Village of Webster may, at its discretion, require
the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to approval in order to insure
that the stormwater practices are installed as required by the approved stormwater
pollution prevention plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall
be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices
approved by the Village of Webster, plus 25%. The performance security shall
contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the
stormwater pollution prevention plan. The installation performance security shall
be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification
by a New York State licensed professional engineer that the stormwater practice
has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable
provisions of this article. The Village of Webster will make a final inspection of the
stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and
the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the
performance security based on the completion of various development stages can
be done at the discretion of the Village of Webster.
A. The Village of Webster or designated agent shall make inspections at any
reasonable time for purposes of inspecting the construction of the stormwater
management facilities. Inspections may include but are not limited to: routine
inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice
of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher
than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of
businesses or industries of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge
to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the
SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting
under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to:
reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
The applicant must notify the Village of Webster in advance before the
commencement of construction. If any violations are found, the property owner
shall be notified of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions.
No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Village of Webster.
B. Furthermore, when any new drainage control facility is installed on private
property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a
public drainage control system, or combined sewer, the property owner shall grant
to the Village of Webster the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in
§ 130-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-25
130:29
§ 130-26. As-built plans and project closeout.
All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater
management practices located on site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and
must be certified by a New York State licensed professional engineer. A final inspection
by the Village of Webster is required before the release of any performance securities
can occur.
§ 130-27. Landscape alterations.
All applicants are responsible for maintaining the grading of the site so that it is
consistent with the certified as-built plans. Any postconstruction alterations to the
landscape shall receive prior approval from the Village of Webster. Temporary
landscape alterations, such as those associated with utility excavations and landscaping
activities must be restored to conditions that are consistent with the certified as-built
plans.
§ 130-28. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter
a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article
is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public
nuisance or correction of a violation of this article.
A. Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the
requirements of the maintenance agreement, the Village of Webster, after
reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance
needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working
condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger
to public safety or public health, the Village of Webster shall notify the party
responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing.
Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have two days to affect
maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice,
the Village of Webster may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair
work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or
prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax
bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the Village.
B. Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary
to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
provided by law.
C. Notice of violation. When the Village of Webster determines that an activity is not
being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it shall issue a
written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall
contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner or applicant;
(2) The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land
§ 130-25 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-28
130:30
§ 130-29. Fees.
Fees will be determined at the annual meeting of the Village Board.82
upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development
activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the
completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against
the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the
municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of
notice of violation.
D. Stop-work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all
construction and/or maintenance activities. This stop-work order will be in effect
until the Village of Webster confirms, in writing, that the activity is in compliance
and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of
violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article.
E. Civil and criminal penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty
provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250 or by imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or
continues.
F. Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits may not be granted until
corrections to all stormwater management practices have been made and accepted
by the Village of Webster.
82. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 130-28 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-29
130:31

ARTICLE III
Illicit Connections to Storm Sewers
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 130-30. Purpose; intent.
The purpose and intent of this article is to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of
citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a
manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.) by:
§ 130-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce
the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or
stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal
or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities subject to SPDES Construction Permits.
Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating and demolition.
DISCHARGER — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity discharging stormwater to the municipal storm sewer.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical
or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to a substantial present
or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in § 130-36 of this article and any stormwater
discharges to the sanitary sewer except as permitted by the Village of Webster.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS —An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
A. Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable;
B. Prohibiting nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system; and
C. Prohibiting stormwater discharges to sanitary sewers.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an
illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including, but not limited to, any
conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
A.
§ 130-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-31
130:33
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY—Activities subject to SPDES Industrial Permits as defined
in 40 CFR § 122.26(b)(14).
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substance or a combination
thereof which is an undesired by-product waste resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of any natural
resources, except garbage.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE—Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or
other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive
fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage,
litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, local laws and accumulations, so that
same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES—Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A facility serving one or more parcels
of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or institutional facility,
that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge into the groundwater's of New
York State, except where a permit for such a facility is required under the applicable
provisions of Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which transports sewage and to which stormwater,
surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater,
surface water and stormwater as may be inadvertently present. The admixture of sewage
with industrial wastes as defined above or other wastes also shall be considered "sewage"
within the meaning of this definition.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
wastewater and wash water, to enter the storm drain system and any connection
to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a
government agency; or
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the
storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent
records and approved by the Village of Webster.
B.
Any stormwater discharge to a sanitary sewer unless approved by the Village of
Webster.
C.
A. Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that applies
§ 130-31 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-31
130:34
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC [under
authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)] that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual or general area-wide basis.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater
is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities,
retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels
(i.e., ditches), reservoirs and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff or drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN—A document which describes
the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce
pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving
waters to the maximum extent practicable.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial uses of the
water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat and industrial use) are impaired by pollutants,
where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of stormwater authorized
under their municipal separate storm sewer (MS4) permit may have caused or has
the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of an applicable
water quality standard. Under this condition the Village of Webster must take
all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards.
303(d) listed waters: the condition in the Village of Webster's MS4 permit that
applies where the Village of Webster discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition the stormwater management program must ensure no increase of the
listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the Village of
Webster MS4 permit where a TMDL, including requirements for control of
stormwater discharges, has been approved by EPA for a water body or watershed
into which the Village of Webster discharges. If the discharge from the Village
of Webster did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocation prior to September 10,
2003, the Village of Webster was required to modify its stormwater management
program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
C.
The condition in the Village of Webster's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed into which
the Village of Webster discharges: under this condition the Village of Webster
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements for control
of stormwater discharges. If the Village of Webster is not meeting the TMDL
stormwater allocations, the Village of Webster must, within six months of the
TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to ensure that
reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
D.
§ 130-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-31
130:35
prepared periodically by the Department of Environmental Conservation as required
by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed water are estuaries, lakes and
streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to
improve within the next two years.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) — The maximum amount of a pollutant
to be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the water,
allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
WATERCOURSE — Waters of the United States as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES — Surface watercourse and water bodies as
defined at 40 CFR § 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and
depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only
carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times
and seasons.
§ 130-32. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the Village of Webster.
This article also applies to stormwater entering the sanitary sewers.
§ 130-33. Responsibility for administration.
The Village of Webster shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Village of Webster may be
delegated, in writing, by the Mayor of the Village of Webster to persons or entities acting
in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 130-34. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum
standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that compliance by any person
will ensure that there will not be contamination, pollution nor unauthorized discharge of
pollutants.
§ 130-35. Powers and authority of inspectors.
A. The Village of Webster bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, records examination
and copying, observation, measurements, sampling, and testing pertinent to
discharge or potential to discharge, and for repair and maintenance to the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
B. Information and data on a nondomestic source obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction, unless the nondomestic source specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village of Webster that the release of such
§ 130-31 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-35
130:36
§ 130-36. Discharge prohibitions; exceptions.
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as confidential information according to the criteria set forth
in 40 CFR 2.208 and 2.302, as may be amended from time to time. When requested
by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose
confidential information shall not be made available for inspection by the public.
Stormwater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. Information accepted by the Village of Webster as confidential shall
be made available upon request to any agency meeting the requirements of Section
308 of the Clean Water Act, including officers, employees or authorized
representatives of the United States concerned with carrying out the Clean Water
Act, bound by the confidentiality rules in 40 CFR Part 2, as may be amended from
time to time.
C. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
§ 130-35A, the Village of Webster shall observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the person, and the person shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the authorized representative(s), and the Village of Webster shall
indemnify the person against loss or damage to its property by Village of Webster
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the person by Village of Webster employees and growing
out of the inspection and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Village of Webster access to the premises or
other interference with the activities of the Village of Webster shall be a violation
of this article. Access to property and/or records of a nondomestic source may not
be refused on the basis that the Village of Webster refuses to sign any waiver,
access agreement, or similar document.
E. If the Village of Webster has been refused access to a building, structure or property
or any part thereof, and if the Village of Webster has demonstrated probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to
inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the Village of Webster to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect
the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Village of
Webster will make an application to a court of competent jurisdiction for a search
and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the
warrant. The warrant application shall specify what, if anything, may be searched
and/or seized on the property described. If granted by the court, such warrant shall
be served at reasonable hours by the Village of Webster in the company of a
uniformed officer of the law enforcement agency with jurisdiction over the
property. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety,
inspections may be made without the issuance of a warrant.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm
drain system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
§ 130-35 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-36
130:37
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. Such
activities include failing private sewage disposal systems as defined in
§ 130-31, improper management of animal waste or any other activity that
causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) SPDES permit authorization.
(2) Upon notification to a person that it is engaged in activities that cause or
contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct such
activities such that it no longer causes or contributes to violations of the
municipality's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
B. Prohibition exceptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established
by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated and nonsediment
laden pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air-conditioning
condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less
than one PPM chlorine), fire-fighting activities and any other water source not
containing pollutants. Regardless of exemption, best management practices
should be implemented to reduce impacts from the above activities.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the Village of Webster as being necessary
to protect public health and safety.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the
Village of Webster prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted
under SPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger
and administered under the authority of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system by the Village of Webster.
C. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under
law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a
pipe or line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system
§ 130-36 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-36
130:38
§ 130-37. Suspension of MS4 access.
(MS4) or allows such a connection to continue.
D. Waste disposal prohibitions. No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep,
or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or
private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the
storm drainage system, or water of the United States, any refuse, rubbish, yard/lawn
waste, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and
accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes
deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are
exempted from this prohibition.
E. Prohibition against failing private sewage disposal systems. No person shall
construct or maintain any cesspool, sewage disposal system, pipe or drain so as to
expose or discharge the sewage contents or other deleterious liquids or matter
therefrom to the atmosphere or on the ground surface or into any storm sewer or
drain or as to endanger any watercourse or body of water unless a permit for such
discharge shall have been issued by the Monroe County Department of Public
Health or by the State Department of Health or the State Department of
Environmental Conservation, and such discharge shall be made in accordance with
the requirements thereof. Owners or operators of private sewage disposal systems
shall operate, maintain and inspect such systems in accordance with the Monroe
County Sanitary Code.
F. Prohibition of stormwater discharge to sanitary sewer. Stormwater shall not be
discharged into the sanitary sewer without written permission to do so from the
Village of Webster.
A. Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The Village of
Webster may, without prior notice, suspend discharge access into the MS4 to a
person when such a suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment; to the health or welfare of persons; to the storm drainage system,
including, but not limited to, pipes, manholes, outfall structures and storm laterals;
or the waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order, the Village of Webster may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States or to minimize
danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the
MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access suspended or terminated
if such action would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The Village of Webster
will notify a violator of the proposed suspension or termination of its MS4 access.
The violator may petition the Village of Webster Superintendent of Public Works
or his or her designee to reconsider the suspension or termination of MS4 access by
requesting a hearing.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate MS4 access to premises suspended
or terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the Village of
Webster.
§ 130-36 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-38
130:39
§ 130-38. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES stormwater discharge
permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said
permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Village of Webster prior to discharge
or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or
improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding
or action; or for any other reasonable cause.
§ 130-39. Monitoring of discharges.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the Village of Webster must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the Village of Webster
has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises
any condition which constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The Village of Webster shall be permitted to enter and inspect, at any time,
facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary
to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures
in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the Village of Webster.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Village of Webster ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling and examination of the
private storm drainage system. Persons or facility operators must supply
copies, if requested by Village of Webster of all records kept under the
conditions of the SPDES stormwater discharge permit. Persons or facility
operators must also identify the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
(3) The Village of Webster shall have the right to place or position on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Village
of Webster to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's discharge
to the storm sewer system.
(4) The Village of Webster has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated as necessary and recommended
by the manufacturer to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the facility which allows for
unsafe access or difficulty in monitoring, inspecting or sampling of the storm
drainage system shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or
verbal request of the Village of Webster and shall not be replaced. All costs
associated with clearing such access restrictions shall be borne by the
discharger in full.
§ 130-38 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-39
130:40
§ 130-40. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater pollutants by use of
best management practices.
(6) Unreasonable delays, as determined by the Village of Webster, in allowing the
Village of Webster access to a facility, which is permitted under the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES Program, for the
purposes of conducting any activity authorized or required by the permit, is
considered a violation of said program and of this article.
(7) If the Village of Webster has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which a discharge or conveyance to the storm sewer system exists, and
the Village of Webster is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to further inspect
and/or sample the private stormwater system to verify compliance with this
article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Village of Webster may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Best management practices. The Village of Webster will adopt requirements
identifying best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation or facility
which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the
storm drain system or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a
commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property
or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required
to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm drainage
system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the
maximum extent practicable, shall be deemed compliant with the provisions of this
section. Appropriately designed structural/nonstructural BMPs shall be included as
part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for
compliance with requirements of the SPDES permit.
B. Private sewage disposal systems. Where private sewage disposal systems are
contributing to the Village of Webster being subject to the special conditions as
defined in § 130-31 of this article, the owner or operator of such private sewage
disposal system shall be required to maintain and operate the system as follows:
(1) Private sewage disposal systems should be operated, maintained and inspected
in accordance with the Monroe County Sanitary Code.
(2) Septic tank additives shall not be used.
(3) Repair or replace private sewage disposal systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with Monroe County sewage design standards.
(b) No person shall alter, repair or extend a private sewage disposal system
unless a permit is obtained from the Monroe County Public Health
§ 130-39 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-40
130:41
§ 130-41. Watercourse protection.
§ 130-42. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a
facility or operation or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation
has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or
may result in the illegal discharge of pollutants into stormwater, the public or private
storm drain system or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of any such release. In the
event a release of hazardous materials occurs, said person shall immediately notify the
NYSDEC Region 8 Spill Response Team and/or call the NYS Spill Hotline within the
timeframe established by law as well as notify the Village of Webster of the occurrence.
In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the Village
of Webster in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the Village of Webster, post marked within three business days of the date of
the in person or phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from
a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
§ 130-43. Enforcement.
Director or his authorized representative.
A. No person shall alter a stormwater practice on private or publicly owned land such
that it alters the stormwater practice from its intended use.
B. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the
property in a manner which prevents illicit discharges and keeps the watercourse
free of trash, debris, yard/lawn waste, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that
would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately
owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not
become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
A. Whenever the Village of Webster finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this article, the Village of Webster may order
compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(2) The elimination of illicit connection or discharges.
(3) That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
§ 130-40 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-43
130:42
§ 130-44. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any violation
of this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed $350 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 15 days, or both for conviction of a first offense; a second violation of
this article, committed within a period of five years, is punishable by a fine not less
than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days, or
both; and a third or subsequent violation of this article, within a period of five years,
is punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a
separate additional violation.
§ 130-45. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the Village
of Webster. The notice of appeal must be received within 10 days from the date of the
notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his or her
designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be made within 15 days
and be final.
§ 130-46. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the
notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the
municipal authority upholding the decision of the Village of Webster, its representatives
and/or employees may enter upon the subject private property with the consent of the
owner or with a valid search and/or seizure warrant, and are authorized to take any and
all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
§ 130-47. Cost of abatement of violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be
notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner
may file a written protection claim objecting to the amount of the assessment within 10
days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision
of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal,
the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute
a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the
provision of this article shall become liable to the Village of Webster by reason of such
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
B. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the
notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must
be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
§ 130-43 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 130-47
130:43
violation.
§ 130-48. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate
the provisions of this article, the Village of Webster may petition for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 130-49. Compensatory action.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by this article, the
Village of Webster may impose upon violator alternative compensatory actions, such as
storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
§ 130-50. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused
or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to
public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be
summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate
enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 130-51. Criminal prosecution; recovery of fees and costs.
§ 130-52. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under
any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the Village of
Webster to seek cumulative remedies.
A. For the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this article shall be deemed misdemeanors and, for such
purpose only, all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be
liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law and, upon conviction,
shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a penalty as set forth in § 130-44 of this
article.
B. The Village of Webster may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
§ 130-47 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 130-52
130:44
Chapter 133
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 130-52 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 130-52
133:1

ARTICLE I
Notification of Defects
[Adopted 9-11-1978 by L.L. No. 1-1978]
§ 133-1. Written notice of defect required.
No civil action shall be maintained against the Village of Webster or the Village of
Webster Superintendent of Public Works for damages or injuries to person or property
sustained by reason of any highway, sidewalk, culvert, water or sewer appurtenance
being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed unless written notice of
such defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of such highway, sidewalk,
culvert, water or sewer appurtenance was actually given to the Village Clerk or Village
Superintendent of Public Works and there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable
time after the giving of such notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction
complained of; but no such action shall be maintained for damages or injuries to person
or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any
highway, sidewalk or culvert unless written notice thereof specifying the particular place
was actually given to the Village Clerk or Village Superintendent of Public Works and
there was a failure or neglect to cause such snow or ice to be removed or to make the
place otherwise reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 133-2. Transmittal of notice to Clerk; presentation to Board.83
The Village Superintendent of Public Works shall transmit, in writing, to the Village
Clerk within five days after receipt thereof all written notices received by him/her
pursuant to this article and § 50-e of the General Municipal Law. The Village Clerk
shall cause all written notices received by the Village Clerk pursuant to this article and
§ 50-e of the General Municipal Law to be presented to the Village Board at the next
succeeding Village Board meeting, or within 10 days, whichever is sooner. The record
of each notice shall be preserved for a period of five years after the date it is received.
83. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 133-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 133-2
133:3

Chapter 137
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 130.
Zoning — See Ch. 175.
Planned unit development requirements — See Ch. 175, Art.
XII.
§ 137-1. Title.
These rules and regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Webster
Subdivision Regulations of 1968."
§ 137-2. Authority; plat approval required.
By reason of a resolution adopted by the Village Board of the Village of Webster on the
13th day of August 1962, pursuant to the provisions of Article 6-A of the Village Law,84
the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Webster has the power and authority to
approve plats of subdivision of land, with or without streets or highways. Such approval,
in accordance with the procedures and regulations set forth below, is prerequisite to the
recording of all plats of any subdivision of land within the Village of Webster in the
office of the Monroe County Clerk.
§ 137-3. Purpose.
To carry out the purposes of the Village Law and the Village Board in providing for such
plat approval, these rules and regulations are adopted by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
and approved by the Village Board, to provide for the future growth and development of
the Village and to afford adequate facilities for the housing, transportation, distribution,
comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of its population. Consistent with such
purposes, these rules and regulations will assure the orderly development of residential
areas, the coordination of existing streets and public utilities with new services, the
proper provision of open spaces for passive and active recreation and the proper location
of future sites for public buildings and shopping areas, all to the mutual benefit to the
developer, in providing more stable values, and to the future homeowner, in providing
the necessary services at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
§ 137-4. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of
these regulations, have the meanings indicated.
B. Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the
84. Editor's Note: Former Article 6-A of the Village Law was repealed by L. 1972, c. 892. See now Article 7 of the Village
Law.
§ 133-2 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-4
137:1
singular. The word "person" includes a corporation, unincorporated association and
a partnership, as well as an individual. The word "building" includes "structure" and
shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." The word "street"
includes "road," "highway" and "lane"; and "watercourse" includes "drain," "ditch"
and "stream." The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and not directive; the
word "may" is permissive.
ALLEY or SERVICE DRIVE—A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way,
municipally or privately owned, serving as a secondary means of access to two or
more properties.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOARD — The word "Board" shall mean the Village of Webster Zoning Board of
Appeals.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, municipally or privately owned, at least 12 feet
in width, which cuts across a block to furnish access for pedestrians to adjacent
streets or properties.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with one end open for public vehicles and
pedestrian access and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT—A lot having at least two sides fronting on separate
streets which do not intersect while adjoining the lot.
EASEMENT — A right granted to use certain land for a special purpose not
inconsistent with the general property rights of the owner.
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAN — A plan or plat prepared for recording by a
registered engineer or surveyor as required by § 137-10.
GRADING PLAN — A plan showing all present and proposed grades for
stormwater drainage.
HALF STREET — One half of a street right-of-way and paving, usually with its
center line located on a property line.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions and changes to the land that may
be necessary to produce usable and desirable lots (e.g., grading, paving, curbing,
fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and drains, sidewalks,
crosswalks, street shade trees, street signs, monuments and fences. (See § 137-7.)
LOT — A parcel of land, intended for transfer of ownership or building
development, that is presently occupied or capable of being occupied by one
principal building or use, and by those buildings or uses accessory thereto, and
having as a minimum such open spaces as required by the provisions of Chapter
175, Zoning, as amended and as may be further amended.[Amended 6-9-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan showing existing features of land and proposed
street and lot layout within and adjacent to a subdivision, as required by § 137-9.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land opened for use as a street, alley or crosswalk.
STREET — A general term used to describe a right-of-way, municipally or
privately owned, serving as a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing
§ 137-4 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-4
137:2
§ 137-5. Application procedures; inspections.
space for sewers, public utilities and shade trees. The "streets" are classified as
follows:
SUBDIVIDER —A person who is the registered owner, or the authorized agent of
the registered owner, of land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — A division of any part, parcel or area of land by the owner
or agent, either by lots or by metes and bounds, into lots or parcels two or more
in number for the purpose of conveyance, transfer, improvements or sale. A
"subdivision" shall not include, however, the division into not more than two
parcels of not less than five acres each.
LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street used as the principal means of
access to adjacent residential properties, serving only a comparatively small
number of dwellings.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET OR ROAD — A street or road connecting local
residential streets to each other, to community facilities and to primary or
major thoroughfares, serving only neighborhood traffic.
(2)
PRIMARY OR MAJOR THOROUGHFARES — Streets connecting district
centers, serving large volumes of through, fast traffic, preferably located
outside or bounding the residential neighborhoods.
(3)
A. General requirements. The Zoning Board of Appeals must hold a public hearing
before the plat of a subdivision receives final approval, thus permitting the plat to
be recorded in the Monroe County Clerk's office. The Board shall give final
approval to a plat before completion of required improvements only if their
installation is assured through an approved performance bond or letter of credit.
B. Summary of procedure. The subdivider shall develop the proposed plat and present
it for final action by the Board in the following consecutive steps:
(1) The subdivider shall present and discuss a rough sketch of the proposed
subdivision at an informal meeting with the Board.
(2) The subdivider shall present a preliminary plan and other required data for
consideration and advice by the Board.
(3) The subdivider shall submit a formal application for approval of the final plat
upon which the Board will hold its public hearing and thereupon approve,
modify and approve, or disapprove such plat.
C. Informal meeting and rough sketch. The Board will meet informally with the
subdivider to discuss the proposed subdivision and make available to the subdivider
its knowledge of development activities and requirements. A written request for
such informal meeting shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The Chair of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall give the applicant at least five days' advance notice of the
time and place of the informal meeting, which shall take place not later than the
second regular meeting of the Board after the filing of the request. The subdivider
shall present sketch plans at such informal meeting which shall roughly indicate
§ 137-4 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-5
137:3
contours, street and lot locations and future development of the total surrounding
area owned or controlled by the subdivider. It is recommended that no detailed
engineering work be done until after such informal meeting.
D. Preliminary plan. After informal consideration with the Board of the subdivider's
rough sketches, the subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk a preliminary plan
of the proposed subdivision which shall include all layouts, plans and data and
which shall be in the form specified in § 137-9. The Village Clerk shall refer the
preliminary plans to the Village Engineer who shall in turn report the Village
Engineer's recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Not later than 30
days after such filing, the Board shall notify the subdivider in writing of any
specific changes which may be required in such plan. The Board and subdivider
shall then meet to discuss informally such preliminary plan and such specific
changes, if any may be required.
E. Formal application. The subdivider's formal application for approval of the final
plat shall be in writing and submitted to the Board by filing it in triplicate with the
Village Clerk. The application shall contain, in the form specified in § 137-10 and
in precise detail, all of the data and material specified in said section.
F. Public hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing within 62
days after the receipt of a complete final plat by the Clerk of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Such hearing shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least five days before such hearing. The Zoning Board
of Appeals may provide that the hearing be further advertised in such manner as it
deems most appropriate for full public consideration of such final plat. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
G. Action of Board. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall by resolution conditionally approve, with
or without modification, disapprove or grant final approval and authorize the
signing of such plat within 62 days after the date of the public hearing. The
ground for modification, if any, or the ground for disapproval shall be stated
upon the records of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2) Extension of time. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
subsection, the time in which the Zoning Board of Appeals must take action
on such plat may be extended by mutual consent of the owner and the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(3) Approval by default. In the event that the Zoning Board of Appeals fails to
take action on a final plat within the time prescribed herein, or for such
extended period established by the mutual consent of the owner and the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the plat shall be deemed approved, and a certificate
of the Village Clerk as to the date of submission and the failure to take action
within such prescribed time shall be issued on demand and shall be sufficient
in lieu of written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required.
(4) Conditional approval of final plats.
(a) Certification of plat. Upon resolution granting conditional approval of a
§ 137-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-5
137:4
final plat, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall empower a duly authorized
officer to sign the plat subject to completion of any requirements as
may be stated in the resolution. Within five days of such resolution, the
plat shall be certified by the Clerk of the Zoning Board of Appeals as
conditionally approved and a copy filed in such Clerk's office. A copy of
the resolution shall be mailed to the owner, which copy shall include a
statement of such requirements which when completed will authorize the
signing of the conditionally approved final plat.
(b) Duration of approval. Upon completion of such requirements, the plat
shall be signed by said duly authorized officer of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Conditional approval of a final plat shall expire within 180 days
after the date of the resolution granting conditional approval unless such
requirements have been certified as completed.
(c) Extension of time. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
subsection, the Zoning Board of Appeals may extend the time in which a
conditionally approved plat in final form must be submitted for signature
if, in its opinion, such extension is warranted by the particular
circumstances thereof, which time shall not exceed additional periods of
90 days each.85
(5) Approval of plat in sections. In granting conditional or final approval of a plat
in final form, the Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the plat to be
subdivided and developed in two or more sections and may, in its resolution
granting conditional or final approval, state that such requirements as it deems
necessary to ensure the orderly development of the plat shall be completed
before said sections may be signed by the duly authorized officer of the Zoning
Board of Appeals. Conditional or final approval of the sections of a final plat
may be granted concurrently with conditional or final approval of the entire
plat, subject to any requirements imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(6) In the event of approval, there shall be stated the precise conditions of the
approval, including the improvements to be required and the amount of the
performance bond or letter of credit which may be furnished in lieu of the
complete installation of such improvements. The Zoning Board of Appeals
may waive, subject to appropriate conditions and guaranties, for such period
as it may determine, the provision of any or all such improvements as, in its
judgment of the special circumstances of a particular plat or plats, are not
requisite in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare or which,
in its judgment, are inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting
facilities adjacent or in proximity to the subdivision.
H. Time limit for filing. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-199486]
(1) The approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals of a plat showing lots, blocks or
sites, with or without streets or highways, or the approval by the Board of the
development of a plat already on file in the office of the Monroe County Clerk
85. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
86. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 137-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-5
137:5
prior to the appointment of the Village Zoning Board of Appeals and the grant
to it of the power to approve plats, or the certificate of the Webster Village
Clerk as to the date of submission of such plat or such proposed development
and the failure of the Zoning Board of Appeals to take action thereon within 62
days, shall expire 62 days from the date of such approval or of such certificate,
unless within such sixty-two-day period such plat or section thereof shall have
been duly filed or recorded by the owner in the office of the Monroe County
Clerk and the proposed development of such plat has either been completed or
a bond therefor posted with the Village Board as provided in Subsection I of
this section.
(2) If the owner shall file only a section of an approved plat within such sixty-twoday
period, such section shall encompass at least 10% of the total number of
lots contained in the approved plat, and the approval of the remaining sections
of the approved plat shall expire unless said sections are filed before the
expiration of the exemption period to which such plat is entitled under the
provisions of § 7-708 of the Village Law. In the event that the owner shall file
only a section of such approved plat in the office of the Monroe County Clerk,
the entire approved plat shall be filed within 30 days of the filing of such
section with the Webster Village Clerk.
I. Performance bond or letter of credit.
(1) Any performance bond or letter of credit furnished in lieu of the installation of
the required improvements shall be in the amount fixed by resolution of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, shall be secured by such deposit of subdivider or
issued by such bonding or security company as shall be approved by the
Village Board, and shall be approved by the Village Board as to form,
sufficiency and manner of execution. The bond or letter of credit shall assure
the complete installation of the required improvements within such period, not
longer than three years, as shall be fixed by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
Zoning Board of Appeals, with the consent of all parties to the bond, may
extend such period upon written application of the subdivider filed with the
Village Clerk prior to the expiration of such period or upon its own motion at
any time prior to a declaration of a default in the bond by the Village Board.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals, with the approval of the Village Board, and
upon findings either that the extent of building development that has taken
place in the subdivision is not sufficient to warrant all the improvements
covered by such bond or that the required improvements have been installed
in sufficient amount to warrant reduction in the face amount of such bond, may
modify its requirements. Such modification shall not take place until after a
public hearing of which notice is published as provided in Subsection F of this
section.
(3) Except as provided in the preceding Subsection I(2), the bond or letter of credit
shall be released only upon complete installation of the required improvements
and the submission of the certified as-built drawings as required in § 137-9H.
(4) If the required improvements are not completely installed within the period
fixed or extended by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Village Board may
§ 137-5 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-5
137:6
§ 137-6. Coordination with State Environmental Quality Review Act.87
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall comply with the provisions of the State
Environmental Quality Review Act under Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation
Law and its implementing regulations.
§ 137-7. Development design standards.
declare the performance bond or letter of credit in default and collect the
amount payable thereunder. Upon receipt of such amount, the Village shall
install such improvements as were covered by the bond and are commensurate
with the extent of building development which has taken place in the
subdivision, not exceeding in cost the amount collected upon the bond.
J. Offers of cession. The subdivider shall tender offers of cession, in a form certified
as satisfactory by the Village Attorney, of all land included in streets, highways or
parks not specifically reserved by him, but the approval of the plan by the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall not constitute an acceptance by the Village of the dedication
of any street, highway, park or other public open space.
K. Inspection. The installations, improvements and development of any subdivision
shall be subject to inspection at all stages by representatives of the Zoning Board of
Appeals or of the Village of Webster, and, for such purposes, free access shall be
accorded, and requested information shall be promptly submitted.
A. General requirements. In the layout, development and improvement of a
subdivision, subdividers shall comply with all standards, specifications, codes and
ordinances of the Village, and, in addition, they shall meet, as minimums, the
standards of design and principles of land subdivision set forth in this section.
B. Streets and roads.
(1) Street layout.
(a) The development plan shall conform to such plan or plans for the Village
as shall have been prepared and adopted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(b) Local residential streets in a new development shall be so laid out as to
discourage through traffic, but provision for the extension and
continuation of major streets into and from adjoining areas is required. If
the subdivision abuts a present or proposed primary or major
thoroughfare, marginal interceptor streets running parallel to the
thoroughfare should be provided.
(c) At all times, the street layout should be logically related to the topography
of the land.
(d) Where the center lines of local streets opening into opposite sides of a
major thoroughfare are within 200 feet of each other, they shall be made
to coincide by curving or angling the local streets.
87. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 137-5 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-7
137:7
(e) If the lots resulting from the original development are large enough for
resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable access
and street openings for such an eventuality shall be provided.
(f) Culs-de-sac in the local street system shall not exceed 500 feet in length
and must be designed with a turnaround having an outside roadway
diameter of at least 125 feet and a street property line diameter of at least
145 feet.
(g) Intersecting minor and secondary streets leading from the same
subdivision shall not empty into the same side of a major thoroughfare at
intervals less than 800 feet.
(2) Street alignment.
(a) The minimum radius at the center line for curves on primary roads or
major thoroughfares shall be 500 feet; for collector streets or roads, 300
feet; and for local residential streets, 150 feet.
(b) Except for local residential streets, there shall be a tangent of at least 100
feet, measured at the center line, between reverse curves.
(c) Proper sight distances should be provided with respect to both horizontal
and vertical alignment. Measured along the center line, the sight distance
should be 400 feet for primary roads or major thoroughfares; 200 feet for
collector streets or roads; and 100 feet for local residential streets.
(d) Proper sight lines should be maintained at all intersections of streets.
Measured along the center line, there should be a clear sight triangle of
80 feet from the point of intersection. No present or future building or
obstruction shall be permitted in this area.
(3) Street grades.
(a) There shall be a minimum grade of at least 3/4 of 1% on all streets; a
maximum grade of 6% on primary roads, major thoroughfares and
collector streets or roads; and 10% on local residential streets for
maximum distances of 1,500 feet.
(b) Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1% and
should be designed for maximum visibility. Intersections shall be
approached on all sides by leveling areas; such leveling areas shall extend
for a distance of 100 feet from the point of intersection of the center lines
of the intersecting streets and within which no grade shall exceed a
maximum of 3%. The grade of actual intersections shall not exceed 1%
in any direction.
(4) Street widths.
(a) Minimum street and pavement widths are shown in the current Village
specifications which are appended to and a part of these rules and
regulations.88
§ 137-7 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-7
137:8
(b) Additional widths may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon
findings that the same are required for public safety and convenience; for
parking in commercial or public use areas; or for old streets which do not
provide the proper widths and where, as a consequence, additional
dedication is necessary.
(5) Street intersections.
(a) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than four streets
shall be avoided, and where such avoidance is impossible, such
intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both vehicular and
pedestrian safety.
(b) Right angle intersections shall be used whenever practicable, especially
when local residential streets empty into major or collector thoroughfares,
and there shall be no intersection angle, measured at the center line, of
less than 75°.
(c) Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a
minimum radius of 20 feet for local residential streets and 30 feet for
intersections, including collector streets or roads and primary roads or
major thoroughfares.
(6) Other requirements.
(a) The dedication of half streets at the edge of a new subdivision is
prohibited. If circumstances render this impracticable, adequate
provisions for the concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the street
must be furnished by the subdivider. The existence of a half street in an
adjoining subdivision will require the provision of the remaining half in
the proposed subdivision.
(b) Reserve strips controlling access or egress are prohibited. New streets
shall be provided through to the boundary lines of the development,
especially if it adjoins acreage.
(c) Streets that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing
named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets, subject to the
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. Blocks and lots.
(1) Blocks.
(a) All blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum length of at least 500
feet with a maximum length of 1,200 feet. Such blocks containing
individual lots shall be at least two lot depths in width. Modifications of
the above requirements are possible in commercial, retail business and
industrial developments.
(b) In large blocks with interior parks, in exceptionally long blocks, or where
88. Editor's Note: The specifications are on file in the Village Clerk's office.
§ 137-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-7
137:9
access to a school or shopping center is necessary, a crosswalk with a
minimum right-of-way of 12 feet and a paved walk six feet in width shall
be provided.
(2) Lots.
(a) The minimum lot size and frontage shall be controlled by the provisions
of Chapter 175, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of Webster, as
amended and as may be further amended.
(b) All lots shall abut on a street, but double frontage lots are prohibited. All
lot lines shall be at right angles to the street or to a tangent of the arc of a
curved street. If, after subdividing, there exist remnants of land, they shall
be included in proposed or existing lot areas.
D. Building lines, utilities and alleys.
(1) Building lines. The minimum building setback shall be controlled by the
provisions set forth in Chapter 175, Zoning, of the Code of the Village of
Webster, as amended and as may be further amended.
(2) Utilities.
(a) If sewer, water, gas, electrical, streetlighting or other public utility
facilities are to be located within street rights-of-way, their location and
installation shall be coordinated so that they may be added to, repaired or
enlarged at minimum cost.
(b) If easements are used at the rear of lots to provide such facilities, an
easement shall be required, having a minimum width of at least 20 feet.
(Where lots back up to each other, this would require a ten-foot easement
from each lot.)
(3) Alleys. Alleys are prohibited in residential developments. In commercial,
retail business or industrial districts without expressly designed loading areas,
alleys with a minimum width of 25 feet shall be required. Where such alleys
dead-end, they shall be provided with a turnaround having an outside roadway
diameter of not less than 75 feet.
E. Dedication and reservations for public land use.
(1) Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown in the
Master Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, or where there is a
need for such use in the area within which the subdivision is to be located, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may require the dedication or reservation of such
area within the subdivision in those cases in which the Zoning Board of
Appeals deems such requirements to be reasonable.
(2) Where deemed essential by the Zoning Board of Appeals, upon consideration
of the particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, and
especially in large-scale neighborhood unit developments, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may require the dedication or reservation of such other areas or
sites of a character, extent or location suitable to the needs created by such
§ 137-7 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-7
137:10
§ 137-8. Required improvements.
The following is a complete list of required improvements to be installed by the
subdivider.
development for schools, parks and other neighborhood purposes.
A. Street grading. All streets shall be graded to the grades shown on the street profile
and cross-section plans as submitted and approved with the preliminary plan. They
shall be inspected and checked for accuracy by the Village or its representatives.
B. Pavement.
(1) All pavement for local residential streets and collector streets or roads shall be
installed as shown on the preliminary plan. All pavements shall conform to the
then-current road construction specifications of the Village of Webster.
(2) Concrete gutters constructed in accordance with Village specifications shall be
required on both sides of all streets.
C. Sidewalks and curbs.
(1) Sidewalks shall be installed as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require, and
on one or both sides of a street depending on local conditions of public safety.
(2) Sidewalks shall be constructed to the following minimum specifications:
Sidewalks shall be 3,500 pounds minimum strength concrete 1-2-4 mix or
better, with a minimum of five feet in width and four inches of thickness,
except at driveway crossings, where the sidewalk shall be increased to six
inches thick and be reinforced.
(3) Curbs shall be installed as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require, and on
one or both sides of a street depending on local conditions of public safety.
Curbs shall conform to the then-current specifications of the Village of
Webster as provided by the Superintendent of Public Works.
D. Storm and surface drainage. All storm sewers and drainage facilities, such as
gutters, catch basins, bridges and culverts, shall be installed and the land graded for
adequate drainage as shown on the final grading plan submitted and approved with
the preliminary plan. These shall be inspected and checked for adequacy by the
Village or its representatives.
E. Sewers and water. All necessary mains and laterals for connection from the lots to
the public sewer system and all necessary mains for water distribution as shown on
the preliminary plan shall be installed by the subdivider. Village forces shall make
the connection from the lots to the public water system. During installation of such
facilities, and before final coverage, the Village or its representatives shall make
inspections to assure that all requirements and specifications have been met. They
shall be granted free access to the development area at all times during this period,
and the Building Inspector will then issue a certificate of approval to the Zoning
Board of Appeals as a requirement of final plan approval. The Village Board, at its
option, may set a connection fee in each case.
§ 137-7 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-8
137:11
§ 137-9. Preliminary plan.89
The subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals a preliminary plan of
the proposed subdivision, with complete topography of the area at two-foot intervals,
unless otherwise specified for profiles and cross sections. These shall all be submitted in
triplicate (one Mylar or its equivalent reproducible and two black and white paper prints)
at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch and shall contain the following information:
F. Planting. Adequate tree planting, appropriate to the individual lot and integral to the
comprehensive benefit of the whole area, shall be completed by the developer.
Tentative location and species (which shall conform to the recommendations of the
Village Arborist) will be indicated on the preliminary plan. Street trees shall be a
minimum of 35 feet apart. Trees shall be not less than 1 1/2 inches in diameter at
the base at time of planting. They shall be planted in the lawn area within 10 feet of
the street line. Trees must be adequately supported by guy wires until firmly rooted.
G. Monuments. Permanent reference monuments of precast concrete or a durable
stone, six inches by six inches by 48 inches, shall be set at final grade at all corners
and angle points of the boundaries of the original tract to be subdivided, at all street
intersections and at such intermediate points as may be required. All lot corner
markers shall be at least a three-fourths-inch metal pin with a minimum length of
30 inches, permanently located in the ground to final grade. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may waive part of the foregoing requirements for monuments if, in its
opinion, suitable bases for the location of boundaries are otherwise provided.
However, in any subdivision, no fewer than three corners of the original tract to be
subdivided shall be marked as heretofore specified.
H. Street signs. Permanent street signs, showing the names of the intersecting streets,
shall be erected at each intersection by the Village of Webster at the developer's
expense.
I. Fences. Fences shall be installed as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require,
depending on local conditions of public safety.
A. The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and a location map showing the
tract in which the subdivision is located and the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to existing community facilities and main traffic arteries.
B. The name and address, personally signed, of the record owner, subdivider and
designer of the preliminary plan in India ink.
C. A deed description and map of survey of the tract boundary made and certified by
a licensed surveyor to be a closed and balanced traverse and showing the location
of property lines, existing easements, buildings, watercourses and other essential
features.
D. The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names of owners of
record for adjacent acreage.
E. The location and size of any existing sewers, water or gas mains, culverts and drains
89. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 137-8 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-9
137:12
on the property to be subdivided.
F. Sanitary sewers, detailed as follows:
(1) Plan and profile of all sewers showing all special features such as inverted
siphons, extra-strength pipe, sewer bridges, stream crossings, etc.
(2) Figures showing the manhole stationing, size of sewers, surface and sewer
invert elevations at manholes, and the grade of all sewers between two
adjacent manholes must be shown on the profiles. Where there is question of
the sewer's being sufficiently deep to serve any residence, the elevation and
location of the basement floor shall be plotted on the profile of the sewer which
is to serve the house in question. The subdivider's engineer shall certify that all
sewers are sufficiently deep to serve adjacent basements except where
otherwise noted on the plans.
(3) Details of all ordinary sewer appurtenances such as manholes, drop manholes,
inspection chambers and inverted siphons, as well as of any special
appurtenances of structures, such as regulators, tide gates, sewer bridges,
pumping stations, etc.
(4) Detailed plans of all sewer sections except standard pipe, clearly shown as
such, must accompany the plans. Details of cradling and encasement must also
be shown.
(5) A summary of design data for all sewers and for pumping stations or any
similar facilities.
G. Storm drainage and sewers, detailed as follows:
(1) All details required for the collection and disposal of surface drainage, the
same as that required for sanitary sewers.
(2) Details of catch basins, open channels, culverts, conduits, ditches and
headwalls.
(3) Design and construction details for the ultimate disposal of stormwaters.
(4) Design and construction details for any method of lowering the groundwater
table with a drainage system.
(5) A summary of design data for all storm drainage.
(6) Final grading plan.
H. The location, names and existing widths of present and proposed streets, highways,
easements, building lines, alleys, parks and other public open spaces.
I. The width, location, grades and street profiles of all proposed streets or other public
ways.
J. Typical cross sections of the proposed grading of the roadways and sidewalks, and
the topographic conditions; additional cross sections at points where cut or fill
exceeds three feet or multiples of three feet.
§ 137-9 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-9
137:13
§ 137-10. Final subdivision plan.90
The developer shall submit the final subdivision plan and street profiles clearly and
legibly drawn in India ink on Mylar or its equivalent. These shall be original drawings
or prints on Mylar or its equivalent at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch.
In addition to the Mylar or its equivalent drawing, there shall be submitted three prints
on Mylar or its equivalent of the plans and profiles. The final plan shall include the
following:
K. Zoning regulations for the area with zoning district boundaries affecting the area;
all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication.
L. The date, scale and true North point.
M. All proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and building setback lines.
N. The proposed location of and type of sidewalks; the location and species of street
trees; the location, size and types of curbs and gutters; the location and size of
water, gas and electrical mains and lines; the character, width, depth of pavement
and subbase; and the type and location of fences.
O. All necessary easements to service public areas.
P. When and if the subdivision covers only a portion of the subdivider's entire holding,
a sketch of the prospective future street system of the entire area shall accompany
the preliminary plan. In addition, the sketch shall show all prospective sewer and
drainage facilities with sizes, slope, location and area served.
Q. All preliminary plans must be submitted at one of the following sizes: 17 inches by
22 inches; 22 inches by 34 inches; or 34 inches by 44 inches. A suitable border line
shall be placed on all drawings with a margin of not less than 1/2 inch on all sides.
A. The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of the tract in
which the subdivision is located; the name and address of the record owner and
subdivider; and the name, license number and seal of the registered professional
engineer or surveyor.
B. Street lines, pedestrianways, lots, reservations, easements and areas dedicated to
public use.
C. Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and length of every street,
lot line and boundary line, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
D. The length and bearing of all straight lines, the deflection angles, radii, length of
curves and central angles of all curves, tangent distances and tangent bearings shall
be given for each street. All dimensions of the lines of each lot shall be shown in
feet and decimals of a foot. The property boundaries, location, scale and North
points shall also be shown.
E. The final plan shall also show by proper designation thereon all public open spaces
90. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 137-9 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-10
137:14
§ 137-11. Variances.
§ 137-12. Amendments.
The rules and regulations as set forth above may be amended, altered or revised by
the Zoning Board of Appeals from time to time, after public hearing and subject to the
approval of the Village Board.
§ 137-13. Fees. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
Village of Webster subdivision fees shall be as set by the Village Board.91
for which deeds of dedication are included. All offers of dedication shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
F. Lots within a subdivision shall be numbered.
G. Permanent reference monuments shall be shown thus: "X." All lot corner markers
shall be shown thus: "O."
H. As-built drawings, certified by the subdivider's engineer, showing that sanitary
sewers, storm drainage facilities, manholes, house lateral stubs and all other
underground facilities were constructed by the developer in accordance with the
approved preliminary plan or in accordance with a variance thereof approved by the
Board.
I. Certification of approval by the appropriate public agency, when and where
required, as well as such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or other
agreements as may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals in the enforcement
of these regulations.
A. Hardships. Where the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that, because of unusual
circumstances of shape, topography or other physical features of the proposed
subdivision, or because of the nature of adjacent developments, extraordinary
hardship may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may change
the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
secured, provided that no such change shall be granted which will have the effect
of nullifying the intent and purpose of Chapter 175, Zoning, of these regulations or
of any other pertinent rules, regulations or ordinances of the Village of Webster.
B. Large-scale development. The standards and requirements of these regulations may
be modified by the Zoning Board of Appeals in the case of a plan and program for
a new complete community or a neighborhood unit, which, in the judgment of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for
the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully
developed and populated and which also provides such covenants or other legal
provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.
C. Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 137-10 SUBDIVISION OF LAND § 137-14
137:15
§ 137-14. Penalties for offenses.92
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, and upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
91. Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
92. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 137-14 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 137-14
137:16
Chapter 143
TAXATION
§ 137-14 TAXATION § 137-14
143:1

ARTICLE I
Exemption for Physically Disabled
[Adopted 10-22-1984 by L.L. No. 2-1984]
§ 143-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to exempt from real property taxes property owned by
certain physically disabled persons as authorized by § 459 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 143-2. Exemption.
An improvement to any real property used solely for residential purposes as a one-, twoor
three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any increase
in value attributable to such improvement if such improvement is used for the purpose
of facilitating and accommodating the use and accessibility of such real property by
a resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled or a member of the
resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if such member resides in the real
property.
§ 143-3. Applicability to improvements.
Any such real property tax exemption will apply to improvements constructed on or after
January 2, 1984.
§ 143-4. Applicability.
This article shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates
occurring on or after January 1, 1985.
§ 143-1 TAXATION § 143-4
143:3

ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Exemption
[Adopted 2-28-2008 by L.L. No. 2-200893]
§ 143-5. Exemption granted.
All real property located within the Village of Webster which is owned by persons 65
years of age or over shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of 50% to 5% of the
assessed valuation thereof subject to the requirements and limitations of § 467 of the
Real Property Tax Law and based upon the income limit of the owner age 65 and over,
according to the following income eligibility schedule:
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
$26,000 or less 50%
More than $26,000 but less than $27,000 45%
27,000 or more but less than $28,000 40%
$28,000 or more but less than $29,000 35%
$29,000 or more but less than $29,900 30%
$29,900 or more but less than $30,800 25%
$30,800 or more but less than $31,700 20%
$31,700 or more but less than $32,600 15%
$32,600 or more but less than $33,500 10%
$33,500 or more but less than $34,400 5%
§ 143-6. Attainment of qualifying age after taxable status date and before end of
calendar year.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person otherwise qualifying for the
senior citizen tax exemption pursuant to New York State Real Property Tax Law § 467
shall not be denied the exemption if he or she becomes 65 years of age after the
appropriate taxable status date and before December 31 of the same year.
§ 143-7. Acceptance of applications for renewal after taxable status date.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the law, the Assessor of the Town of Webster is
authorized to accept applications for renewal of exemption after the taxable status date
on or before the date for the hearing of complaints from the owner, or all of the owners,
of property which has received a tax exemption.
§ 143-8. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the appropriate filings as required by law
and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring
93. Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Art. II, Senior Citizens Exemption, adopted 9-23-1993 by L.L. No.
2-1993, as amended.
§ 143-5 TAXATION § 143-8
143:5
on or after January 1, 2008.
§ 143-8 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 143-8
143:6
ARTICLE III
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-28-2008 by L.L. No. 2-200894]
§ 143-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to implement legislation which amends New York State
Real Property Tax Law § 458-a, Subdivision 2, to allow the Village of Webster to
increase the maximum exemption allowable under Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of said
Subdivision 2 to the schedules of levels set forth in § 143-10 of this article.
§ 143-10. Increase in allowable amount of exemption.
The Assessor of the Town of Webster is hereby directed to increase the maximum
exemption allowable for the alternative veterans exemption under New York State Real
Property Tax Law § 458-a, Subdivision 2, Paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), to $36,000,
$24,000 and $120,000, respectively.
§ 143-11. Applicability.
This article shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates
occurring on or after January 1, 2008.
94. Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Art. III, Alternative Veterans Exemption, adopted 2-12-1998 by L.L.
No. 1-1998.
§ 143-9 TAXATION § 143-11
143:7

ARTICLE IV
Utilities Tax
[Adopted 1-13-2005 by L.L. No. 1-2005]
§ 143-12. Imposition of tax.95
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State of New
York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the first day of November
1968 is hereby imposed upon every utility with the exception of any Village-owned
utility, doing business in the Village of Webster, New York, which is subject to the
supervision of the State Department of Public Service, which has a gross income for 12
months ending May 31 in excess of $500. Except motor carriers of brokers subject to
such supervision under § 240 et seq. of the Transportation Law, a tax equal to 1% of its
gross operating income from and after the first day of November 1968 is hereby imposed
upon every other utility doing business in the Village of Webster, New York, which has
a gross operating income for the 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which
taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of the Village of Webster
notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction
within such limits.
§ 143-13. Definitions.96
The terms used in this article shall be defined as provided in § 186-a of the Tax Law and
Subdivision 4 of § 5-530 of Village Law.
§ 143-14. Maintenance of records.
Every utility subject to tax shall keep such records of its business and in such form as
the Village Treasurer may require or as the Village Board may require, and such records
shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the Village Treasurer or the
Village Board may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that
they be kept longer.
§ 143-15. Filing of returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually on or before the 25th day of
February a return for the 12 calendar months ending the 31st day of December or, on
or before the 25th day of March, a return date of any portion thereof for which the tax
imposed hereby is effective; provided, however, that in lieu of the annual return required
by the foregoing provision, any utility may file quarterly on or before September 1,
December 1, March 1 and June 1, a return for the three calendar months preceding
each such return date, and in the case of the first such return, for all preceding calendar
months during which the tax imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the
gross income or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall be
filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him/her for such purpose
and shall contain such other data, information or matter as he/she may require to be
included therein. The Village Treasurer, in order to insure payment of the tax imposed,
95. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
96. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 143-12 TAXATION § 143-15
143:9
may require at any time that may be specified by him/her, and he/she may require any
utility doing business in the Village of Webster, New York, to file an annual return,
which shall contain any data specified by him/her, regardless of whether the utility is
subject to tax under this article. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of
the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof; or of a
principal officer of the corporation if such business is conducted by a corporation, to the
effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 143-16. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay to the
Village of Webster the tax imposed by this article for the period covered by such return.
Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return, or if a return is not filed
when due, on the last day on which the return is required to be filed.
§ 143-17. Insufficient or unsatisfactory returns; correction.
§ 143-18. Mailing of notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may be given
by mailing the same to the persons for whom it is intended, in a postpaid envelope,
addressed to such person at the address given by him under this article, or, if no
return has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory
to the Village Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20
days after the same is required by notice from him/her, or if no return is made for
any period, the Village Treasurer shall determine the amount of tax due from such
information as he/she is able to obtain, and if necessary, may estimate the tax on the
basis of external indices or otherwise. He/she shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and
irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within
30 days after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Village
Treasurer for a hearing, or unless the Village Treasurer, of his/her own motion, shall
reduce the same. After such hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his/
her decision to the person liable for the tax.
B. Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York if application therefor is made
within 90 days after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such
decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed,
with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the Village
Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him/her, in such amount and with such
sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such
proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and
charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the option of
the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest,
penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be
required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the
granting of such order.
§ 143-15 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 143-18
143:10
notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to whom
addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the provision of this
article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such
notice.
§ 143-19. Failure to file.
Any person failing to file a return, or to pay any tax or any portion thereof, within the
time required by this article, shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of such tax for each
month, after such return was required to be filed or such tax became due, but the Village
Treasurer, for cause shown, and if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all
or any portion of the penalty fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 143-20. Refunds.
§ 143-21. Tax to be part of operating costs.97
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the utility and
may be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others but
shall constitute a part of the operating costs of such utility.
§ 143-22. Failure to pay.98
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this article, the
Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Board, bring an action to enforce
payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be
paid to the Village Treasurer. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property
of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
A. If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof shall
make application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall
determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously or
illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the amount so determined.
B. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative
of the Village Treasurer. However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid
pursuant to a determination of the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided, or of
his/her own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or if it shall have been
established in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of
the State of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds
shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An application for a
refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the
revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the Village Treasurer may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his/her determination, the
Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and he shall be
entitled to an order to review such determination under said Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York, subject to the provisions
hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such order.
97. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
98. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 143-18 TAXATION § 143-22
143:11
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 143-23. Additional rule and regulations.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have power to make such
reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the
exercise of his/her powers and the performance of his/her duties, and to prescribe the
form of blanks, reports and other records relating to the administration and enforcement
of the tax, to take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within
the line of his/her official duty under this article, and to subpoena and require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 143-24. Confidentiality of returns.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it
shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any agent, clerk or employee of the
Village of Webster to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross
income or gross operating income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any
return under this article. The officers charged with the custody of such returns shall
not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them
in any action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf of the
State Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax
Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding
under the provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person or his duly authorized
representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the publication
of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and the
items thereof, or the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons
who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this
article, together with any relevant information which, in the opinion of the Village
Treasurer may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection by
the Village Attorney or other legal representative of the Village of Webster of the
return of any person who shall bring action to set aside to review the tax based
thereof, or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or by both, and
if the offender be an officer, clerk or employee of the Village of Webster, he shall
be dismissed from office and shall be incapable of holding any office or
employment for the Village of Webster for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer may exchange
with the chief fiscal officer of any city or any other Village in the State of New
York information contained in returns filed under this article, provided such city or
other Village grants similar privileges to the Village of Webster and provided such
information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Village Treasurer shall,
upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with any information contained in
such returns.
§ 143-22 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 143-25
143:12
§ 143-25. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article shall be paid
into the treasury of the Village of Webster and shall be credited to and deposited in the
general fund of the Village.
§ 143-26. Severability.
If any part or provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance be adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall be confined in its operation to the part or provision or application directly involved
in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect
or impair the validity of the remainder of this article or the application thereof to other
persons or circumstances, and the Village of Webster hereby declares that it would
have passed this article or the remainder thereof had such invalid application or invalid
provision been apparent.
§ 143-27. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the Secretary of
State in accordance with § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
§ 143-25 TAXATION § 143-27
143:13

ARTICLE V
Exemption for Disabled Persons with Limited Income
[Adopted 2-28-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
§ 143-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to exempt from real property taxes property owned by
certain physically disabled persons with limited income as authorized by § 459-c of the
Real Property Tax Law.
§ 143-29. Applicability.
This article shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates
occurring on or after January 1, 2008.
§ 143-30. Grant of exemption.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 459-c of the New York State Real Property Tax
Law, as most recently amended, real property located within the Village of Webster
owned by persons with disabilities, or real property owned by a husband and wife, or
both or by siblings, at least one of whom has a disability, and whose income, as hereafter
defined, is limited by reason of such disability, shall be exempt from taxation by the
Village of Webster to the extent provided in the schedule under § 143-31.
§ 143-31. Schedule of income eligibility.
A. No exemption shall be granted if the income of the owner, or the combined income
of the owners of the property, for the income year immediately preceding the date
of making application for exemption exceeds the sum set forth in the following
schedule. Such real property shall be exempt to the extent provided in the schedule.
B. The tax exemption provided by § 459-c of the New York State Real Property Tax
Law shall apply for Village tax purposes to all real property located within the
Village of Webster, subject to the requirements and limitations of such statutes and
based upon the income schedule.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
$26,000 or less 50%
More than $26,000 but less than
$27,000
45%
$27,000 or more but less than $28,000 40%
$28,000 or more but less than $29,000 35%
$29,000 or more but less than $29,900 30%
$29,900 or more but less than $30,800 25%
$30,800 or more but less than $31,700 20%
$31,700 or more but less than $32,600 15%
§ 143-28 TAXATION § 143-31
143:15
§ 143-32. When effective; applicability.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the appropriate filings as required by law
and shall apply to assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status dates occurring
on or after January 1, 2008.
Annual Income
Percentage of Assessed Valuation
Exempt from Taxation
$32,600 or more but less than $33,500 10%
$33,500 or more but less than $34,400 5%
§ 143-31 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 143-32
143:16
Chapter 156
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Snowmobiles — See Ch. 123.
§ 143-32 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 143-32
156:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 156-1. Definitions.
§ 156-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Village Board, or its designee, shall install and maintain traffic control devices when
and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make effective the provisions of
this chapter, and may install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as it
may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 156-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article 1 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section for the purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE —The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the absence of a
curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.99
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD—Whenever certain hours are named herein or on
traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard which is in current use in
this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations adopted under
the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby established a system of schedules,
appearing as Article VI of this chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations
after adoption. Such schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they
refer. All regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule as
indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Village Board in accordance with provisions of
the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by an officer or agency
authorized by the Village Board to adopt regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
99. Editor's Note: The former definition of "holidays," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
12-11-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014.
§ 156-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-3
156:3

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 156-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of those streets
described in Schedule I (§ 156-32), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-5. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets or highways
within the Village of Webster is hereby established at 30 miles per hour, except on any
controlled-access highway hereafter constructed in the Village limits, except that the
speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule II (§ 156-33) shall be as indicated in said schedule.
§ 156-6. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 156-34), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 156-7. Required turns.
Required turns shall be as follows:
§ 156-8. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IV (§ 156-35), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of the locations
described in Schedule V (§ 156-36), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at
any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 156-37), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 156-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VII (§ 156-38), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
A. Main Street West at Barrett Drive. All westbound traffic in the right lane on Main
Street West must turn right onto Barrett Drive.
§ 156-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-12
156:5
§ 156-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 156-39), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
§ 156-13. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IX (§ 156-40), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 156-12 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-13
156:6
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 156-14. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or official traffic control device.
§ 156-15. General provisions.
A. Parking of any vehicle in the streets of the Village of Webster between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. is hereby declared unlawful.
B. Parking is prohibited on spaces and zones on the streets of the Village as may be
indicated by suitable signs erected by the Village authorities.
C. Parking of motor vehicles in any of the Village streets with motor running for
longer than five minutes during the hours from 7:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. is hereby
declared unlawful.
D. Time limitations on parking in sections of parking lots owned, leased or controlled
by the Village of Webster shall be set by the Village Board, and signs and markings
giving due notice of the permitted parking times shall be installed. All use of
parking lots shall comply with the posted times. In the event of any violation, the
Village may have the vehicle removed and impounded, with costs of removal and
storage charged against the owner thereof.
E. Parking areas within parking lots owned, leased or controlled by the Village of
Webster shall be designated by the Village Board. Signs and markings giving notice
of the permitted parking areas shall be installed. No vehicle shall park outside of
the designated areas. Any vehicle parked within a parking lot owned, leased, or
controlled by the Village of Webster shall be parked wholly within one designated
parking space and shall not extend into drive lanes or outside of designated parking
areas. Trailers connected to a motor vehicle may park across two designated in-line
parking spaces in a parking lot owned, leased, or controlled by the Village of
Webster but shall not be parked in any lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. Trailers which are not connected to a registered motor vehicle shall not be
parked in a parking lot owned, leased, or controlled by the Village of Webster at
any time. In the event of any violation, in addition to any other prosecution or
penalties, the Village may have the vehicle removed and impounded with costs of
removal and storage charged against the owner thereof. [Amended 1-9-2020 by
L.L. No. 2-2020]
F. Parking in any of the lots owned, leased or controlled by the Village of Webster of
any vehicle which is not duly registered for use on the highways of the State of New
York is hereby declared unlawful. The Village may have the vehicle removed and
impounded, with costs of removal and storage charged against the owner thereof.100
100.Editor's Note: Original § 156-15G, regarding parking in the south municipal parking lot, added 4-22-1999 by L.L. No.
5-1999, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-16
156:7
§ 156-16. Parking for handicapped.
§ 156-17. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule X (§ 156-41), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-18. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XI (§ 156-42), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-19. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule XII (§ 156-43), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
A. Parking restricted in designated spaces. After establishment of specially marked
parking spaces for handicapped persons, no person shall park a motor vehicle in
such space, unless a handicapped person is either a passenger, driver or occupant of
the vehicle and the vehicle contains a designation issued by the Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles, pursuant to § 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, which shall
be displayed as required by the above statute, or the vehicle is registered pursuant
to Vehicle and Traffic Law § 404-a and the vehicle is being used for the
transportation of a severely disabled or handicapped person. [Amended 5-10-2012
by L.L. No. 3-2012]
B. Location of designated spaces. The following locations are designated as
handicapped parking spaces:
(1) On Main Street, south side, 50 feet east of the exit driveway of the Village Hall
parking lot, one space.
(2) In the Village parking lot behind the Village Hall, the first three spaces closest
to the Village Hall in the middle of the parking lot. [Amended 5-10-2012 by
L.L. No. 3-2012]
(3) On Lapham Park, west side, the first space closest to Main Street.
(4) In the Village parking lot, north of 39 West Main Street, the first space closest
to the building on the east side of the parking lot.
(5) On the east side of South Avenue, the first space south of the south entrance to
12 South Avenue. [Added 5-10-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
(6) On the south side of East Main Street, the western most space located in front
of 37 East Main Street. [Added 5-10-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
(7) Any space within the municipal boundaries of the Village of Webster
designated as reserved for handicapped parking, and signed in accordance to
§ 1203-c(2)(a) or 1200(d) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. Both on-street and
off-street parking spaces shall be included in this provision. [Added
5-10-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 156-16 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-20
156:8
§ 156-20. Parking prohibited during certain hours and during certain events.
[Amended 8-25-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in, or during certain events
described in, Schedule XIII (§ 156-44) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any
street or parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made part of this
chapter.
§ 156-21. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XIV (§ 156-45) of
any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said schedule, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-22. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XV (§ 156-46) of
any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said schedule, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-23. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in Schedule XVI
(§ 156-47) at any time between the hours listed in said schedule of any day, unless
otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said schedule,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 156-24. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof described in
Schedule XVII (§ 156-48), attached to and made a part of this chapter, except at the
angle designated and only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof
where angle parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon
shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 156-25. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 156-49), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 156-26. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 156-50), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 156-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-26
156:9

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 156-27. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 156-28. Towing from privately owned property without vehicle owner's
permission. [Added 11-25-2008 by L.L. No. 11-2008]
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public parking lot
within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which
affects that portion of the public highway or parking lot upon which said vehicle is
parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Village Board, or its designee.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking lot within
the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may
be removed by or under the direction of the Village Board, or its designee.
A. No person shall tow, remove, impound or otherwise disturb any motor vehicle,
other than an abandoned vehicle as defined in § 156-27 of this chapter, without
permission of the vehicle owner, from privately owned property in the Village of
Webster, other than property which is solely residential and contains fewer than
five residential units, unless there is posted on the property, in a clearly conspicuous
location at the entrance to the parking lot, a sign or notice conspicuous both day and
night relating, in clear and concise English, and of a size at least 12 inches by 24
inches, with lettering at least 2 1/2 inches high and in a color contrasting to that of
the background, that unauthorized vehicles will be removed at the vehicle owner's
expense and providing the towing company's name, telephone number and address
where towed vehicles may be retrieved. The towing company shall be responsible
for assuring that signs meeting the requirements of this section are posted and
maintained.
B. No person shall tow a vehicle from privately owned property in the Village of
Webster without permission of the vehicle owner to a location 2 1/2 miles from the
four corners of the Village of Webster. [Amended 8-13-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
C. The towing company shall immediately notify the Webster Police Department of
all vehicles towed from a location within the Village of Webster without permission
of the vehicle owner and shall provide the Webster Police Department with such
information as the Police Chief may require.
D. The towing company shall notify the Village Board of Trustees at the end of each
month of all vehicles towed from a location within the Village of Webster without
permission of the vehicle owner.
E. No person shall place a parking boot on, or otherwise immobilize, a vehicle owned
by another person which is parked on private property.
F. Penalties for offenses. Violations of this section shall be as follows: for first time
offense: $75; for second offense: $175; for each offense thereafter: $200.
G. Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the towing of a vehicle
§ 156-27 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-28
156:11
§ 156-29. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Village Board, or its
designee, may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place at the expense
of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem the same upon
payment to the person with whom stored of the amount of all expenses actually and
necessarily incurred in effecting such removal and storage, such storage charges not to
exceed an amount per day or fraction thereof as set by the Village Board.
§ 156-30. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Village Board, or its designee, to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge and to notify
that person of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the amount which will
be required to redeem the same. The Village Board, or its designee, shall also, without
delay, report to the Village Clerk the removal and disposition of any vehicle removed as
provided in this article.
through the Village of Webster from a destination outside of the Village of Webster
to another destination outside of the Village of Webster, nor to the towing of
a vehicle from or to a destination outside of the Village of Webster as long as
said vehicle is towed with permission of the vehicle owner by a towing company
without a place of business or storage lot in the Village of Webster.
§ 156-28 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-30
156:12
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 156-31. Penalties for offenses.101
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision of this
chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
more than $150 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment for not more than
45 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $450 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
101.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 156-31 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-31
156:13

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 156-32. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-4, traffic control signals shall be installed at
the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 156-33. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-5, speed limits other than 30 miles per hour
are established as indicated upon the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Krieger Road [Added
8-11-2005 by L.L. No.
6-2005102]
25 Entire length
Orchard Street [Added
10-24-2002 by L.L. No.
1-2002]
25 From Route 250 west to the Village line
Phillips Road 35 Entire length
§ 156-34. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-6, the following described streets or parts
thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Parking lot entrance and
driveway at 45 North Avenue
East Between its intersection with North
Avenue and its intersection with the
Utz Lower Parking Lot
§ 156-35. Schedule IV: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-8, no person shall make a U-turn at any of
the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
102.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the installation of a wheelchair sign.
§ 156-32 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-36
156:15
§ 156-36. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-9, no person shall make a turn of the kind
designated below at any of the following intersections:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 156-37. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-10, no person shall make a right turn when
facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 156-38. Schedule VII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-11, the following described intersections are
hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Apartment parking lot exits Both Daniel Drive
Ashwood Lane — Reynolds Road
Baker Street — Main Street
Barrett Drive — Main Street
Champion Avenue — Cobb Street
Champion Avenue — Phillips Road
Clover Drive — Dunning Avenue
Clover Drive — South Avenue and North Avenue
Cobb Street — Champion Avenue
Commercial Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
Corning Park — Main Street
Corning Park — Sanford Street
Corning Park Parking Lot — Corning Park
County Manor Way — Phillips Road
Curtice Park — Main Street
Curtice Park Both Fuller Avenue
Curtice Park West Its extension westerly through the
Village Manor Subdivision
Daniel Drive — Main Street
§ 156-36 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-38
156:16
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Daniel Drive — Reynolds Road
Daniel Drive exits Both Apartment parking lot
Dean Springs Drive parking
lot
— Main Street
Dean Springs Drive — Parking lot road
Dean Springs Drive — Reynolds Road
Donovan Street — Phillips Road
Donovan Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
Dunning Avenue — Main Street
Dunning Avenue — Meadow Drive
Dunning Avenue — South Avenue and North Avenue
Dunning Avenue Both Fuller Avenue
Elm Street — Dunning Avenue
Elm Street — Lapham Park
Firehouse parking lot exit — South Avenue and North Avenue
Foster Drive [Added
1-25-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
— Krieger Road
Foster Drive [Added
1-25-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
— Phillips Road
Fuller Avenue — Dunning Avenue
Fuller Avenue [Added
11-25-2008 by L.L. No.
12-2008]
— London Road
Fuller Avenue — South Avenue and North Avenue
Fuller Avenue Both Curtice Park
Fuller Avenue Both Dunning Avenue
Gordon Park — Park Avenue
Harmon Street — Curtice Park
Harmon Street — Judson Street
Hefner Drive — Judson Street
Hefner Drive — Phillips Road
Iroquois Street — Seneca Street
Iroquois Street — State Road
Judson Street — Harmon Street
Judson Street — Hefner Drive
§ 156-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-38
156:17
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Judson Street [Added
10-13-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
Both Kent Drive
Judson Street — London Road
Kent Drive [Added
10-13-2005 by L.L. No.
7-2005]
East Judson Street
Kent Drive — London Road
Kircher Park — Main Street
Kircher Park — May Street
Kittelberger Park [Added
2-23-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
Both Wishing View
Kittelberger Park [Amended
2-23-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
East North Avenue
Krieger Road (2) [Added
1-25-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
— Phillips Road
Lapham Park — Main Street
Lapham Park — Park Avenue
Lincolnshire Road — Southwick Drive
Lincolnshire Road — State Road
London Road — Judson Street
London Road — Kent Drive
Main Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
Martin Street — Orchard Street
May Street — Kircher Park
May Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
McKay Drive [Added
6-14-2001 by L.L. No.
2-2001]
— Phillips Road
Meadow Drive — Dunning Avenue
Mentis-Suter Alley South West Main Street
Mohawk Street — Iroquois Street
Mohawk Street — Seneca Street
North Avenue — Main Street
Northwest parking lot exit — South Avenue and North Avenue
§ 156-38 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-38
156:18
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Orchard Street — Phillips Road
Orchard Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
Park Avenue — Dunning Avenue
Park Avenue — South Avenue and North Avenue
Parking lot road — Dean Springs Drive
Pierce Street — Main Street
Pierce Street — Sanford Street
Pontiac Street — Iroquois Street
Pontiac Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
Railroad Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
Sanford Street — South Avenue and North Avenue
Sanford Street Both Sherwood Avenue
Seneca Street — Iroquois Street
Seneca Street — Pontiac Street
Sherwood Avenue — Main Street
Sherwood Avenue — Sanford Street
Sherwood Avenue Both Sanford Street
Southwick Drive — Lincolnshire Road
Walnut Circle — Reynolds Road
Wishing View [Added
2-23-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
South Kittelberger Park
Woodstone Circle — Orchard Street
§ 156-39. Schedule VIII: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-12, the following described intersections are
hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 156-40. Schedule IX: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-13, trucks in excess of the weights indicated
are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts thereof, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such streets:
§ 156-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-40
156:19
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-41. Schedule X: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-17, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Baker Street [Added
8-8-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
Both For a distance 130 feet south of the
south edge of the bike path along
NYS Route 104
Commercial Street [Added
6-9-2005 by L.L. No.
3-2005]
South For a distance of 200 feet west of the
west curblines of North Avenue
Corning Park Both For a distance of 200 feet south of the
south curbline of West Main Street
Curtice Park West For a distance of 293 feet south of the
south curbline of East Main Street
East Main Street [Added
6-9-2005 by L.L. No.
2-2005]
South For a distance not to exceed 185 feet
west of the west curblines of North
Avenue
East Main Street South For a distance of 410 feet west of the
center line of Phillips Road
Foster Drive East From Krieger Road to a point of
intersection approximately 300 feet
east of the Phillips Road center line
Gordon Park East From a point 221 feet north of the
north curbline of Fuller Avenue to a
point 284 feet north of the north
curbline of Fuller Avenue
Gordon Park South From Park Avenue to Fuller Avenue
Gordon Park West From Park Avenue to Fuller Avenue
Iroquois Street East North of Seneca Street
Kircher Park [Added
8-8-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
Both For a distance 90 feet south of the
south edge of the bike path along
NYS Route 104
Kittelberger Park South For a distance of 770 feet west of the
west curbline of North Avenue
Krieger Road West Entire length
§ 156-40 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-41
156:20
Name of Street Side Location
Lapham Park East For a distance of 188 feet south of the
south curbline of East Main Street
Lyon Drive [Added
8-8-2019 by L.L. No.
2-2019]
Both At the east end of Lyon Drive: for a
distance of 165 feet west of the west
ROW line of Baker Street as extended
to intersect the center line of Lyon
Drive; at the west end of Lyon Drive:
for a distance of 130 feet east of the
east ROW line of Kircher Park as
extended to intersect the center line of
Lyon Drive
Main Street Both From Barrett Drive east to Sherwood
Avenue
Main Street North For a distance of 99 feet east and west
of the center line of Kircher Park
Main Street South For a distance of 20 feet east of the
exit driveway of the Village Hall
parking lot
May Street Both Entire length
Parking lot entrance East North of 39 West Main Street, 60 feet
north of the north curbline of West
Main Street
Phillips Road Both Within the Village limits north from
Ridge Road to Klem Road
Sanford Street [Added
5-13-1999 by L.L. No.
3-1999]
South From South Avenue (N.Y. Route 250)
right-of-way west to Corning Park
South Avenue East For a distance of 180 feet south of the
Main Street south curbline
South Avenue East For a distance of 90 feet north and
south of the center line of Park
Avenue
South Avenue West For a distance of 264 feet south of the
Main Street south curbline
Village right-of-way Between South Avenue (U.S. Route
250) right-of-way and the Villageowned
property known as the "Milton
R Case Memorial Park"
West Main Street North For a distance of 20 feet east and west
of the existing parking lot driveway at
75 West Main Street
§ 156-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-41
156:21
Name of Street Side Location
West Main Street From Sherwood Avenue east to
Corning Park
West Main Street From Barrett Drive west to the
corporation line approximately 150
feet
§ 156-42. Schedule XI: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-18, no person shall stop a vehicle upon any
of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-43. Schedule XII: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-19, no person shall stand a vehicle upon any
of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-44. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours and During
Certain Events.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-20, no person shall park a vehicle between
the times specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 156-41 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-44
156:22
Name of Street Side
Hours/Days or
Events Location
Foster Drive [Added
12-27-2001 by L.L. No.
4-2001]
Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
Entire street
North Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 3:00
p.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
North from the Main Street
curb to the south curbline of
Orchard Street
Sanford Street [Added
8-25-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
Both During the annual
Firemen's
Carnival,
beginning at
12:00 midnight
on the first day of
the carnival and
ending at 12:00
noon the first
Sunday after
carnival
On the north side a distance of
1,725 feet, beginning at the
west right-of-way line of
South Avenue and continuing
westward along Sanford Street
to the west end at the west
Village corporation line. On
the south side, a distance of
1,300 feet, beginning at the
west end of the existing "No
Parking" area, approximately
325 feet west of the west
right-of-way line of South
Avenue, and continuing
westward along Sanford Street
to the west end at the west
Village corporation line
Sherwood Avenue
[Added 8-25-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
Both During any and
all sporting events
as defined in
§ 156-1 that are
held at Spry
Middle School
For a distance of 1,600 feet,
beginning at the south rightof-
way line of Sanford Street
and continuing southward to
the south right-of-way line of
Wood Street
Sherwood Avenue
[Added 8-25-2016 by
L.L. No. 2-2016]
Both During the annual
Firemen's
Carnival,
beginning at
12:00 midnight
on the first day of
the carnival and
ending at 12:00
noon the first
Sunday after
carnival
For a distance of 2,550 feet,
beginning at the south rightof-
way line of West Main
Street and continuing
southward to the south rightof-
way line of Wood Street
§ 156-45. Schedule XIV: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-21, no person shall stop a vehicle between
the times specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 156-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-45
156:23
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-46. Schedule XV: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-22, no person shall stand a vehicle between
the times specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-47. Schedule XVI: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-23, no person shall park a vehicle for longer
than the time limit specified upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Lapham Park West 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From the south side of Main
Street's south sidewalk south to a
point 30 feet north of the traffic
island
Main Street Both 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From each curbline of Pierce
Street and its northerly projection,
east to the west curbline of
Kircher Park and its southerly
projection; except the no-parking
zones established by the State of
New York at the Four Corners
and by the Village of Webster in
front of the Village Hall
South Avenue East 10 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 180 feet south of the
Main Street south curbline to a
point 200 feet south of the Main
Street curbline
South Avenue East 1 hr.; 8:00 a.m. to
7:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 230 feet south of the
Main Street south curb to the
south line of the Fire Hall
property projected easterly
South Avenue West 10 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m./Monday
through Saturday
From a point 264 feet south of the
Main Street south curbline to a
point 304 feet south of the Main
Street south curbline
§ 156-48. Schedule XVII: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-24, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle designated:
§ 156-45 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 156-48
156:24
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-49. Schedule XVIII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-25, the following described locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-50. Schedule XIX: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 156-26, the following described locations are
hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 156-48 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 156-50
156:25

Chapter 162
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Plumbing — See Ch. 101.
Sewers — See Ch. 113.
§ 162-1. Connections to public water supply.
All connections to the public water supply or applications for connection thereto shall
comply with the Monroe County Water Authority’s “Rules for the Sale of Water and the
Collection of Rents and Charges” currently in effect and as amended.
§ 156-50 WATER § 162-1
162:1

Chapter 166
WEEDS AND GRASS PLOTS
§ 166-1. Vacant property to be kept free of weeds.103
Owners of vacant property in the Village of Webster shall keep the same free from
noxious weeds and growth in excess of 10 inches in height by mowing or chemically
treating the property.
§ 166-2. Trimming of grass plots required.104
Owners of residential, business and industrial lots shall keep the grass and grass plots
cut and trimmed so as not to exceed 10 inches in height. The lots and property referred
to above include the entire lot out to the street pavement line.
§ 166-3. Failure to comply.
On failure to comply with §§ 166-1 and 166-2 hereof, after written notice of 10 days to
the last known address of the taxpayer, the Village may enter upon the premises, mow or
chemically treat the property and charge the expense thereof to the property so affected
by including it in the next annual tax levy against said property, pursuant to § 4-412,
Subdivision 1, of the Village Law of the State of New York.
§ 166-4. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
103.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
104.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 162-1 WEEDS AND GRASS PLOTS § 166-4
166:1

Chapter 175
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 30.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 50.
Gasoline stations and repair shops — See Ch. 58.
Noise — See Ch. 85.
Adult uses — See Ch. 93, Art. II.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 130.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 137.
§ 166-4 ZONING § 166-4
175:1

ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 175-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "1976 Zoning Local Law of the Village of Webster,
New York."
§ 175-2. Word usage.
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following rules shall apply:
§ 175-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building the use of which is customarily incidental to
that of the main building and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the
main building.
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT — Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction
with a wireless communications facility or wireless support structure. The term
"accessory equipment" includes but is not limited to utility or transmission equipment,
power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and storage
sheds, shelters or similar structures.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
ACCESSORY USE —
A. Words used in the present tense shall include future tense.
B. The singular includes the plural.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual.
D. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
E. The term "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or structure, shall be
construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied," except as to nonconforming uses or structures. [Amended 6-9-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
F. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. [Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
A use, not otherwise contrary to law, customarily incidental to the use of a building
for dwelling purposes and including:
The office or studio of a physician or surgeon, dentist, artist, musician, lawyer,
architect, teacher or other like professional persons residing on the premises.
There shall be no more than four paid employees or assistants. This "accessory
use" shall not apply to Residential R-1-13.6 and Residential R-1-9.6 Districts.
[Amended 4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
(1)
Home workshops which do not constitute a nuisance by reason of smoke, odor,
vibration, dust or noise. There shall be no paid employees or assistants.
(2)
A.
§ 175-1 ZONING § 175-3
175:3
ALTERATION OF BUILDING — Any change in supporting members of a building,
except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any
change in use from one district classification to another; or removal of a building from
one location to another.
ANTENNA — An apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting radio frequency
(RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed location pursuant to FCC
authorization, for the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled
information services. For purposes of this definition, the term "antenna" does not include
an unintentional radiator, mobile station, or device authorized under 47 CFR Part
15.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
APARTMENT — A room or suite of two or more rooms designed or used solely as
a residence in a building not used as a hotel, rooming house or boardinghouse or for
other transient occupancy. The terms "apartment" and "apartment building" shall not
be deemed to include a hotel, motel, automobile court, bed-and-breakfast, tourist home,
furnished rooming house, dormitory, boarding home, convalescent home, rest home,
nursing home or other accommodation used for transient occupancy.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
APARTMENT BUILDING — Any structure divided into four or more individual
apartments which share common entry, internal circulation or parking facilities, and the
totality of said structure is contained within a single parcel with a single tax account
identification number.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
APARTMENT COMPLEX — More than one apartment building, each divided into
three or more apartments, designed or used solely for residential purposes detached and
grouped together on a single parcel.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
APARTMENT HOUSE—A multifamily dwelling or a building consisting of more than
two apartments.
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN FEATURES — A prominent or significant part or
element of a building, structure or site. Architectural features include, but are not limited
to, the following:[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
Customary home occupations such as millinery and dressmaking conducted by
a person residing on the premises, with no paid employees or assistants. The
foregoing does not include tailor shops, barbershops or hairdressing shops.
This "accessory use" shall not apply to Residential R-1-13.6 and Residential
R-1-9.6 Districts. [Amended 4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
(3)
An "accessory use" may be conducted in the main building or in an accessory
building, but in the case of uses provided for in Subsection A(1) and (3) above,
such use shall not occupy a floor area greater than 300 square feet. There shall
be no commercial display visible from the street or advertising, except for a small
professional nameplate or announcement sign not larger than two square feet in
area. [Amended 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
B.
ARCADE — Passage or walkway covered over by a succession of arches or vaults
supported by columns.
A.
AWNING — A movable ornamental roof-like protective cover over a door,
entrance, window or outdoor service area that projects from the facade of a structure
B.
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:4
AREA, BUILDING — The minimum first-floor area used for living purposes shall
be the horizontal area of a building measured at the ground level along the exterior
foundation walls, excluding accessory buildings, open porches, terraces, steps and
garages, whether attached or unattached.
ASSEMBLY USE — A building or structure where groups or individuals voluntarily
meet to pursue their common social, educational, religious, recreational, or other
interests, but not including an association or group organized to render, purchase or
otherwise make use of a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise. For
the purposes of this definition, assembly uses do not include temporary festivals, animal
shows and similar outdoor events, or conference centers/convention centers.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA — An area of open land with accessory buildings, used
for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles and where no repair work is
done.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE, LIMITED[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012] —
and is constructed of durable materials, including but not limited to fabrics and/or
plastics. An awning shall not be considered a "building overhang" (see below). Also
referred to as a "canopy."105
CORNICE — The uppermost section of moldings along the top of a wall or just
below a roof.
C.
FASCIA—Any horizontal surface which spans across the top of columns or across
the top of a wall. Specifically, used to describe the horizontal "fascia board" which
caps the end of rafters outside a building.
D.
PROJECTION — A vertical or horizontal break in a building facade which moves
the wall surface outward.
E.
RECESS — A vertical or horizontal break in a building facade which moves the
wall surface inward
F.
General definition. Uses that provide direct services to motor vehicles where the
driver or passengers generally wait in the car or nearby while the service is
performed. Incidental uses may include auto repair and tire sales.
A.
Examples. This classification includes the following types of specific uses:
CAR WASH — Any building, land or other premises, the principal use
and primary revenue generating activity of which is the washing, waxing
or cleaning (detailing) of automobiles or similar light vehicles. The retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels and convenience retail are permitted as
accessory uses.
(1)
QUICK LUBRICATION SERVICES — Any building used for minor
servicing and repair of automobiles and light trucks, with an emphasis on the
sale and installation of lubricants. Body and fender work or repair of heavy
trucks or vehicles and retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels are excluded
(2)
B.
105.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:5
BAR — An establishment primarily engaged in the sale and service of alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption during any period of the day as permitted by
law. Such an establishment is subject to the regulatory authority of the New York State
Liquor Authority. The incidental sale or provision of food, light fare or snacks shall not
entitle such a use to be considered a restaurant under other provisions of this chapter.
Also, the periodic provision of musical, theatrical or other forms of live or prerecorded
entertainment shall not entitle such a use to be considered a theatre or cultural use facility
under other provisions of this chapter. Synonyms include "pub" or "tavern."[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A private residence in which no more than five rooms
are set aside for overnight guests whose paid accommodations include breakfast. The
operator shall live on the premises or in adjacent premises.[Added 8-23-2001 by L.L.
3-2001; amended 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BERM — An earthen construct designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable
views and/or decrease noise.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BLOCK — The length of a street between two street intersections.[Amended
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BOUNDARY LINE — The front, rear and side lines enclosing a lot or parcel of land as
described in the owner's deed or as shown on the Village of Webster Tax Map or other
authentic map if there is sufficient deed description.[Amended 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and
intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels.
BUILDING ENTRY, PRIMARY — The primary location from which patrons, tenants,
visitors and the general public may enter or exit the building. Utility and loading doors
shall not be constituted as principal entrances unless they serve a dual purpose as
such.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING ENTRY, SECONDARY — Any entry point with restricted access and
not utilized as a primary means to access habitable or leasable space within a
building.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING ENTRY, SHARED — An entrance utilized by multiple building tenants
or occupants to access common areas and internal corridors within the building.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING FACADE, PRIMARY — Any building frontage:[Added 10-11-2012 by
L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING FACADE, SECONDARY — All other building frontages not defined as a
primary building facade.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
from this use classification.
Facing public streets and/or any drive, parking lot, public or semipublic space, with
or without a primary building entry;
A.
B. Greater than three feet from any adjacent structure in side yards; or
C. Within 50 feet of any rear property boundary.
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:6
BUILDING FOUNDATION — That part of a building, either partially exposed or
completely subterranean, which supports the structure and connects the above structure
with the land below.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The width of a building facing a street or public parking
lot; in the case of a corner lot, it may be either frontage at the option of the applicant.
Where a mall exists, "building frontage" shall mean that portion of the building
perimeter facing a street or designated parking areas; in the case of two such perimeters,
it may be either frontage at the option of the applicant.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012]
BUILDING GLAZING—Glass windows that provide transparency into the building or
structure.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation
of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the
roof.[Amended 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING OVERHANG — A permanent component of the building facade which
extends beyond the plane of the building, typically to provide shelter for entrances,
dining areas, or windows. A building overhang differs from an awning (defined herein),
in that overhangs are typically clad in solid surface materials.[Added 10-11-2012 by
L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING, MIXED-USE — Multistory buildings which include both residential and
commercial uses, integrated in a compatible fashion, generally with residential uses
located on upper stories.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING, OFFICE — A building that is divided into offices, either single or suites,
for the transaction of business other than for mercantile, retail or manufacturing purposes
where merchandise is on display and offered for sale. Offices used for a professional
business, in part or in whole, will be classed as an office building.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — Any building in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which such building is located.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUILDING, PUBLIC — Any building or structure used for municipal, civic,
ecclesiastical, recreational or other purposes not used for enterprise.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
BUSINESS OFFICE — An establishment where one conducts an occupation, trade or
profession.[Added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
CARRY-OUT OR DELIVERY RESTAURANT — An establishment which by design
of physical facilities or by packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase
of prepared, ready-to-eat foods intended to be consumed off premises and where the
consumption of foods in motor vehicles on premises is neither permitted nor
encouraged.[Added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
CLUBHOUSE — A building to house a club or social organization not conducted for
private profit and which is not an adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a public
tavern, cafe or other public place.
CO-LOCATION — The mounting or installing of a WCF on a preexisting structure,
and/or modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing a WCF on that
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:7
structure.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
CONDOMINIUM — A property subdivided into individual units for occupancy as
single-family dwellings, in which each unit owner holds fee simple title to the individual
unit, retains an individual interest as a tenant in common in common facilities and
common areas of the building and grounds which are used by all the unit owners and
in which an agreement exists among the unit owners regulating the administration and
maintenance of the property. Condominiums are governed under Article 9-B of the Real
Property Law, also known as the "Condominium Act."[Added 11-23-1981 by L.L. No.
3-1981]
CULTURAL USE FACILITY or MUSEUM — Any building, room or area designed
or utilized primarily for the presentation to the general public of live theater, dance
performances, musical concerts, cinema, lectures, exhibits of various art forms or
exhibits of cultural, historic, academic or scientific material.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L.
No. 5-2012]
DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility duly permitted by the New York State
Department of Social Welfare providing or designed to provide daycare for five or more
persons on a regularly scheduled basis. Also see § 390 of the Social Services Law of the
State of New York.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS) — A network of spatially separated
antenna sites connected to a common source that provides wireless service within a
geographic area or structure.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
DOG KENNEL — The keeping of more than two dogs that are more than six months
old.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT—A use or portion of a use which by design of physical
facilities or by service or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to
receive a service or obtain a product via a motor vehicle which may be consumed or
used on or off the premises. Such drive-through facilities include, but are not limited
to, banking teller windows, automatic teller machines, restaurant order and pickup
windows, and other pickup, delivery or transaction services deemed inclusive by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. "Drive-through," "drive-in," or "drive-up" shall be considered
synonymous terms.[Added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001; amended 10-11-2012 by
L.L. No. 5-2012]106
DRIVEWAY — On residential properties, a graveled or paved area from the street to a
garage, or to an area on which a conforming garage could be built, no more than 12 feet
wide on properties where there is no garage, or 12 feet wide for each garage stall up to
a total of 36 feet. A residence with a single stall garage may have an additional apron of
12 feet by 36 feet to facilitate two-car parking.[Added 5-13-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999]
DRY-CLEANING OUTLET — An establishment used to collect and distribute articles
or goods of fabric to be subjected to the process of dry cleaning, dyeing or stain removal,
at an off-site dry cleaning facility location.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A residence designed for or occupied by three
or more families, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. Apartment
houses are considered to be multiple-family dwellings.
106.Editor's Note: The former definition of "drive-thru," added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001, which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012.
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:8
DWELLING or RESIDENCE—A building designated or used exclusively as the living
quarters for one or more families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached residence designed for or occupied by
one family only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A residence designed for or occupied by two families
only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
EMERGENCY — A condition that 1) constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the
health, welfare, or safety of the public; or 2) has caused or is likely to cause facilities
in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss of the services provided.[Added
8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area surrounding or adjacent to a wireless support
structure within which base stations, power supplies, or accessory equipment are
located.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
FACADE — That exterior wall and roof of a building facing the front line of the
lot.[Added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
FAMILY—One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit as a traditional
family or the functional equivalent of a traditional family. It shall be a rebuttable
presumption that four or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit, who are
not related by blood, adoption, or marriage, do not constitute the functional equivalent
of a traditional family. In determining the functional equivalent of a traditional family,
the following criteria shall be present:107
FARM STAND — A temporary or permanent accessory structure, wagon or trailer, not
exceeding 240 square feet in size, for the purpose of retail sale of produce, baked goods,
and other farm products to the public.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
FARMERS' MARKET — A public market at which multiple farmers and often other
vendors sell produce directly to public consumers.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012]
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
FENCE — Anything other than living plants, trees or shrubs designed to or which in
fact does divide, enclose or screen a parcel of land or portion thereof and which does
not support any roof structure or enclose any covered living space.[Added 6-23-2005 by
L.L. No. 4-2005]
FILLING STATION — A building or premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail
A. The group shares the entire dwelling unit.
B. The group lives and cooks together as a single housekeeping unit.
C. The group shares expenses for food, rent, utilities or other household expenses.
D. The group is permanent and stable, and not transient or temporary in nature.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether the group is the functional
equivalent of a family.
E.
107.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:9
sale of fuel for motor vehicles.[Amended 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012108]
FUNERAL HOME — An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the
deceased for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the body and for the observances
held for the deceased as an incident to burial or cremation.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L.
No. 5-2012]
GARAGE, ATTACHED — A garage having a wall or a portion thereof common to a
principal building.[Added 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989109]
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — Any building, structure or lot which is used for the
repair, maintenance or equipping of automobiles.[Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
GARAGE, PRIVATE—A building or enclosed space not available to the public that is
used for the storage of automobiles, provided that no business, occupation or service is
conducted for profit therein. Storage space is to be provided primarily for the residents
on the premises. However, space may be rented for not more than two vehicles of other
than the occupants of the building to which such garage is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building or enclosed space available to the public for the
storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing and servicing of motor vehicles.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A building, structure or tract of land used for the
storage and sale of gasoline, motor fuels, lubricants, accessories, supplies and any other
materials related to the maintenance or equipment of automobiles or in which repairs,
adjustments, maintenance or equipping of automobiles is conducted. The term shall
include, without limitation, the rendering of the following services: fueling, changing oil,
water, batteries or tires; replacing fan belts, air filters or oil filters; installing windshield
wiper blades or light bulbs. The term shall not include any such establishment which
renders such services or stores such materials for a single commercial or industrial
establishment rather than offering such services and materials to the public.[Added
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL — Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in retail sales from the premises, including trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers,
pesticides, plants and plant materials. Such establishments typically sell products
purchased from others, but may sell material which they grow themselves. Also referred
to as a "garden center" or "commercial nursery."[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012110]
GREENHOUSE, PERSONAL — A structure, primarily of glass, in which temperature
and humidity can be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants, fruits or
vegetables which is accessory to the main use of the property. Personal greenhouses are
not to exceed 6,000 square feet in area, or 15% of the parcel, whichever is lesser.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
GREENHOUSE, WHOLESALE — An establishment engaged in the growing of trees,
shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, plants and plant materials for the sole purpose of
offering for wholesale purchase. A wholesale greenhouse is considered an agricultural
operation, not offering direct-to-consumer sales.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
108.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
109.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
110.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:10
5-2012]
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) — The gross size of the total floor area of the outside
dimensions of a building. These dimensions shall include the length, width and number
of stories of the facility.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA)—The gross size of the floor area of a commercial/
retail facility which is leased.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
HEALTHCARE FACILITY, OUTPATIENT — A facility providing medical care,
treatment and minor surgical procedures for non-life-threatening injuries. Such facilities
typically operate for extended hours throughout the day and are utilized as an alternative
to traditional emergency departments at hospitals. These facilities are not coincident
with primary medical care providers and are not considered medical offices.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
HEIGHT OF A TOWER-BASED WCF — The vertical distance measured from the
ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a tower-based WCF,
including antennas mounted on the tower and any other appurtenances but excluding any
lightning rod.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling,
provided that such use is carried on solely by the residents of the dwelling and is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, with no paid
employees or assistants.
HOSPITAL — A building used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human
ailments, which term includes a sanatorium, clinic, rest home, nursing home and
convalescent home.
HOTEL — A building used primarily to provide sleeping accommodations for the
transient public in which more than six rooms are available for hire.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any roofed or other solid structure or material covering
the ground through which water does not readily penetrate, including but not limited
to concrete, oil and stone, tar or asphalt pavement, or compacted gravel. Regardless of
the construction materials, any area which is used for driveway or parking purposes,
including disturbed grass, ground cover or dirt shall be considered impermeable.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE—The ratio between impermeable surface and
total land area of a lot expressed as the percentage of land covered by impermeable
surfaces.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
INN—A commercial facility for the housing and feeding of transients, containing more
than four rooms and less than 15 rooms. The facility may have accessory uses such as a
restaurant or a bar.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
JUNKYARD — A lot or part thereof, whether inside or outside a building, used
primarily for the collecting, storing and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or
discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery
or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts thereof.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVE—A business that cleans clothing or which is equipped with
individual clothes washing and drying and/or cleaning machines for the principal use of
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:11
retail customers. Use may or may not include a dry cleaning outlet.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
LOADING BERTH — An off-street space not less than 12 feet in width and 33 feet in
length, adjacent to a building and accessible from the street, for the purpose of loading
and unloading trucks.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied by, or which may be occupied by, a building and
accessory building, and including the yards and other open spaces required by this
chapter or the land shown as a separate lot or parcel on the records of Monroe County.
Any portion of a lot which is within the street right-of-way shall be excluded from any
determination of density, lot area or setback requirements of this chapter. The street
right-of-way lines shall be considered the boundary of the lot in determining density, lot
area or setback requirements.[Amended 3-22-1982 by L.L. No. 2-1982]
LOT, CORNER — A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — The aggregate area of the lot covered by principal buildings plus
each accessory building.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line,
measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
LOT WIDTH — The lot's mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
MIXED USE — A development or redevelopment that allows for the vertical and
horizontal integration of a diverse range of complementary uses in a single structure
or lot, including but not limited to residential, commercial and industry uses. A typical
mixed-use structure would have commercial retail or office uses on the first floor, and
commercial office or residential uses on the upper floors.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L.
No. 5-2012]
MODIFICATION or MODIFY — The improvement, upgrade or expansion of existing
wireless communications facilities or base stations on an existing wireless support
structure or the improvement, upgrade, or expansion of the wireless communications
facilities located within an existing equipment compound, if the improvement, upgrade,
expansion or replacement does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
MONOPOLE — A WCF or site which consists of a single pole structure, designed and
erected on the ground or on top of a structure, to support communications antennas and
connecting appurtenances.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings not more than two stories in height having
direct convenient access to a main traveled road, intended or designed to provide a series
of sleeping units for the accommodation of transients. Each sleeping unit will consist of
a minimum of a bedroom and a bathroom, and convenient access to a parking space for
each unit's occupants will be provided.
NIGHTCLUB—Any room, space, or premises operated as a commercial establishment
in which eating and/or drinking takes place, where alcoholic beverages are served
subject to the regulatory authority of the New York State Liquor Authority, and where
the provision of entertainment is the primary activity. Background music shall not be
considered as a form of entertainment for the purposes of this definition. Synonyms
include: club; nightspot; disco; social establishment; cabaret; dinner theater. Nightclubs
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:12
are subject to the regulations found in Chapter 85.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012111]
NON-TOWER WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (NON-TOWER WCF)
— Wireless communications facilities located or co-located on existing structures, such
as, but not limited to, buildings, water towers, electrical transmission towers, utility
poles, light poles, traffic signal poles, flag poles and other similar structures that do not
require the installation of a new tower. This term includes the replacement of an existing
structure with a similar structure that is required to support the weight of the proposed
WCF.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
NOXIOUS USE — Any use which is continuously or regularly offensive or injurious
by reason of the emission of excessive amounts of dust, smoke, refuse matter, odor, gas,
fumes, noise or vibration.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
OPEN PORCH — A porch open on three sides except for wire screening. A porch shall
not be considered "open" if enclosed by either permanent or detachable glass sash.
PARKING ROOM — An arrangement that utilizes parking lot medians to break up
the massing of parking lots into smaller components with a predetermined maximum
number of parking spaces each. The maximum number of parking spaces in a parking
room may vary between zoning districts.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
PARKING, SHARED — A legally binding agreement between two or more property
owners to provide for the shared utilization of an aggregate number of parking spaces
that collectively meets the parking needs of each party.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012]
PARKING SPACE — An area for the temporary parking of a motor vehicle, capable of
containing a rectangle 10 feet wide and 20 feet long and clear to a height of seven feet,
together with access aisles for maneuvering and passage to and from the public street.
The minimum width of the aisle, whether serving spaces on one or both sides, shall be 24
feet. Such parking spaces and such access aisles shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt,
crushed stone or gravel and shall in no instance be on bare earth or grass areas.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION OR ACCOMMODATION — An improved pathway
at least five feet in width devoid of obstructions or hazards and intended for use by
pedestrians to commute between destinations, including but not limited to buildings,
structures, parks and open spaces, parking areas, the sidewalk system or other
walkways.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
PERSON — Individuals, corporations, companies, associations, joint stock companies,
firms, partnerships, limited liability companies, corporations and other entities
established pursuant to statutes of the State of New York, provided that "person" does
not include or apply to the Village, or to any department or agency of the Village.[Added
8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment primarily engaged
in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, such as
a barbershop or beauty parlor, shoe repair, dry cleaning, tailoring or dressmaking,
optician, health club, clothing, rental shop, photographic studio and other similar
services.[Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
111.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:13
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main or principal use
of the lot on which said building is located.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An establishment primarily engaged in providing
professional services which are licensed by either the federal government, state
government, or professional society such as doctors, dentists, lawyers, accountants,
engineers, architects and other similar services. Electricians and plumbers are excluded
from this definition.[Added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
PROPRIETARY HOME — A multiple residence within which there is nursing care,
supervisory care and medical care and treatment of the aged and infirm.
PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC FACILITY — Any one or more of the following uses,
including grounds and accessory buildings necessary for their use:[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
PUBLIC REALM — All areas legally open to public use, such as public streets,
sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys and parks, as well as the interior and
areas surrounding public buildings.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
PUBLIC REALM AMENITY—Structures or improvements open to the general public
and intended to strengthen the urban fabric and enhance the pedestrian experience,
such as but not limited to sidewalks, landscaped open spaces, public seating, public art,
gathering spaces and crossing aids.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Includes facilities for activities, such as bowling,
movies, theatres, pool halls and physical fitness facilities, but does not include those
activities included under § 93-5 of this Code.[Added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL — A place designed and equipped for
the conduct of sports, leisure-time activities and other customary and usual recreational
activities. Business primarily devoted to the amusement of the general public such as
golf courses and driving ranges, bowling alleys, indoor amusement arcades and health
clubs. Incidental food service is also included.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
REPLACEMENT — The replacement of existing wireless communications facilities
on an existing wireless support structure or within an existing equipment compound
due to maintenance, repair or technological advancement with equipment composed
of the same wind loading and structural loading that is substantially similar in size,
weight and height as the wireless communications facilities initially installed and that
does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing wireless support
structure.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
A. Religious institutions.
Public parks, playgrounds and recreational areas when authorized or operated by a
governmental authority.
B.
C. Schools.
D. Public libraries.
E. Not-for-profit fire, ambulance and public safety buildings.
F. Day-care centers.
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:14
RESIDENCE — See "dwelling."
RESIDENTIAL USE — Those uses which are intended and designed to provide one or
more dwellings.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
RESTAURANT — A building or portion thereof where food and beverages, whether
or not alcoholic, are sold to the public for consumption on the premises.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A specific type of restaurant characterized both by
its cuisine and minimal table service. Food is offered from a limited menu; is cooked
in bulk in advance and kept hot; is finished and packaged to order; and is usually
available ready to take away. Typically, these establishments also include a drivethrough
facility.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
RETAIL, CONVENIENCE—Small commercial establishments, less than 3,000 square
feet in gross building area, catering primarily to residents of nearby areas, providing
frequently needed retail goods and personal services, which may include ready-to-order
and prepared foods, such as but not limited to sandwiches, pizza, and beverages. The sale
or dispensing of petroleum-based fuels and lubricants for motor vehicles shall be limited
to two pump islands. May include the sale of prefilled propane fuel tanks 40 pounds and
smaller, yet does not include the refilling of any sized propane tank. See "automotive
service, limited" for motor vehicle refueling stations.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012112]
RETAIL, NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET — Small retail establishment not to exceed
8,000 square feet in gross building area, specializing in the sale of articles such as food
products, over-the-counter or prescription drugs, tobacco products, magazines, candy,
beverages and similar convenience items. The sale of petroleum-based products shall be
limited to over-the-counter goods prepackaged by unit for retail sale, and shall exclude
the dispensing of bulk petroleum-based products. Neighborhood markets differ from
small retail by the volume of vehicular traffic generated, typically exceeding 750 vehicle
trips per day.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
RETAIL, SHOPPING CENTER — Any building or structure larger than 8,000 square
feet in gross building area in which one or more articles of merchandise, commerce or
services are provided, including but not limited to department stores, furniture stores,
appliance sales, home goods, food markets, clothing and accessory stores, and
pharmacies. Such uses may include an individual business, a building with multiple
businesses, or a parcel with multiple retail buildings.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012]
RETAIL, SMALL — Any building or structure less than 8,000 square feet in gross
building area in which a limited range of merchandise or services are provided for sale,
including but not limited to salons, clothing and accessory stores, banks, insurance sales,
small-scale grocery or nutritional goods stores, or proprietary goods manufactured or
assembled on-site. Small retail generates the lowest level of traffic compared to other
retail operations, typically below 750 vehicle trips per day.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L.
No. 5-2012]
ROAD, PRIMARY — NY Route 404, NY Route 104, and NY Route 250.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
112.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:15
ROAD, SECONDARY — All roads not defined as primary roads.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
ROOF — The exterior covering on the uppermost part of a building, with the primary
purpose to protect the building and its contents from the effects of weather. The
following additional definitions also apply:[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — A school established by a nongovernmental organization
supported by private funds for the purposes of providing education.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Any elementary or secondary school supported by public funds
and providing free education for children of a community or district.[Added 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SCREEN or SCREENING DEVICE — A method of reducing the adverse impacts
associated with noise, glare and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive or more
harmonious elements, such as vegetation, berms, fences, walls or any appropriate
combination thereof. A screen shall be opaque and shall obscure 100% of such views to
the extent prescribed herein.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — The primary purpose of this use is the provision for
the storage of personal or commercial goods in which the owner of the facility does not
have care, custody or control of the customers' goods. The facility is typically a one-story
building with an overhead door in the front or on all sides in some cases. It may also be
multiple stories and may or may not include climate-controlled buildings. Each door will
service a storage compartment. A site plan will be required that provides for the ability
to drive up to the building. This definition does not include temporary portable storage
units. Truck rentals are considered to be an ancillary use that is incidental to the principal
use; however, the minimum lot size requirement must be increased to 1.5 acres.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SENSE OF PLACE — The creation of a built environment that is unique within its
A. ROOF EAVE — The extension of the roof beyond the structural building wall.
ROOF, FALSE — A structure utilized to screen the appearance of rooftop
mechanical equipment, having the appearance of a roof structure that is integrated
and appropriate to the architecture of the building.
B.
ROOF, GABLE — A roof section with a single break at the center of the roof
structure which creates a triangular portion of wall below the sloping roof.
C.
ROOF, GAMBREL — A usually symmetrical two-sided roof with two slopes of
either side, with the upper slope positioned at a shallow angle, and the lower slope
having the steeper pitch.
D.
ROOF, HIP—A roof where all sides slope downwards to the walls, usually with a
fairly gentle slope.
E.
ROOF, MANSARD—A roof with a double pitch on all four sides, the lower slope
having the steeper pitch.
F.
ROOF, SHED—A roof that slopes only in one direction, having a side wall that is
higher than the other.
G.
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:16
surroundings and appropriate within the local or regional context, and evokes a positive
pedestrian or user experience.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SERVICE STATION—See "automotive service, limited."[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L.
No. 5-2012]
SIGN — Any material, structure or device, or part thereof, composed of lettered or
pictorial matter or upon which lettered or pictorial matter is placed, when used out-ofdoors
or on the exterior of any building, which shall display or include any letter, word,
model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in
the nature of, an announcement, direction or advertisement.
SIGN, A-FRAME (SANDWICH SIGN)—A two-sided, freestanding, ground-mounted,
nonpermanent sign shaped like an inverted V(/\), of no more than 12 square feet for each
side, used for business identification as provided for in § 175-54D(3) and F of the Code
of the Village of Webster; or for the announcement of temporary events as provided for
in § 175-54B(11), C(3), and F of the Code of the Village of Webster.[Added 5-13-1999
by L.L. No. 2-1999; amended 9-11-2008 by L.L. No. 10-2008]
SMALL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (SMALL WCF)—A wireless
communications facility, including but not limited to DAS and microcells, that meets
each of the following conditions:[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
SPACE, PRIVATE — Privately held space that is only accessible to the public upon
invitation or upon the granting of permission to enter the space.[Added 10-11-2012 by
L.L. No. 5-2012]
SPACE, PUBLIC — A publicly controlled space that is typically available and open to
the public.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SPACE, SEMIPUBLIC—A privately held space that is made available to the public for
public and private use, such as parking lots, interior and exterior circulation spaces and
other common areas.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
The structure on which antenna facilities are mounted:
(1) Is 50 feet or less in height; or
(2) Is no more than 10% taller than other adjacent structures; or
Is not extended to a height of more than 10% above its preexisting height as a
result of the co-location of new antenna facilities; and
(3)
A.
Each antenna (excluding associated antenna equipment) is no more than three cubic
feet in volume; and
B.
All antenna equipment associated with the facility (excluding antennas) is
cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume;
C.
D. The facilities do not require antenna structure registration under 47 CFR Part 17;
The facilities are not located on tribal lands, as defined under 36 CFR 800.16(x);
and
E.
The facilities do not result in human exposure to radio frequency radiation in excess
of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 CFR 1.1307(b).
F.
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:17
SPECIAL USE — A use which is deemed allowable within a given zoning district,
but which is potentially incompatible with other uses and therefore is subject to special
standards and conditions set forth for such use subject to approval by the Village of
Webster Zoning Board of Appeals.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SPECIAL USE PERMIT — The process through which an applicant applies for final
site plan approval for a special use. The requirements of the special use permit process
are in addition to requirements for the underlying zoning district and all other
requirements of this chapter, unless expressly stated otherwise.[Added 10-11-2012 by
L.L. No. 5-2012]
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications facilities and accessory equipment which render them more visually
appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in
such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods
include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, buildingmounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities constructed to
resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
STREET—A thoroughfare publicly or privately owned, open to general public use and
having a right-of-way width of 21 feet or more.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way or established property line of a street as indicated
by dedication or by deed of record.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground
or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include
buildings, walls, fences, billboards, poster panels and pools 24 inches deep or more.
However, a child's playhouse is not included in this definition.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE —
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any receptacle for water having a depth at any
point of more than two feet, or having a surface area exceeding 250 square feet, which
is intended for recreational purposes, and including all appurtenant decks, walks and
equipment constructed, installed and maintained in or above the ground outside of
the principal structure to which the pool is accessory. Private swimming pools are
subject to the regulations found in § 175-66 and shall be considered a structure.[Added
10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A publicly or privately owned pool open to the
general public or on a membership basis and having appropriate dressing room facilities,
recreation facilities and off-street parking area.[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
THEATRE — See "cultural use facility."[Added 10-11-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012]
TOURIST HOME — A private residence in which overnight sleeping accommodations
Any increase in the height of a wireless support structure by more than 10%, or by
the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing
antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; or
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which has already
been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved height or by the height
of one additional antenna array. [Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
B.
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:18
are provided for overnight transient paying guests.
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (TOWER-BASED
WCF) — Any structure that is used for the primary purpose of supporting one or more
antennas, including, but not limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and
monopoles.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
TOWNHOUSE—Single-family dwellings attached to each other by a common or party
wall in groups of not fewer than three nor more than eight, each located on a separate lot
with no side yards except on the exterior face of the two end units.
TOWNHOUSE BUILDING — A structure consisting of not fewer than three nor more
than eight townhouse units.[Added 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
TOWNHOUSE UNIT — A dwelling unit, individually owned, which makes provision
for living and sleeping facilities for one family, which is one of a series of three or
more units, having a common party wall between each adjacent unit, each with a private
outside entrance and separate utilities and located on a separate lot with no side yards
except on the exterior face of an end unit.[Added 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989]
TRAILER COURT — Any plot of ground upon which two or more occupied trailer
coaches are located.
TRAILER HOUSE — A vehicle used for living or sleeping purposes and standing on
wheels or on rigid supports.
TRANSIENT PUBLIC/TRANSIENT PAYING GUESTS — One or more persons who
pay for temporary lodging for not to exceed a period of 15 days.[Added 8-23-2001 by
L.L. No. 3-2001]
USABLE CONDITION—Compliance with all of the following requirements regarding
repair of damage and/or deterioration to structures and properties:[Added 3-9-2000 by
L.L. No. 2-2000]
Roofs. Roofs shall be repaired to prevent damage to the structure. Repairs may be
accomplished by replacing the roof or by patching the problem area. When a roof
is repaired by patching, the material used shall be similar to the existing roof in
texture, size and color.
A.
Structures. The various parts of a structure (walls, stairs, beams, floors, ceilings,
joists, rafters, etc.) shall be repaired with material of equal or better strength to be
structurally sound.
B.
Foundations. Cracks in the foundation walls shall be repaired with material that will
adhere well and prevent further deterioration.
C.
Plumbing. Plumbing systems, including supply systems and waste systems, shall be
in safe, sanitary working condition. All sinks, tubs, showers and toilets shall drain
properly without leaking. Hot and cold water systems shall provide sanitary water
without leaking. Potable hot water heating systems shall be restored to a usable,
safe operating condition. All nonworking fixtures shall be repaired or replaced.
D.
Siding. Outside siding (wood, shingles, brick, vinyl siding, etc.) shall be in a
sound condition to protect the internal structure from damage. Repair may be
accomplished by entirely replacing the surface of an entire wall, residing the entire
E.
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:19
USE—The general purpose for which land or a building is designed or for which it may
be occupied or used.
VEHICLE STORAGE—The placing of vehicles in an area for an indeterminate period,
but in any case longer than two weeks. No use may be made of the vehicles during
storage, nor may they be attached to utilities of any kind.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not limited to,
infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.[Added
8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF)—The antennas, nodes, control
boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and other equipment used
for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating
wireless communications services. Wireless communications facilities shall include
distributed antenna systems.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICANT (WCF APPLICANT) —
Any person that applies for a wireless communications facility building permit, zoning
approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way (ROW) or other Villageowned
land or property.[Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, including the
replacement of an existing structure in-kind, such as a tower-based wireless
communications facility or any other support structure that could support the placement
or installation of a wireless communications facility if approved by the Village.[Added
8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019]
YARD — An open space on a lot unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
structure or repairing a damaged area. When repairing a damaged area, the material
shall be similar to the original surface material used in kind, texture, size, shape and
color. Wood surfaces shall be painted or stained to match the original surface color.
Windows and doors. Window and door openings, which may have been initially
covered by wood or other material to protect against additional damage, shall be
made to function as they were initially designed. Windows will have the glass
replaced and all covering (plywood, etc.) removed. All exterior doors shall be
restored to a working condition so that they will open and close securely. All
temporary protective covering (plywood, etc.) shall be removed. Door locks and
handles shall be in good working order.
F.
Exterior stairs, porches, decks, entrance platforms, fire escapes and railings shall
be repaired to be structurally sound and shall be painted/treated with a protective
coating.
G.
Heating systems. Heating systems, including combustion chambers, and exhaust
systems shall be restored to a safe, functional condition to meet codes regarding
safe ventilation and fire protection.
H.
I. Junk/scrap material. All junk or scrap material shall be removed from the premises.
Electrical. Electrical fixtures, devices, wiring and systems shall be in a safe working
condition to prevent potential ignition or shock. All nonworking electrical fixtures
and wiring shall be replaced. [Added 4-13-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000]
J.
§ 175-3 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-3
175:20
upwards, except as otherwise permitted.
YARD, FRONT — Open and unoccupied space between the building line or front main
wall of a building and the front property line. In all cases where the front property line
cannot be established, 1/2 of the width of the street or road shall be added to the front
yard requirement, and the "front yard" shall be measured from the center of the street or
road pavement.
YARD, REAR — An open space on the same lot with a building, between the rear wall
of the building and the rear line of the lot and unoccupied except for parking spaces,
fences and accessory buildings, including, among others, either attached or detached
garages and open porches, which in the aggregate shall occupy not more than 30% of the
area. In the case of a corner lot, the owner may designate any interior lot line as the rear
lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An open unobstructed space on the same lot with a building, between
the building and the side line of the lot and extending through from the front to the rear
yard, which space shall be unoccupied from the ground to the sky, except for driveways,
parking space, fences and landscaping, and into which there is no extension of building
parts other than eaves with an overhang of not more than two feet, rainwater leaders,
window sills and other fixtures, open steps, and bay windows not more than 12 feet wide,
at one floor level only and for a distance not to exceed two feet.
§ 175-3 ZONING § 175-3
175:21

ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts
§ 175-4. Establishment of districts.
§ 175-5. Zoning Map.
A. For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community, the Village of Webster is hereby divided into the following districts:
[Amended 4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980113]
Residential R-1-13.6 Districts
Residential R-1-9.6 Districts
Residential R-2-9.6 Districts
Residential RM Districts
Neighborhood Business NB Districts
Central Business CB Districts
General Industrial GI Districts
West End Business District
B. In addition, Planned Unit Development PUD Districts are established for such areas
of the community as may be placed in them from time to time by action of the
Village Board.
A. The boundaries of said districts are hereby established on a map entitled the
"Official Zoning Map of Village of Webster, 1976." This map, together with all the
explanatory matter contained on it, is hereby made a part of this chapter and shall
be duly certified as such by the Village Clerk and filed according to law.114
B. If, in accordance with law, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on it, together with an
entry on the Zoning Map as follows: "On (date), by official action of the Village
Board, the following (change) changes (was) were made in the Zoning Map: (brief
description of the nature of the change)." This entry shall be signed by the Mayor
and attested by the Village Clerk, and the amending local law shall provide that
such changes or amendments shall not become effective until they have duly been
entered upon the Zoning Map. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any
person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter and punishable
under Article XX of this chapter.
C. The Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in the office of the Village Clerk,
shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings and
other structures and uses in the Village.
113.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
114.Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map is available in the Village Clerk’s office, and an unofficial version is available
on the Village website.
§ 175-4 ZONING § 175-6
175:23
§ 175-6. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
§ 175-7. Lots in two districts.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot, the uses and the regulations of the less
restricted portions of the lot may be extended not more than 10 feet into the more
restricted portion, provided that the lot has frontage on a street in the less restricted
district. The uses and the regulations of the less restricted district may be extended
farther into the more restricted district upon approval of the Board of Appeals, granted
in accordance with Article XV
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or
highways shall be construed to follow such center lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed
as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in
Subsections A and B shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on
the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
§ 175-6 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-7
175:24
ARTICLE III
Application of Regulations
§ 175-8. Application of district regulations.
§ 175-9. Uniform application as minimum requirements.
The regulations established by this chapter shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each use of structures or land within each district.
A. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building
or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein
specified for the district in which it is located.
B. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the
height; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater
percentage of lot areas; or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side
yards or other open spaces than is herein specified for the district in which such
building or structure is located.
C. No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required
about or in connection with any building or structure for the purpose of complying
with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking
or loading space similarly required for another building or structure.
D. No yard or lot or provision for off-street parking space existing at the time of
enactment of this chapter shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum
requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.
E. Damaged structures. [Added 3-9-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
(1) When structures are damaged by fire, wind or other causes, they shall
immediately (within seven days) be protected from additional damage from
vandalism and the elements. Within 90 days from the time the damage
occurred, the structure shall be permanently repaired to a usable condition or
demolished and removed.
(2) The building permit issued for such repairs shall be limited to a period of 90
days. The recipient of such a permit may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for an extension of up to six months in which to complete repairs of the
structure to bring it up to a usable condition.
§ 175-8 ZONING § 175-9
175:25

ARTICLE IV
Residential R-1-13.6 Districts
§ 175-10. Permitted structures and uses.
In Residential R-1-13.6 Districts, only the following structures and uses shall be
permitted:
§ 175-11. District regulations.
In Residential R-1-13.6 Districts, all structures and uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures.
B. Subject to site plan review and approval as provided in Article XIV: [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Schools having an academic curriculum for primary, secondary or college
students. Schools meeting the requirements and standards of Article 9 of the
Education Law for selection and development of school sites shall be
permitted without further building or land use control under this chapter upon
submission to the Building Inspector of plans and specifications, together with
evidence showing that they comply with such requirements and standards.
(2) Churches and their related uses.
(3) Libraries, fire stations, municipal office buildings and public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Telephone exchanges.
(5) Utility substations.
(6) Private swimming pools.
C. The special permit uses specified in Article XV, upon the approval of the Board of
Appeals as therein provided.
A. Required lot size.
(1) Minimum lot size of any lot permitted: 13,600 square feet in area.
(2) Minimum lot size of 50% in number of the lots appearing on any subdivision
plan submitted: 16,000 square feet in area.
B. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings, shall cover
not more than 20% of the area of the lot.
C. Front yards. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of 40 feet,
except that if there are principal structures fronting on the same street within 300
feet of either or both of the side lines of the lot, the front yard depth shall be equal
to the average of the setbacks of the nearest of such structures on each side or to the
average of such setback and 40 feet if there is such a structure on one side only, but
§ 175-10 ZONING § 175-11
175:27
not less than 20 feet in any case.
D. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard not less than 40 feet deep.
E. Side yards. Each lot shall have two side yards with a total width of not less than 20
feet, neither one of which may be less than eight feet in width at the front and rear
building line. When a lot less than 70 feet in width exists in separate ownership on
the effective date of this chapter, the total width of the two side yards may be
reduced by one foot for each foot of lot width less than 70 feet, but not to a total
width of less than 12 feet. When the total side yard becomes less than 16 feet, the
two side yards shall be of equal width.
F. Height. Dwellings and structures attached to them shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
Detached garages shall not exceed 18 feet in height. Accessory buildings shall not
exceed 10 feet in height. [Amended 2-9-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987]
G. Garages and accessory buildings. See Article XVII, § 175-59. [Added 2-9-1987 by
L.L. No. 1-1987]
§ 175-11 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-11
175:28
ARTICLE V
Residential R-1-9.6 Districts
[Added 4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
§ 175-12. Permitted structures and uses.
In Residential R-1-9.6 Districts, only the following structures and uses shall be
permitted:
§ 175-13. District regulations.
In Residential R-1-9.6 Districts, all structures and uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Subject to site plan review and approval as provided in Article XIV: [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Schools having an academic curriculum for primary, secondary or college
students. Schools meeting the requirements and standards of Article 9 of the
Education Law for selection and development of school sites shall be
permitted without further building or land use control under this chapter upon
submission to the Building Inspector of plans and specifications, together with
evidence showing that they comply with such requirements and standards.
(2) Churches and their related uses.
(3) Libraries, fire stations, municipal office buildings and public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Telephone exchanges.
(5) Utility substations.
(6) Private swimming pools.
C. The special permit uses specified in Article XV, upon the approval of the Board of
Appeals as therein provided.
A. Required lot area. Lots shall be not less than 9,600 square feet, and the minimum
lot width at the front building line shall be 75 feet.
B. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings, shall cover
not more than 25% of the area of the lot.
C. Front yards. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of 40 feet,
except that if there are principal structures fronting on the same street within 300
feet of either or both of the side lines of the lot, the front yard depth shall be equal
to the average of the setbacks of the nearest of such structures on each side or to the
average of such setback and 40 feet if there is such a structure on one side only, but
not less than 20 feet in any case. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 175-12 ZONING § 175-13
175:29
D. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard not less than 40 feet deep.
E. Side yards. Each lot shall have two side yards with a total width of not less than 16
feet, neither one of which may be less than six feet in width at the front and rear
building lines. When a lot less than 60 feet in width exists in separate ownership on
the effective date of this chapter, the total width of the two side yards may be
reduced by six inches for each foot of lot width less than 60 feet, but not to a total
width of less than 10 feet. When the total side yard width becomes less than 12 feet,
the two side yards shall be of equal width.
F. Height. Dwellings and structures attached to them shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
Detached garages shall not exceed 18 feet in height. Accessory buildings shall not
exceed 10 feet in height. [Amended 2-9-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987]
G. Garages and accessory buildings. See Article XVII, § 175-59. [Added 2-9-1987 by
L.L. No. 1-1987]
§ 175-13 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-13
175:30
ARTICLE VI
Residential R-2-9.6 Districts
§ 175-14. Permitted structures and uses.
In Residential R-2-9.6 Districts, only the following structures and uses shall be
permitted:
§ 175-15. District regulations.
In Residential R-2-9.6 Districts, all structures and uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Subject to site plan review and approval as provided in Article XIV: [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Schools having an academic curriculum for primary, secondary or college
students. Schools meeting the requirements and standards of Article 9 of the
Education Law for selection and development of school sites shall be
permitted without further building or land use control under this chapter upon
submission to the Building Inspector of plans and specifications, together with
evidence showing that they comply with such requirements and standards.
(2) Churches and their related uses.
(3) Libraries, fire stations, municipal office buildings and public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Telephone exchanges.
(5) Utility substations.
(6) Private swimming pools.
(7) Two-family dwellings.
(8) Townhouses.
C. The special permit uses specified in Article XV, upon the approval of the Board of
Appeals as therein provided.
A. Required lot area. [Amended 11-23-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
(1) Lots shall be not less than 9,600 square feet, and the minimum lot width at the
front building line shall be 75 feet.
(2) The required lot area for two-family dwellings shall be not less than 18,000
square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(3) The required lot area for townhouses shall be not less than 2,000 square feet
for each dwelling unit. There shall be a minimum of one acre for each
§ 175-14 ZONING § 175-15
175:31
townhouse group. Townhouses shall not exceed eight units per acre.
B. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings, shall cover
not more than 25% of the area of the lot.
C. Front yards. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of 40 feet,
except that if there are principal structures fronting on the same street within 300
feet of either or both of the side lines of the lot, the front yard depth shall be equal
to the average of the setbacks of the nearest of such structures on each side or to the
average of such setback and 40 feet if there is such a structure on one side only, but
not less than 20 feet in any case. [Amended 4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980;
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
D. Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard not less than 40 feet deep.
E. Side yards. [Amended 11-23-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
(1) Each lot shall have two side yards with a total width of not less than 16 feet,
neither one of which may be less than six feet in width at the front and rear
building lines. When a lot less than 60 feet in width exists in separate
ownership on the effective date of this chapter, the total width of the two side
yards may be reduced by six inches for each foot of lot width less than 60 feet,
but not to a total width of less than 10 feet. When the total side yard width
becomes less than 12 feet, the two side yards shall be of equal width.
(2) For two-family dwellings, when permitted under Article XIV as a controlled
site use, the total width of the two side yards shall be increased by 10 feet,
neither one of which may be less than 10 feet in width at the front and rear
building lines.
(3) For townhouse buildings when permitted under Article XIV as a controlled
site use, each side yard to adjacent properties shall be a minimum of 40 feet.
The minimum distance between separate townhouse buildings which make up
a townhouse development on the parcel shall be 20 feet or equal to the height
of the highest adjacent building, whichever is greater. [Amended 1-9-1989 by
L.L. No. 1-1989]
F. Height. Dwellings and structures attached to them shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
Detached garages shall not exceed 18 feet in height. Accessory buildings shall not
exceed 10 feet in height. [Amended 2-9-1987 by L.L. No. 1-1987]
G. Garages and accessory buildings. See Article XVII, § 175-59. [Added 2-9-1987 by
L.L. No. 1-1987]
§ 175-15 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-15
175:32
ARTICLE VII
Residential RM Districts
§ 175-16. Permitted structures and uses.
In Residential RM Districts, only the following structures and uses shall be permitted:
§ 175-17. District regulations. [Amended 11-23-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
In Residential RM Districts, all structures and uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Subject to site plan review and approval as provided in Article XIV: [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Schools having an academic curriculum for primary, secondary or college
students. Schools meeting the requirements and standards of Article 9 of the
Education Law for selection and development of school sites shall be
permitted without further building or land use control under this chapter upon
submission to the Building Inspector of plans and specifications, together with
evidence showing that they comply with such requirements and standards.
(2) Churches and their related uses.
(3) Libraries, fire stations, municipal office buildings and public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Telephone exchanges.
(5) Utility substations.
(6) Private swimming pools.
(7) Two-family and multiple-family dwellings, townhouses and condominiums.
(8) Private or public multiple residence and accessory buildings, approved and
regulated by the State of New York under the Social Services Law, for
residence, nursing, supervisory and medical care and treatment of the aged and
infirm.
C. The special permit uses specified in Article XV, upon the approval of the Board of
Appeals as therein provided.
A. Minimum lot size.
(1) Minimum lot area and width for single- and two-family dwellings. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(a) Lots shall be not less than 9,600 square feet, and the minimum lot width
at the front building line shall be 75 feet.
§ 175-16 ZONING § 175-17
175:33
(b) The required lot area for two-family dwellings shall be not less than
18,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(2) The minimum lot area for multiple-family dwellings shall be 20,000 square
feet, plus 3,000 square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two, and the
minimum lot width for such dwellings shall be 150 feet.
(3) The required lot area for townhouses shall be not less than 2,000 square feet
for each dwelling unit. There shall be a minimum of one acre for each
townhouse group. Townhouses shall not exceed eight units per acre.
B. Percentage of lot coverage. All buildings, including accessory buildings, shall cover
not more than 25% of the area of the lot.
C. Yards. Each lot shall have not less than the following minimum front, side and rear
yards: [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Front yards. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of 40 feet,
except that if there are principal structures fronting on the same street within
300 feet of either or both of the side lines of the lot, the front yard depth shall
be equal to the average of the setbacks of the nearest of such structures on each
side or to the average of such setback and 40 feet if there is such a structure on
one side only, but not less than 20 feet in any case.
(2) Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard not less than 40 feet deep.
(3) Side yards.
(a) Each lot shall have two side yards with a total width of not less than 16
feet, neither one of which may be less than six feet in width at the front
and rear building lines. When a lot less than 60 feet in width exists in
separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter, the total width of
the two side yards may be reduced by six inches for each foot of lot width
less than 60 feet, but not to a total width of less than 10 feet. When the
total side yard width becomes less than 12 feet, the two side yards shall
be of equal width.
(b) For two-family dwellings, when permitted under Article XIV as a
controlled site use, the total width of the two side yards shall be increased
by 10 feet, neither one of which may be less than 10 feet in width at the
front and rear building lines.
(c) For townhouses, when permitted under Article XIV as a controlled site
use, each side yard shall be a minimum of 40 feet. The minimum distance
between separate buildings which make up townhouse groupings shall be
20 feet or equal to the height of the highest adjacent building, whichever
is greater.
(4) Multiple dwellings shall not be located closer to the side and rear property
lines than a distance equal to twice the height of the principal structure.
D. Height. Single- and two-family dwellings and townhouses shall not exceed 35 feet
in height. There shall be no limit on the height of multiple-family dwellings,
§ 175-17 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-17
175:34
condominiums or nonresidential structures, except that for each foot that the height
of a nonresidential structure exceeds 35 feet, the total width of the two side yards
shall be increased by two feet and the depth of the front yard by one foot.
§ 175-17 ZONING § 175-17
175:35

ARTICLE VIII
Neighborhood Business NB Districts
[Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001: 10-11-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
§ 175-18. Purpose and intent.
The Village of Webster's 2010 Comprehensive Plan recognizes the community's desire
to maintain its village character which is supported by enhanced walkability and vibrant
economic and neighborhood environments. The purpose and intent of the Neighborhood
Business District is to encourage a variety of residential, small-scale commercial and
public uses that are viable and economically relevant into the future, and also to preserve
the unique character of the Village. The design standards provided for this district
promote the appropriate scale, form, massing, proportion and composition of
architecture to complement the historic character found within the community.
Walkability and the pedestrian experience are critical to the success of the mixeduse
districts such as Neighborhood Business, and the provision of infrastructure to
support these characteristics is required to create a service, employment and living
destination distinct from its suburban and rural counterparts. The use of traditional
architectural forms, shared parking and the equal accommodation of all users will help
offset the transportation system's dominance and provide a pleasant, unique and inviting
atmosphere.
§ 175-19. Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted within the Neighborhood Business District:
A. Uses permitted administratively:
(1) Accessory structure.
(2) Dwelling, single-family.
(3) Parks and open space, private.
B. Uses requiring site plan approval:
(1) Assembly use.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast.
(3) Building, mixed-use.
(4) Building, office.
(5) Daycare or nursery school.
(6) Dwelling, multiple-family.
(7) Dwelling, two-family.
(8) Dwelling unit, accessory.
(9) Dwelling, townhouse.
§ 175-18 ZONING § 175-19
175:37
(10) Family/caregiver apartment.
(11) Farmers' market.
(12) Farm stand.
(13) Funeral home.
(14) Greenhouse, personal.
(15) Health care facility, outpatient.
(16) Home occupation.
(17) Hospital, animal or veterinary clinic.
(18) Laundry, self-serve/dry cleaning outlet.
(19) Membership clubs.
(20) Office, professional.
(21) Place of worship.
(22) Public and semipublic facilities.
(23) Recreational facilities, commercial.
(24) Residential care facility, general.
(25) Residential care facility, limited.
(26) Restaurant or diner (without drive-through).
(27) Retail, neighborhood market.
(28) Retail, small.
(29) School, private.
(30) School, public.
(31) Swimming pool, public.
(32) Theatre.
C. Uses requiring a special use permit and site plan approval (see Article XV):
(1) Apartment building.
(2) Apartment complex.
(3) Automotive service, limited.
(4) Bar, tavern or pub.
(5) Carwash.
§ 175-19 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-19
175:38
§ 175-20. Dimensional requirements.
The following dimensional requirements apply to all lots within the Neighborhood
Business District:
(6) Cultural use facility or museum.
(7) Hotel/motel.
(8) Inn.
(9) Nightclub.
(10) Retail, convenience.
(11) Retail, shopping center.
(12) Telecommunications tower.
A. Setback distances.
(1) Front yard building setback.
(a) Minimum: 10 feet.
(b) Maximum: 20 feet.
(2) Rear yard building setback.
(a) Minimum: 1:1 ratio of building height to distance from property
boundary, but in no instance less than 20 feet.
(b) Minimum for lots abutting a residential district or use: 40 feet.
(c) Accessory structure: see Article X.
(3) Side yard building setback.
(a) Minimum: 10 feet.
(b) Minimum for lots abutting a residential district or use: 20 feet.
(c) Maximum: total aggregate distance for side yards shall not exceed 50
feet; no individual side yard shall exceed 30 feet.
(4) Parking lot and drive setback.
(a) In rear and side yards: five feet minimum.
B. Minimum lot area and frontage requirements.
(1) Area: 8,000 square feet for all uses.
(2) Frontage: 50 feet for all uses.
C. Minimum gross floor area (GFA) requirements.
§ 175-19 ZONING § 175-20
175:39
§ 175-21. Design standards.
The following design standards shall be utilized for new development applications
within the Neighborhood Business District:
(1) Single-family dwellings:
(a) One thousand one hundred square feet for single-story structures.
(b) One thousand three hundred fifty square feet for multistory structures.
(2) Two-family dwellings: 1,800 square feet.
(3) Multifamily or apartment units: 750 square feet.
D. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
E. Maximum building and parking lot surface coverage: 60% of total lot area.
F. Maximum development density:
(1) The maximum dwelling unit density shall not exceed 10 units per acre.
A. Site design.
(1) Buildings shall be oriented with primary facades parallel to primary streets.
(2) Lots with multiple buildings shall include pedestrian connections between
adjacent uses, structures and parking areas.
(3) Lots with multiple buildings shall create a well organized, accessible and
functional site. The site layout shall create a unique sense of place without
large parking lots devoid of landscaping or pedestrian accommodations and be
complementary to surrounding uses.
(4) In an effort to decrease the aggregate number of parking spaces and
impervious surface area on site, common or shared parking facilities and
access for lots with multiple buildings shall be required to the extent practical
or feasible, as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Building form and design.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals must consider the proportion, massing, and
scale of surrounding valued historic forms, and may refer applications to the
Historic Preservation Commission for recommendation and comment.
(2) The maximum gross floor area (GFA) for each story of a single building shall
be 15,000 square feet.
(3) Buildings greater than one story shall provide visual distinction between the
first floor and upper floors through the use of appropriate architectural
elements, details, materials and/or changes in facade color.
(4) In instances where the front facade is greater than 50 feet in width, delineations
and treatments, such as a recess or projection that varies the depth of the
§ 175-20 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-21
175:40
building wall, shall be used to break up its appearance.
(5) Structures shall incorporate fascias, canopies, arcades, setbacks, recesses,
projections or other design features to avoid large, undifferentiated walls.
(6) For buildings with multiple storefronts, there shall be a direct correlation
between the delineations of interior tenant spaces and exterior facade
treatments.
(7) For commercial buildings, a formal building base shall be distinguished from
the upper portions of the structure through a change of materials, color, texture
and/or projection.
C. Building entries.
(1) Primary building entrances shall face a primary street or drive. At the
discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, a side or rear entry may also be
permitted depending on the site layout.
(2) Buildings fronting on NYS Route 250 and/or NYS Route 404 and an
intersecting street shall have a primary entry on NYS Route 250 or NYS Route
404 or at the corner facing the intersecting streets.
(3) Primary entries shall be prominently designed and constructed, and shall
function as pedestrian transition areas independent of site or building signage.
D. Building windows.
(1) All new or renovated commercial or mixed-use buildings with frontage on
public streets shall provide areas of transparent glazing not less than 50% of
the wall area between the height of three feet and 10 feet from the ground
along said public street frontage. At its discretion, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may seek to vary this requirement for the renovation of former
residences.
(2) Windows shall be of a scale, proportion and extent appropriate to the overall
architectural style of the building.
(3) Window openings shall be trimmed with an appropriate material (brick, stone,
wood, wood-like, cementitious board, vinyl) to provide added definition to the
overall facade.
E. Building materials.
(1) Standard masonry block walls shall be prohibited on any primary facade.
(2) Decorative masonry materials, such as split face and textured finish blocks, are
permitted as a primary finished building material.
(3) The following materials or systems shall not be utilized on finished building
or signage exteriors:
(a) Unfinished dimensional or sheet lumber;
(b) Treated lumber (permitted only on outdoor structures for residential
§ 175-21 ZONING § 175-21
175:41
uses);
(c) Glass block;
(d) Untextured or uncoated masonry block;
(e) Spandrel glass or glass curtain walls.
F. Pedestrian accommodations.
(1) Pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns shall be designed to minimize
potential conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians and to provide enhanced
separation.
(2) Safe, convenient, efficient and dedicated pedestrian circulation pathways shall
be provided between structures and parking facilities.
(3) Parking and vehicle circulation patterns shall be designed to reduce speeds and
increase pedestrian safety, efficiency and convenience.
(4) Principal and shared pedestrian entrances for ground floor residential units
shall face the primary street and have a direct connection to the sidewalk
system, if present.
G. Buffer zones and landscaping requirements.
(1) Buffers and screens.
(a) Where a site plan within the Neighborhood Business District proposes a
nonresidential use adjacent to residential uses or districts, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall require an appropriately designed and engineered
buffer area 10 feet in depth meeting the criteria of this Subsection G.
(b) At its discretion, the Zoning Board of Appeals may also require a buffer
area meeting these requirements between multifamily uses and singlefamily
uses.
(c) The Zoning Board of Appeals, in assessing the degree and necessity of
requiring a buffer area greater and/or different from the foregoing criteria,
shall consider such aspects as the proposed development's effect on the
adjacent neighboring residential community, noise levels, traffic inflow
and outflow, environmental and pollutant effects.
(d) Buffer areas within Neighborhood Business Districts shall be planted
with a variety of evergreen and deciduous vegetation consisting of trees
and upright shrubs, forming a dense screen at the time of planting.
Vegetation shall be complementary in scale and massing to the adjacent
development both at the time of installation and at maturity.
(e) An opaque screen six feet in height shall buffer the Neighborhood
Business District from residential districts, and shall be a fully
functioning screen at the time of installation. The use of approved fencing
no greater than six feet in height shall be permitted in addition to
vegetation, but shall not be permitted as a sole means of screening the
§ 175-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-21
175:42
Neighborhood Business District from residential districts.
(f) The use of undulating earthen berms and mounds is discouraged, unless
deemed appropriate by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the specific
buffer needs.
(g) Buffer zone plant materials shall apply toward planting unit requirements
as determined by Subsection G(3).
(2) General landscaping requirements.
(a) Plant materials shall be nursery grown and selected for their hardiness for
conditions in Monroe County, NY.
(b) Plantings shall be limited to species native, hardy, salt-tolerant, known to
be noninvasive to the area, and deer-resistant.
(c) Areas that will receive continued pedestrian movement shall be paved
with concrete, solid stone, brick or concrete paving stones.
(d) Landscape plans shall be designed by an appropriate licensed
professional who shall certify as to plant hardiness.
(e) All shrub and perennial plantings, regardless of location, shall be
contained within a defined and edged planting bed containing mulch no
less than three inches in depth.
(f) All plant material shall be of the following minimum size at installation:
[1] Shrubs: 24 inches or greater in height and spread;
[2] Evergreen trees: six feet in height;
[3] Small deciduous trees: 1.5 inch caliper;
[4] Large deciduous trees: three inch caliper.
[5] Perennials: three-gallon container size minimum upon availability.
(3) Planting unit requirements.
(a) One planting unit equals:
[1] One mature shade tree;
[2] Two minor deciduous trees;
[3] Two evergreen trees.
[4] Four shrubs;
[5] Eight perennials; or
[6] Two-hundred-forty square feet of grasses or ground cover.
(b) A minimum of one planting unit shall be required for each:
§ 175-21 ZONING § 175-21
175:43
[1] Thirty linear feet or fraction thereof of lot frontage along a road; and
[2] One-thousand square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area.
(4) Retention of existing vegetation.
(a) At the discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the retention of healthy
existing vegetation on site may be utilized to satisfy up to 50% of
required planting units.
(b) Each existing mature shade tree with a trunk diameter of six inches or
greater when measured at breast height (dbh) may satisfy the requirement
for up to two planting units.
(c) Other existing trees on site with a diameter between two and six inches
dbh may satisfy requirements for up to 0.5 planting unit for each such tree
retained.
(d) Existing vegetation must be adequately protected during and after
construction, and must survive a minimum of two years beyond the
completion of construction activities to qualify as required planting units.
(5) Site landscaping.
(a) Consideration shall be given during species selection to the mature form,
habit, and size of vegetation to ensure plantings do not create safety
hazards.
(b) The use of decorative planters, the materials of which are complementary
to the primary building, may be utilized to contain no more than 20% of
required landscaping.
(c) Entry drives and areas adjacent to freestanding signage shall receive a
minimum of 10% of required planting units pursuant to Subsection G(3).
(6) Parking lot landscaping.
(a) All parking lot medians, end islands and perimeters shall be attractively
landscaped, and such landscaping shall count towards satisfying the
planting unit requirements of Subsection G(3).
(b) Major and/or minor deciduous trees shall be utilized in all end islands,
medians and parking lot perimeters. Each forty-foot island shall be
planted with two trees 20 feet on center. Each twenty-foot island shall be
planted with one tree on center.
(c) The Zoning Board of Appeals may require additional major and/or minor
tree plantings within parking areas.
(d) Parking lot islands and medians shall be vegetated and shall not be
utilized for the permanent storage and retention of stormwater. Where
appropriate, the use of green infrastructure within parking lots for the
infiltration of stormwater shall be encouraged pursuant to the most
current versions of the NYS DEC Stormwater Design Manual.
§ 175-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-21
175:44
(7) Foundation landscaping.
(a) All nonpaved areas along the building foundation shall be adequately
landscaped with deciduous and coniferous shrubs, perennials and grasses
in a defined and mulched planting bed equal to or greater than six feet in
width from the foundation.
(b) Foundation plantings shall not interfere with or block visual access to
windows and doors, and shall be maintained to a height above grade equal
to or less than four feet.
H. Lighting systems.
(1) General lighting requirements.
(a) Adequate lighting shall be provided on a site to ensure safe movement of
persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall
be of a type approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(b) Lighting shall be designed such that poles, fixtures, ornamentation and
materials are uniform throughout, of a pedestrian scale and height, and
provide for a safe pedestrian experience.
(c) Fixtures shall be "dark sky" compliant. Light trespass into adjacent
noncommercial areas shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle in intensity.
(d) Freestanding lights shall be located and protected to avoid being easily
damaged by vehicles.
(e) Lighting shall be located along streets, parking areas, at intersections and
where various types of circulation systems merge, intersect or split.
(f) Pathways, sidewalks, stairways, sloping or rising paths, building
entrances and trails shall be lit for safety.
(2) Site lighting design.
(a) Fixture heights shall be between 12 and 20 feet in height, with shorter
poles along sidewalks and pedestrian zones, and taller poles within
parking areas.
(b) Fixture mounting height, direction and intensity shall be determined
based on the minimum requirements necessary to efficiently and safely
illuminate the area, and shall comply with the following lighting intensity
standards:
[1] Parking lots: an average of two footcandles.
[2] Intersections: three footcandles.
[3] Pedestrian areas: average of 0.6 footcandle.
(c) Building-mounted lighting shall be of a style complementary to the
architectural character of the building and surroundings.
§ 175-21 ZONING § 175-21
175:45
(d) Where practical, building-mounted lighting shall not solely be utilized as
area lighting in place of pole-mounted lighting along public and private
rights-of-way, sidewalk and pedestrian zones, and parking areas.
I. Parking and parking lots.
(1) The following off-street parking space requirements shall apply within the
Neighborhood Business District:115
(a) Dwellings: 1.5 spaces per unit, excluding garage spaces, plus one
additional space per three dwelling units for visitors in non-single-family
detached developments.
(b) Hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast: one space per guest room, plus one
space per three seats for conference and event space at maximum
occupancy.
(c) Car wash: minimum four stacking spaces per stall.
(d) Commercial office uses: maximum one space per 300 gross square feet.
(e) Commercial retail uses: maximum one space per 300 gross square feet.
(f) Medical use: two for each treatment room, plus one for each employee.
(g) Restaurant uses: maximum one space per two dining room seats, plus one
space per employee.
(h) Places of worship and assembly: maximum one space per each four seats
at maximum lawful occupancy as determined by the Fire Marshal.
(i) Day-care facility: one space per staff member, plus one off-street loading
space per five students.
(j) All other uses: maximum one space per 330 gross square feet, plus one
space per employee.
(2) Parking lots shall be divided into rooms of no more than 50 parking spaces
through the use of vegetative medians.
(3) Landscape islands shall be installed such that no single row of parking stalls
exceeds 10 spaces without an island to provide a visual break. Double rows of
parking stalls shall not exceed 20 spaces without a landscape island.
(4) All islands shall be a minimum of six feet in width. Interior parking lot islands
along double rows shall be 40 feet in length. Perimeter islands and those along
interior single rows shall be 20 feet in length.
(5) No parking spaces shall be located in front yards between the front building
facade(s) and the primary abutting street(s). This standard shall also be upheld
for corner lots.
J. Shared parking and access.
115.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-21 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-21
175:46
(1) The provision for shared access and parking among adjacent properties shall
be required to internalize traffic circulation and reduce turning movements
onto roadways. Applicants are encouraged to investigate common or shared
parking opportunities between adjacent principal businesses with differing
peak hours.
(2) An applicant proposing to use a shared parking arrangement to satisfy offstreet
parking requirements shall submit a shared parking analysis
demonstrating its feasibility. The analysis shall address, at a minimum:
(a) The size and type of the proposed development;
(b) The anticipated use(s) of the property;
(c) The anticipated rate of parking turnover; and
(d) The anticipated peak parking and traffic load for all uses that will be
sharing off-street parking spaces.
(3) The Applicant shall furnish sufficient evidence of a viable and legally binding
shared parking agreement on behalf of all involved facilities to the Zoning
Board of Appeals prior to approval of a shared parking program.
(4) All parking included under a shared parking agreement shall count towards the
numerical requirements for off-street parking as specified in Subsection I(1).
(5) Applicants approved for the use of shared parking within combined parking
lots shall not be required to provide the twenty-foot parking lot setback and
buffer requirement along the shared property boundary.
K. Public space and recreation.
(1) At the discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, mixed use commercial or
residential multifamily projects shall provide publicly accessible open space
for the use and enjoyment of customers, tenants, and residents of the
development, yet in no instance shall such requirement exceed 15% of the total
lot area.
§ 175-21 ZONING § 175-21
175:47

ARTICLE IX
Central Business CB Districts
§ 175-22. Permitted structures and uses.
In Central Business CB Districts, only the following structures and uses shall be
permitted:
§ 175-23. District regulations. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
In Central Business CB Districts, all structures and uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures. [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. Subject to site plan review and approval as provided in Article XIV: [Amended
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Schools having an academic curriculum for primary, secondary or college
students. Schools meeting the requirements and standards of Article 9 of the
Education Law for selection and development of school sites shall be
permitted without further building or land use control under this chapter upon
submission to the Building Inspector of plans and specifications, together with
evidence showing that they comply with such requirements and standards.
(2) Churches and their related uses.
(3) Libraries, fire stations, municipal office buildings and public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Telephone exchanges.
(5) Utility substations.
(6) Private swimming pools.
(7) Retail stores, banks, business offices, personal service establishments,
mortuaries and undertaking establishments.
(8) Restaurants including carry-out and delivery, hotels, motels, indoor theaters
and recreation establishments. [Amended 4-22-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
(9) Gasoline service stations and commercial garages.
(10) Public utility and municipal storage yards and repair shops.
(11) Kennels, pet shops and veterinary establishments.
(12) Parking lots.
C. The special permit uses specified in Article XV, upon approval of the Board of
Appeals as therein provided.
A. Required lot area. Lot area and minimum lot width for buildings used wholly or
§ 175-22 ZONING § 175-23
175:49
partially for dwelling purposes other than by one person acting as a caretaker
shall be as follows. There shall be no limitation on lot area or width for all other
structures.
(1) Minimum lot area and width for single- and two-family dwellings.
(a) Lots shall be not less than 9,600 square feet, and the minimum lot width
at the front building line shall be 75 feet.
(b) The required lot area for two-family dwellings shall be not less than
18,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(2) The minimum lot area for multiple-family dwellings shall be 20,000 square
feet, plus 3,000 square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two, and the
minimum lot width for such dwellings shall be 150 feet.
(3) The required lot area for townhouses shall be not less than 2,000 square feet
for each dwelling unit. There shall be a minimum of one acre for each
townhouse group. Townhouses shall not exceed eight units per acre.
B. Percentage of lot coverage. All residential buildings, including accessory buildings
and all others permitted in Residential RM Districts, shall cover not more than 25%
of the area of the lot. All commercial buildings permitted shall cover not more than
90% of the area of the lot.
C. Front yards. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum setback of zero feet
from the right-of-way, except that, where a principal structure is located within 100
feet in a different zoning district, then the minimum setback shall be the average of
the zero setback and the setback of the adjacent structure in the adjacent zoning
district. [Added 8-23-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
D. Rear yards. Where a Central Business CB District adjoins a residential district at
the rear, rear yard requirements shall be as follows: There shall be a rear yard not
less than 40 feet deep. Otherwise, the rear yard requirements shall be as follows:
There shall be a rear yard of at least 20 feet in depth, except that if the building is
used for dwelling purposes other than by one person acting as a janitor or caretaker,
the rear yard shall be 30 feet deep. For a building that extends through from street
to street, front yard requirements shall apply on each frontage.
E. Side yards.
(1) For structures to be used wholly or partially for dwelling purposes other than
by one person acting as a janitor or caretaker, side yards shall be as follows:
(a) Each lot shall have two side yards with a total width of not less than 16
feet, neither one of which may be less than six feet in width at the front
and rear building lines. When a lot less than 60 feet in width exists in
separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter, the total width of
the two side yards may be reduced by six inches for each foot of lot width
less than 60 feet, but not to a total width of less than 10 feet. When the
total side yard width becomes less than 12 feet, the two side yards shall
be of equal width.
§ 175-23 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-23
175:50
(b) For two-family dwellings, when permitted under Article XIV as a
controlled site use, the total width of the two side yards shall be increased
by 10 feet, neither one of which may be less than 10 feet in width at the
front and rear building lines.
(c) For townhouses, when permitted under Article XIV as controlled site use,
each side yard shall be a minimum of 40 feet. The minimum distance
between separate buildings which make up townhouse groupings shall be
20 feet or equal to the height of the highest adjacent building, whichever
is greater.
(2) For structures designed wholly for nonresidential use, no side yards shall be
required except:
(a) When a lot in a Central Business CB District adjoins a lot in a residential
district at the side, a side yard shall be provided on the residential side of
the business lot, with a width not less than that of the narrowest yard
required in the adjoining residential district.
F. Height. There shall be no limit on building height, except that for each foot that the
height of a building or structure exceeds 55 feet, the total width of the two side
yards shall be increased by two feet.
§ 175-23 ZONING § 175-23
175:51

ARTICLE X
General Industrial GI Districts
§ 175-24. Permitted structures and uses.
In General Industrial GI Districts, only the following structures and uses shall be
permitted:
§ 175-25. District regulations.
In General Industrial GI Districts, all structures and uses shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. All structures and uses, except the following which are specifically prohibited:116
(1) Any use of land or building which creates any dangerous, injurious, noxious
or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive, radioactive or other hazard; noise
or vibration; smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; heat, cold,
dampness or movement of air; electrical or other disturbance; glare; liquid or
solid refuse or wastes; a condition conducive to the breeding of rodents or
insects; or other substance, condition or element in a manner or amount as to
adversely affect the surrounding area.
(2) Residential uses.
(3) Trailer courts.
(4) Junkyards, automobile graveyards and disassembly plants.
B. The special permit uses specified in Article XV, upon approval of the Board of
Appeals as therein provided.
C. Adult use establishments as defined in Chapter 93, Article II, of the Code of the
Village of Webster. [Added 3-8-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
A. Minimum lot size. There shall be no minimum lot area or width.
B. Percentage of lot coverage. All structures, including accessory structures, shall
cover not more than 50% of the area of the lot.
C. Yards. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Front yards. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of 40 feet,
except that if there are principal structures fronting on the same street within
300 feet of either or both of the side lines of the lot, the front yard depth shall
be equal to the average of the setbacks of the nearest of such structures on each
side or to the average of such setback and 40 feet if there is such a structure on
one side only, but not less than 20 feet in any case.
(2) Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard not less than 40 feet deep.
116.Editor's Note: Original Subsections A and B, which listed structures and uses permitted in Central Business CB
Districts and controlled site uses, respectively, and which immediately preceded this subsection, were repealed 6-9-1994
by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 175-24 ZONING § 175-25
175:53
(3) Side yards. Each lot shall have two side yards with a total width of not less
than 20 feet, neither one of which may be less than eight feet in width at the
front and rear building line. When a lot less than 70 feet in width exists in
separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter, the total width of the
two side yards may be reduced by one foot for each foot of lot width less than
70 feet, but not to a total width of less than 12 feet. When the total side yard
becomes less than 16 feet, the two side yards shall be of equal width.
D. Height. No structure shall extend above any of the planes inclined at a slope of one
foot vertically for each foot horizontally, rising upward over the lot from each of
the property lines.117
E. Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. There shall be no activities which emit
dangerous radioactivity at any point or which create electrical disturbance, except
from domestic household appliances, adversely affecting the operation at any point
of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.
F. Water and air pollution. There shall be no emission into the atmosphere of fly ash,
dust, fumes, vapors, gases and other forms of air pollution which can cause damage
to life or property nor discharge into any sewage disposal system or stream or into
the ground of any materials of such a nature or temperature as can contaminate any
watercourse or water supply or can cause any dangerous or unhealthy condition,
except upon approval of applicable government agencies having jurisdiction to
regulate such air or water pollution.
G. Heat, cold, movement of air or dampness. There shall be no activities which
produce any material effect on the temperature, motion or humidity of the
atmosphere at the lot line or beyond.118
117.Editor's Note: Original Subsection E, Fire and explosion hazards, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 8-8-1977.
118.Editor's Note: Original Subsection I, Semifireproof construction, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 175-25 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-25
175:54
ARTICLE XI
West End Business District
[Added 4-22-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
§ 175-26. Permitted structures and uses.
In the West End Business WEB District, only the following structures and uses shall be
permitted:
§ 175-27. District regulations.
In the West End Business WEB District, all structures and uses shall be subject to the
A. Single-family dwellings and their accessory uses and structures.
B. Subject to site plan approval as provided in Article XIV:
(1) Schools having an academic curriculum for primary, secondary or college
students. Schools meeting the requirements and standards of Article 9 of the
Education Law for the selection and development of school sites shall be
permitted without further building or land use control under this chapter upon
submission to the Building Inspector of the plans and specifications, together
with evidence showing that they comply with such requirements and
standards.119
(2) Churches and their related uses.
(3) Libraries, fire stations, municipal office buildings and public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Telephone exchanges.
(5) Utility substations.
(6) Private swimming pools.
(7) Retail stores, banks, business offices, personal service establishments,
mortuaries and undertaking establishments.
(8) Restaurants, drive-in establishments, hotels, motels, indoor theaters and
recreation establishments.
(9) Gasoline service stations and commercial garages.
(10) Public utility and municipal storage yards and repair shops.
(11) Kennels, pet shops and veterinary establishments.
(12) Parking lots.
C. The special permit uses specified in Article XV, upon approval of the Board of
Appeals as therein provided.
119.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-26 ZONING § 175-27
175:55
following regulations:
A. Required lot area. Lot area and minimum lot width for buildings used wholly or
partially for dwelling purposes other than by one person acting as a caretaker shall
be as follows. There shall be no limitations on lot area or width for all other
structures.
(1) Minimum lot area and width for single- and two-family dwellings.
(a) Lots shall be not less than 9,600 square feet, and the minimum lot width
at the front building line shall be 75 feet.
(b) The required lot area for the two-family dwellings shall be not less than
18,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(2) The minimum lot area for multiple-family dwellings shall be 20,000 square
feet, plus 3,000 square feet for each dwelling unit in excess of two, and the
minimum lot width for such dwellings shall be 150 feet.
(3) The required lot area for townhouses shall be not less than 2,000 square feet
for each dwelling unit. There shall be a minimum of one acre for each
townhouse group. Townhouses shall not exceed eight units per acre.
B. Percentage of lot coverage. All residential buildings, including accessory buildings
and all others permitted in Residential RM Districts, shall cover not more than 25%
of the area of the lot. All commercial buildings permitted shall cover not more than
90% of the area of the lot.
C. Front yards. Each lot shall have a front yard with a minimum depth of 20 feet,
except that if there are principal structures fronting on the same street within 150
feet of either or both of the side lines of the lot, the front yard depth shall be equal
to the average of the setbacks of the nearest of such structures on each side or to the
average of such setback and 20 feet if there is such a structure on one side only, but
not less than eight feet in any case.
D. Rear yards. Where a West End Business WEB District adjoins a residential district
at the rear, rear yard requirements shall be as follows: There shall be a rear yard of
not less than 40 feet deep. Otherwise, the rear yard requirements shall be as follows:
There shall be a rear yard of at least 20 feet in depth, except that if the building is
used for dwelling purposes other than by one person acting as a janitor or caretaker,
the rear yard shall be 30 feet deep. For a building that extends through from street
to street, front yard requirements shall apply on each frontage.
E. Side yards.
(1) For structures to be used wholly or partially for dwelling purposes other than
by one person acting as a janitor or caretaker, side yards shall be as follows:
(a) Each lot shall have two side yards with a total width of not less than 16
feet, neither one of which may be less than six feet in width at the front
and rear building lines. When a lot less than 60 feet in width exists in
separate ownership on the effective date of this chapter, the total width of
the two side yards may be reduced by six inches for each foot of the lot
§ 175-27 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-27
175:56
width less than 60 feet, but not to a total width of less than 10 feet. When
the total side yard width becomes less than 12 feet, the two side yards
shall be of equal width.
(b) For two-family dwellings, when permitted under Article XIV as a
controlled site use, the total width of the two side yards shall be increased
by 10 feet, neither one of which may be less than 10 feet in width at the
front and rear building lines.
(c) For townhouses, when permitted under Article XIV as a controlled site
use, each side yard shall be a minimum of 40 feet. The minimum distance
between separate buildings which make up townhouse groupings shall be
20 feet or equal to the height of the highest adjacent building, whichever
is greater.
(2) For structures designed wholly for nonresidential use, no side yards shall be
required except:
(a) When a lot in a West End Business WEB District adjoins a lot in a
residential district at the side, a side yard shall be provided on the
residential side of the business lot, with a width not less than that of the
narrowest yard required in the adjoining residential district.
F. Height. There shall be no limit on building height, except that for each foot that the
height of a building or structure exceeds 55 feet, the total width of the two side
yards shall be increased by two feet.
§ 175-27 ZONING § 175-27
175:57

ARTICLE XII
Planned Unit Development PUD Districts
§ 175-28. Purpose.
§ 175-29. District regulations.
Once lands have been rezoned by the Village Board as a Planned Unit Development
PUD District, the set of use and dimensional specifications elsewhere in this chapter
are replaced by an approval process in which the approved plan becomes the basis for
continuing land use controls, provided that in Planned Unit Development PUD Districts
all structures and uses shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. Planned Unit Development PUD Districts are designed to encourage and facilitate
the construction of more efficient and desirable suburban development than can be
accomplished within the framework of conventional zoning categories. They will
permit the development of urban areas which will foster a sense of community
among their residents. Development at a large scale is most conducive to a design
that will accomplish this purpose, because it provides opportunities for integral
development. Through a diversity of compatible land uses, such an integrated
development plan will give the project area a distinctive visual character and
identity. To assist in accomplishing this purpose, a planned unit development will
be permitted the maximum freedom in design; however, it will be required to
provide extensive environmental amenities, and its development plans and its
detailed site plans will be subject to intensive review by the Village Board to assure
the project's compatibility with adjacent development, the general neighborhood
and the Village as a whole.
B. No Planned Unit Development PUD District shall be created by amendatory action
of the Village Board, and no site plan approval shall be rendered by such Village
Board permitting the issuance of a building permit without full compliance with the
following regulations and procedures. It is understood that certain public benefit
features will be required to ensure that the quality of design and amenity are
sufficient to justify the departure from conventional zoning restrictions. Emphasis
on the preservation of natural site attributes will be accomplished through design
and placement of structures which complement rather than conflict with the natural
terrain and other natural features such as trees and watercourses. The following
regulations will not specify precise rules for the arrangement of the structures on
the site, but rather will require that they be compatible with each other and with
adjacent developments.
A. Minimum area. No land shall be designated for a Planned Unit Development PUD
District if it is too small, too narrow in width, too irregular in shape or with
topography too excessive to be planned and developed in a manner consistent with
proper land use. Under normal circumstances, the minimum area required to qualify
for a Planned Unit Development PUD District shall be 50 contiguous acres of land.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend the waiver of this minimum if the
Board finds the proposed development to be in accord with the general Village
development plan.
B. Permitted uses. All variety and types of residential uses shall be permitted with
§ 175-28 ZONING § 175-29
175:59
§ 175-30. Procedure.
accessory and associated uses, including, where necessary and/or appropriate, the
full range of nonresidential uses needed to serve the residential development in
suitable spatial relationships and with adequate connectors.
C. Density of development. In approving the development plan and site plan, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall specify the respective maximum densities permitted
if the uses proposed were in existing zoning districts, treating lot area requirements
as net area. Modifications of the density requirements may be made by the Board if
conditions of the plan so warrant.
D. Open space. In every planned unit development, a minimum of 50% of the total
area of the tract shall be provided as open space. In a planned unit development,
"open space" is that outdoor common property not occupied by structures, roads,
service areas and their immediate surroundings and set aside in whole or in part to
preserve the natural scenic beauty or openness of the area and for recreational use
and enjoyment by the owners and occupants of the planned unit development so as
to enhance the present or potential value of the remaining lands in the planned unit
development. That open space which contains such structures, improvements and/
or landscaping as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of
the owners and occupants of the planned unit development in their active and
passive recreational purposes shall be designated as developed open space.
Vehicular parking areas may be considered as developed open space for the purpose
of this chapter.
E. Common property. Common property in a planned unit development is a parcel or
parcels of land, together with the improvement thereon, the use and enjoyment of
which is shared by the owners and occupants of the development. When common
property exists, the ownership of such common property may be either public or
private. Where common property exists in private ownership, satisfactory
arrangements must be made for the improvement, operation and maintenance of
such common property and facilities.
F. Ownership. The tract of land for a planned unit development may be owned, leased
or controlled either by a single person, a corporation or a group of individuals or
corporations. An application must be filed by the owner or jointly by the owners of
all property included in the tract. In the case of multiple ownership, the
development plan and the site plan shall be binding on all owners.
A. General. The fact that an application complies with all of the specific requirements
set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a presumption that the proposed
development would result in a more efficient and desirable development than could
be accomplished by the use of conventional zoning categories or that it would result
in compatibility with the surrounding development; nor shall such compliance, by
itself, be sufficient to require the approval of the development plan, the site plan or
the granting of the zoning amendment to create a planned unit development. Such a
zone shall be recommended or rejected by the Zoning Board of Appeals on a
finding that the application is or is not proper for the comprehensive and systematic
development of the Village of Webster.
§ 175-29 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-30
175:60
B. Application for development plan approval. In order for the Zoning Board of
Appeals and the developer to reach an understanding on basic design requirements,
the developer shall submit a plan of his or her proposal to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Such a plan shall be to scale and shall be supplied in such form and
quantity as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require and shall include the
following information in addition to any other information which the applicant
deems necessary to support the application:
(1) The principal physical characteristics of the site, including an analysis of the
soils and subsoils and the location of major stands of trees, streams,
floodplains and rock outcroppings.
(2) The topography of the site with contour intervals of not more than five feet of
elevation; areas of the site where grades exceed 3%; portions of the site with a
moderate to high susceptibility to erosion, flooding or ponding; and a
preliminary grading plan with five-foot contour intervals.
(3) An analysis of the relationship of the site to the surrounding community,
including significant parcels of vacant land and the character of nearby builtup
areas.
(4) Principal ties to the community at large with respect to transportation,
circulation, water supply, sewage disposal and other pertinent public utilities.
(5) General description of the provision of other community facilities such as
schools, fire protection and cultural facilities, if any, and some indication of
how these needs are to be accomplished.
(6) The proposed land use plan indicating the location, number and types of
dwelling units in each residential area; business and/or industrial areas; parks,
playgrounds, recreational structures and facilities; open spaces; common
property and all other uses; and the major and minor circulation pattern with
all existing rights-of-way and easements, parking areas and pedestrianways.
(7) A generalized landscaping plan; the overall drainage system.
(8) If the development is to be staged, an indication of how the staging is to
proceed.
(9) Any other information required by the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
purpose of enabling it to evaluate the compliance of the proposed planned unit
development with the general intent of this article.
C. Review of development plan by Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall review the development plan and its related documents and shall
render its report within 62 days of the date when all of the necessary application
material has been presented. The Zoning Board of Appeals may hold formal or
informal public hearings on the development plan to assist it in the preparation of
its report. If no report has been rendered within 62 days, unless such time limit has
been extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the Zoning Board of Appeals,
it may be assumed by the applicant that the report is favorable, and the Village
Board shall be so informed. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 175-30 ZONING § 175-30
175:61
(1) A favorable report shall be based on the following findings which shall be
included as part of the report:
(a) The proposal implements the goals and policies expressed in the Village
Comprehensive Plan better than can be accomplished with conventional
zoning categories.120
(b) The proposal meets all the general requirements of § 175-29 and, if
necessary, any of the specific requirements of this section.
(c) The proposal represents a creative approach to the use of land through
innovation and flexibility.
(d) The proposal is conceptually sound in that it meets a community need and
it conforms to accepted design standards in the proposed roadway system,
land use configuration, open space system and drainage system.
(e) There are adequate services and utilities available or proposed to be made
available in the construction of the development.
(2) An unfavorable report shall state clearly the reasons therefor and, if
appropriate, point out to the applicant what might be necessary to receive a
favorable report.
D. Application for planned unit development districting. Upon receipt of a report from
the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Village Board may then consider the application
for the Planned Unit Development District as any other application for amendment
of the zoning local laws and may establish a date for and conduct a public hearing
for such an amendment as provided by law.
E. Zoning for planned unit development. If the Village Board grants the redistricting
to planned unit development, the Zoning Map shall be so amended. When rezoning
a parcel, the Village Board shall establish the maximum number of dwelling units
therein and may, if it feels it necessary in order to fully protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the community, attach to its zoning resolution any additional
requirements for the applicant to meet. Such requirements may include, but not be
limited to, visual and acoustical screening, land use mixes, order of construction
and/or occupancy, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, availability of sites
within the area for necessary public services such as schools, firehouses and
libraries, protection of natural and/or historic sites and other physical or social
demands. The Village Board shall further approve the final site plan prior to
effectuation of the Zoning Map amendment and the issuance of a building permit
by the Building Inspector. Such site plan may constitute the entire development or,
if staged, only a portion thereof. If the project is to be constructed in stages, only
that portion receiving site plan approval may be effectuated.
F. Site plan submission. In an area designated as a Planned Unit Development PUD
District, a detailed site plan must be approved by the Village Board prior to the
issuance of a building permit. The site plan for all or a portion of the Planned Unit
Development PUD District shall be consistent with the development plan. It shall
120.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-30 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-30
175:62
show:
(1) All of the information normally required in the submission of a preliminary
subdivision plan.
(2) An area map showing the applicant's entire holding, that portion of the
applicant's property under consideration and all properties, subdivisions,
streets and easements within 500 feet of the applicant's property.
(3) The proposed location, coverage and use of all buildings; if a building is a
multiple-family dwelling, the number of dwelling units, classified by the
number of bedrooms.
(4) All roads, streets, parking areas and pedestrianways.
(5) Existing topography and final grading plan at contour intervals of not more
than two feet.
(6) The proposed landscaping, lighting and screening plans. The sites of all public
or private common areas, including schools, parks, playgrounds and other
community facilities, identifying land to be dedicated to public use.
(7) If the application is related to past and future stages and to the entire
development.
(8) The calculation of building coverage, parking facilities, areas of open space,
density and common areas.
(9) Any other information required by the Zoning Board of Appeals to evaluate
the consistency of the detailed site plan within the approved development plan.
G. Site plan review. Upon review by the Zoning Board of Appeals of the detailed site
plan, it shall determine:
(1) Whether the detailed site plan is consistent with and carries out the intent of
the development plan as approved.
(2) Whether, in the opinion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the arrangements for
the ownership and maintenance of the common land are workable and will
result in the permanent preservation of such land for its indicated use.
(3) Whether, if the application involves less than the total area of the planned unit
development, the development proposed under the site plan could exist by
itself as a unit capable of sustaining an environment of continuing quality and
stability consistent with the development plan.
H. Site plan approval. Within 62 days of the receipt of the application for site plan
approval, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a recommendation for approval
or disapproval and so notify the Village Board, which shall take final action
thereon. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) Upon approving an application, the Village Board shall endorse its approval
on a copy of the site plan and forward it to the Building Inspector, who shall
then issue a building permit to the applicant if the project conforms to all other
§ 175-30 ZONING § 175-30
175:63
§ 175-31. Other regulations.
applicable requirements.
(2) Upon disapproving an application, the Village Board shall notify the applicant
and the Building Inspector, in writing, of its decision and its reasons for
disapproval.
A. Following initial construction and occupancy, any changes other than use changes
shall be considered as special permit requests under Article XV of this chapter.
B. Use changes must be considered as zoning amendments and must be acted upon as
such by the Village Board.
C. No building permits shall be issued for construction within a Planned Unit
Development PUD District until improvements have been installed or a
performance bond provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 137,
Subdivision of Land.
§ 175-30 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-31
175:64
ARTICLE XIII
Incentive Zoning
[Added 8-23-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 175-32. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for a system of zoning incentives for the
provision of amenities or benefits that advance the Village's specific physical, cultural
and social policies in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and other Village
planning mechanisms and land use techniques, all as provided in Article 7 of the Village
Law, as amended.
§ 175-33. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all use districts in the Village of
Webster. Amenities may be located within any zoning district. Incentives consisting of
physical improvements may be located only in those zoning districts listed in § 175-35
of this article.
§ 175-34. Designated amenities.
A. The following are amenities eligible for consideration hereunder:
(1) Elder care.
(2) Child care.
(3) Infrastructure improvements (e.g., roads, parking facilities).
(4) Parkland, open space.
(5) Space for public use and enjoyment.
(6) Cultural or historic sites.
(7) Senior housing.
(8) Affordable housing.
(9) Other facilities or benefits to the Village residents.
(10) Combination of the above and/or cash in lieu thereof.
B. Amenities may be provided on or off the site in which the incentive is granted.
C. Amenities otherwise required by law shall not be eligible for consideration
hereunder.
D. If the Village Board finds that an amenity is not immediately feasible or cannot be
reasonably provided, the Village Board may require a cash payment in lieu of the
provision of the amenity. These funds shall be placed in a trust fund to be used by
the Village Board exclusively for specific community benefits or amenities
authorized by the Board of Trustees. Cash payment shall be made prior to the
issuance of a building permit. Cash payments in lieu of amenities are not to be used
§ 175-32 ZONING § 175-34
175:65
§ 175-35. Designated incentives.
As an incentive for the provision of amenities, the Village Board may offer the following
incentives or any combination thereof within the Central Business District,
Neighborhood Business District, West End Business District, Planned Unit
Development District, Residential R-2-9.6 District, Residential RM District, or the
Industrial District:
§ 175-36. Initial review by Village Board.
§ 175-37. Plot plans submission.
to pay general and ordinary Village expenses.
A. Increase of building and/or unit density.
B. Change of use.
C. Changes of height, setback and bulk requirements.
D. Change of floor area.
E. Any other changes in requirements of this chapter.
A. Applications for incentives in exchange for amenities shall be submitted to the
Village Board. The applicant shall provide the following information with the
request:
(1) Description of proposed amenity.
(2) Cash value of proposed amenity.
(3) Exhibits containing:
(a) Description of benefits to the community of the proposed amenity.
(b) Statement that there are adequate existing public facilities (including
transportation, water supply, waste disposal and fire protection) to service
the site if developed to full potential.
(c) Statement of whether the proposed exchange of amenities for incentives
will have any significant negative environmental impacts and whether
mitigating or remediating measures are proposed.
(d) Statement that the proposed exchange of amenities for incentives is
compatible with the development otherwise permitted.
B. The Village Board shall consider the submission and determine whether further
review is warranted. If the Village Board determines that further review is
warranted, it shall forward the submission to the Zoning Board of Appeals and
notify the applicant that further submissions in accordance with this article should
be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A. The applicant shall submit two proposed plot plans for the site to the Zoning Board
§ 175-34 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-37
175:66
of Appeals.
(1) One plot plan shall be prepared showing development with the amenity, if it is
on site, and the incentive sought.
(2) One shall show development without any amenity or incentive.
B. Each plot plan shall contain the following information, and such other data as may
be requested by the Zoning Board of Appeals to permit a proper evaluation of the
proposal:
(1) An area map showing the applicant's entire holding, that portion of the
applicant's property under consideration and all properties within 500 feet of
the applicant's property.
(2) A topographic map, showing contour intervals of not more than two feet of
elevation.
(3) Site map showing the following information:
(a) The title of the drawing, including the name and address of the applicant.
(b) The North point, scale and date.
(c) The boundaries of the property plotted to scale.
(d) The existing watercourses.
(e) The location, proposed use and height of all buildings; the location of all
parking and truck loading areas, with on-site traffic flow plans and access
and egress drives to and from the site; the location of outdoor storage, if
any; the location of all existing or proposed site improvements, including
drains, culverts, retaining walls and fences; a description of the method
of sewage disposal and the location of such facilities; the location and
size of all signs; the location and proposed development of buffer areas;
and the location and design of lighting facilities. In addition, the site plan
must state the gross floor area and net floor area for each building and
delineate and state the area of each use therein, including flex space, if
any.
(f) The calculation of building coverage, parking facilities, number of
residential units and residential bedrooms per acre; areas of open space,
density and common areas.121.
(g) A tracing overlay shall be provided showing all soil areas and their
classifications and those areas, if any, with a moderate to high
susceptibility to erosion. For areas with potential erosion problems, the
overlay shall also include an outline and description of existing
vegetation.
(h) An architectural rendering, professionally prepared, showing floor
plan(s), elevations or perspective drawings of proposed structures. For
121.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-37 ZONING § 175-37
175:67
§ 175-38. Action by Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 175-39. Action by Village Board.
structures of 500 square feet or more, such rendering must indicate the
location of electrical, plumbing and heating/air conditioning service.122
C. Where the incentive consists of off-site improvements, the applicant shall submit a
site plan for the off-site improvements, prepared in accordance with this section.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, in its discretion, waive such of the foregoing as
may not be necessary for a proper review of the application.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review a complete submission and report to the
Village Board its opinion whether:
(1) The proposed amenity/incentive exchange is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(2) The proposed amenity/incentive exchange is suitable for the site.
(3) The proposed amenity/incentive development is compatible with adjoining
land uses and improvements.
(4) The proposed amenity/incentive exchange is in the best interests of the
Village.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue its report within 62 days after receipt of a
complete submission or such other time as the Village Board may determine.
A. The Village Board shall review the report of the Zoning Board of Appeals for the
purpose of determining whether further proceedings should be had thereon and
shall notify the applicant of such determination.
B. Should the Village Board determine a need for further proceedings, it shall:
(1) Comply with the provisions of the State Environmental Quality Review Act
(SEQR).
(2) Evaluate the effects of potential incentives which are possible by reason of
amenities, provided that the zoning district contains adequate resources,
environmental quality and public facilities (including adequate transportation,
water supply, waste disposal and fire protection).
(3) Consider whether the offered amenities are a sufficient quid pro quo for the
zoning incentives requested.
C. Prior to its final decision, and in conjunction with SEQR review and making the
determinations specified in the preceding subsection, the Village Board shall
conduct at least one public hearing, and such other public hearings as it may deem
advisable in fulfilling its responsibilities hereunder, each on notice published in the
official newspaper of the Village at least five days (or 14 days, if a draft
122.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-37 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-39
175:68
environmental impact statement or supplemental impact statement was required)
prior thereto.
D. Upon completion of the public hearings and termination of the SEQR process, the
Village Board shall approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions,
or deny the proposed incentive zoning application. Any approval shall include a
statement of findings that:
(1) All requirements of SEQR have been met.
(2) The proposed project, including the incentive, can be supported adequately by
public facilities available or provided as a result of the project, including
sewer, water, transportation, waste disposal and fire protection, without
diminishing the availability of such services for projects permitted as a matter
of course.
(3) The specific factual basis supporting the Village Board's decision that the
project is compatible with the purpose and intent of this chapter; that the
amenities are sufficiently advantageous to make it appropriate for the grant of
the requested incentive; and that the project will enhance the long-range assetbase
of the Village.
(4) The use of incentive zoning in the particular instance is consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
E. The Village Board will be guided by the following principles: Preference shall be
given to physical amenities benefitting the Village through: 1) its parks and
streetscape improvements; 2) its cultural enhancements and historical structures
and artifacts; and 3) physical amenities located within the immediate area of the
incentivized parcel. If the amenities are to be in the form of cash, or are to be in the
form of physical improvements located outside the zoning district in which the
incentivized premises is located or a zoning district that abuts that zoning district,
the Village Board shall, in its authorizing resolution, provide a detailed explanation
of why the amenities are more advantageous than physical amenities located in the
immediate area of the incentivized parcel.
F. Should the Village Board grant a request for incentive zoning (either with or
without modification), the Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to entertain and
act upon an application for preliminary site plan and/or subdivision approval
pursuant to this chapter and/or Chapter 137, Subdivision of Land, of the Code of
the Village of Webster.
G. Any applicant for incentives or bonuses shall pay a proportionate share of the cost
of preparing the environmental impact statement, and such charge shall be added to
any site-specific charge made pursuant to the provisions of § 8-0109 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.123
123.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-39 ZONING § 175-39
175:69

ARTICLE XIV
Controlled Site Uses
§ 175-40. Procedure for issuance of permit.124
The following procedure shall govern the issuance of a permit for the structures and uses
authorized in §§ 175-10B, 175-12B, 175-14B, 175-16B, 175-19B and 175-22B.
§ 175-41. Requirements and regulations.
A. An application for the permit, which shall include detailed area, site and
landscaping plans, shall be made to the Building Inspector, who shall immediately
refer it to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review and approve, approve with
modifications or disapprove the application to determine the compliance of the
plans with the requirements set forth in § 175-41 of this Article XIV. During its
review the Zoning Board of Appeals may have informal conferences with the
applicant and accept amended plans in substitution for those originally filed.
[Amended 4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980]
C. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall render a decision within 62 days from the day
the application was made and notify the Building Inspector of its decision. This
time within which the Zoning Board of Appeals must render its decision may be
extended by mutual consent of the applicant and Zoning Board of Appeals. If
approval is given, the Building Inspector shall issue a permit for the proposed
structure and/or use. Nothing herein shall preclude the holding of a public hearing
on any such matter on which a public hearing is not so required. [Amended
4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 2-1980; 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
D. This authority granted to the Zoning Board of Appeals is pursuant to § 7-725-a of
the Village Law. This section shall take effect immediately. [Added 4-14-1980 by
L.L. No. 2-1980; amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
A. The structures and uses authorized in §§ 175-10B, 175-12B, 175-14B, 175-16B,
175-19B, 175-22B and 175-24 shall conform to all the regulations of the district in
which they are located and to any particular regulations which apply to them under
other provisions of this chapter. In addition, they shall be oriented in their location
upon the site as to layout, screening, signs, means of access, landscaping and
architecture so that: [Amended 2-24-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
(1) The flow, control and safety of traffic shall not be adversely affected to an
unreasonable degree.
(2) There shall be reasonable compatibility in all respects with any structure or use
in the neighborhood, actual or permitted, which may be directly and
substantially affected.
(3) There shall not be any unreasonable detriment to any structure or use, actual
124.Editor's Note: Original § 51-24, Permitted structures and uses, which immediately preceded this section, was repealed
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 175-40 ZONING § 175-41
175:71
or permitted, in the neighborhood.
(4) There shall be reasonable provision for open spaces, yards and recreational
areas appropriate to the structure and use.
B. General site plan requirements. General site plan requirements shall be as follows:
[Added 11-23-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
(1) An area map showing the applicant's entire holding, that portion of the
applicant's property under consideration and all properties, subdivisions,
streets and easements within 500 feet of the applicant's property.
(2) The proposed location, coverage and use of all buildings.
(3) All roads, streets, parking areas and pedestrianways.
(4) Existing topography and final grading plan at contour intervals of not more
than two feet.
(5) The proposed landscaping, lighting and screening plans. The sites of all public
or private common areas, including schools, parks, playgrounds and other
common facilities, identifying land to be dedicated to public use.
(6) The calculation of building coverage, parking facilities, areas of open space,
density and common areas.
(7) An architectural rendering, professionally or otherwise prepared, showing
floor plan(s), elevations or perspective drawings of proposed structures. For
structures of 500 square feet or more, such a rendering must indicate the
location of electrical, plumbing and heating/air conditioning service.
[Amended 2-24-2000 by L.L. No. 1-2000]
(8) The location of all existing or proposed site improvements, including drains,
culverts, retaining walls and fences, and all existing trees over four inches in
diameter and sanitary, storm and water mains.
C. Site approval standards for multiple dwellings, townhouses and condominiums.
[Amended 11-23-1981 by L.L. No. 3-1981]
(1) Arrangement of buildings. The arrangement of buildings on the site shall be
subject to approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals after meeting the
following standards: access for residents; access for safety vehicles and
firefighters; and suitable provisions for light, air and green area surrounding
building for residents and for the preservation of the pleasant and uncrowded
residential character of the area. The layout of units shall not form long
unbroken lines of exterior walls. Groups shall be arranged to make efficient,
comfortable and convenient use of land and open space.
(2) Parking. There shall be furnished space for parking automobiles sufficient for
two automobiles per living unit. There must be space furnished, completely
off the highway and with proper access, in paved areas, large enough for one
automobile per living unit. These areas must be properly screened by
plantings. The balance of the required parking area, where not required to be
§ 175-41 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-41
175:72
enclosed, may be in paved areas beyond the concrete gutters of the streets
and adjacent to them. These shall be screened by low plantings. All parking
areas shall be agreed to by the Village but shall be maintained by the owner
of the apartment building. Multiple-family dwellings shall provide at least one
garage or carport for a minimum of 1/4 of the apartments or condominiums.
(3) Recreation area. Suitable park and recreation areas shall be developed and
maintained by the owners.
(4) Disposal unit. There shall be created structures serving each apartment house
for trash and garbage disposal. These shall be of permanent construction,
located on the plot plan, and conform in style to the apartment building. Any
unsightly features shall be masked from view by plantings. These structures
shall be securely closed from vermin and animals.
(5) General standards.
(a) The owner must make every effort to keep a homelike community
atmosphere in the apartment developments. This is a general purpose, and
specific recommendations may be made by the Zoning Board of Appeals
as requirements to the approval of development plans. In particular, the
owner shall submit a landscape development plan with grass lawns,
shrubs and trees definitely located so that a pleasant residential
atmosphere will prevail. The parking areas and service roads will be
screened by plantings sufficient to avoid asphalt monotony.
(b) Playground areas shall be located on the plans developed and maintained
by the owners, in size and location reasonably sufficient to accomplish
the needs of the residents of the apartments. The Municipal Recreation
Commission authorities may assume supervision and use of these areas at
their discretion.
(6) Performance bond. A performance bond, a letter of credit or other financial
guaranty is required to ensure the proper construction of all services in the area
and that all landscaping, park and recreation areas be developed in accordance
with the Village Board's requirements.
(7) Stairways. All stairways shall be interior stairways.
(8) Access to public streets. In townhouse groups, no individual unit shall have
direct access to a dedicated street.
(9) Utilities. All utilities shall be installed underground.
(10) Maintenance. The project developer must be able to show the Zoning Board of
Appeals a feasible method of assuring that all common lands in the
development are properly maintained and such a documented method must be
approved by the Village Board. Such maintenance agreement shall include
mowing and other landscape services, removal of snow and all other project
needs.
D. Site approval standards for gasoline service stations and commercial garages.
§ 175-41 ZONING § 175-41
175:73
(1) No pump, lubricating or other device shall be located closer to a front or side
property line than 20 feet.
(2) No major repair work shall be conducted outside of a structure.
(3) No liquid fuel, oil or similar substance shall be stored closer to a property line
than 40 feet in aboveground storage tanks nor closer than 20 feet in
underground storage tanks.
(4) All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles and similar articles shall be stored
within a structure.
(5) The site shall be located on a major road as designated in the Comprehensive
Plan of the Village of Webster.125
(6) The site shall have frontage of at least 50 feet on any street for each curb cut
to be requested.
(7) All curb cuts shall be no more than 30 feet in length and shall not break into
intersection radii.
(8) Structures used for automotive repairs shall have no openings in roof or walls
within 15 feet of any side property line.
(9) The boundary lines of a filling station or a commercial garage lot shall be at
least 300 feet from an R-1-13.6, R-1-9.6, R-2-9.6 or RM Zoning District and
the closest boundary lines of a church, school, hospital, public building, public
park or municipal building lot and 1,000 feet from the closest boundary line of
any existing or proposed filling station or commercial garage lot. [Amended
4-14-1980 by L.L. No. 3-1980]
(10) The size of the site shall be adequate so that vehicles using the station shall not
become a hazard to users of the public sidewalks or highways upon which the
station fronts.
(11) Gas stations shall require a fire prevention permit as provided in Chapter 46,
Fire Prevention, § 46-11F. [Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
125.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-41 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-41
175:74
ARTICLE XV
Special Permit Uses
§ 175-42. Permitted structures and uses.
The following structures and uses shall be permitted in the districts indicated upon the
specific approval of the Board of Appeals as provided in § 175-44 of this Article XV:
§ 175-43. Applicable regulations.
The structures and uses authorized in § 175-42 of this Article XV shall conform to all
the regulations of the district in which they are located and to any particular regulations
which apply to them under other provisions of this chapter. If any additional regulations
and safeguards will permit the findings set forth in § 175-44 of this Article XV, the
Board of Appeals shall require them as a condition of approval.
§ 175-44. Findings necessary for approval.
A. In any district:
(1) Private clubs, regulation golf courses and parks, playgrounds and privately
operated nonprofit recreational facilities.
(2) Hospitals, nursing homes and proprietary homes.
(3) Cemeteries.
(4) Charitable, educational and governmental services.
(5) Nursery schools.
(6) Excavation and topsoil removal other than on a temporary basis and
subordinate to the development of a site for uses permitted in the district.
(7) Off-site parking.126
B. In Neighborhood Business NB Districts:
(1) Residential uses.
C. In Central Business CB Districts:
(1) Residential uses.
D. In Planned Unit Development PUD Districts:
(1) Any changes of the site plan other than use changes.
E. In General Industrial GI Districts: multiple-family dwellings. [Added 6-9-2011 by
L.L. No. 1-2011]
126.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(8), added 6-13-1983 by L.L. No. 2-1983, as amended, which pertained to
communications antennas over 24 inches in height or diameter, and which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019.
§ 175-42 ZONING § 175-44
175:75
A. The Board of Appeals may approve a structure or use under this Article XV or
under any other provision of this chapter, only upon findings that the proposed
structure or use, together with such regulations and safeguards as the Board may
fix, is:
(1) Appropriate for the particular lot and location.
(2) Not unreasonably detrimental to neighboring properties, areas and districts.
(3) Consistent with an orderly and appropriate development of neighboring
properties, areas and districts.
(4) Where adjoined by existing or permitted uses, a suitable transition between
neighboring uses and districts.
(5) Oriented in the location and upon the site as required in § 175-41 of Article
XIV.
(6) An appropriate evolution of the Comprehensive Plan for the Village of
Webster.
B. An application for approval of the Board of Appeals under this Article XV shall be
immediately referred to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which may submit such
report and recommendations as it deems proper for consideration of the Board of
Appeals in its determination of the findings specified in Subsection A. The Board
of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing within 62 days from the day an
application is received on any matter referred to it under this section. The Board of
Appeals shall decide upon the application within 62 days after the conduct of the
hearing. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
§ 175-44 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-44
175:76
ARTICLE XVI
Historic Preservation
[Added 4-22-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004; amended 6-23-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
§ 175-45. Purpose.
Recognizing that the Village of Webster's rich and varied history and vibrant present
are evident in its commercial and residential buildings and surroundings and recognizing
that the preservation, protection, and enhancement and continued use of these structures
and sites serves the best interest of all people, this article is intended to:
§ 175-46. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Preserve, protect and promote the use of historic landmarks which reflect the
Village's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history.
B. Safeguard the property rights of owners.
C. Stabilize and improve property values.
D. Foster civic pride.
E. Protect and enhance the appeal of the Village for residents, tourists, and visitors and
for the use in educational purposes.
F. Encourage the harmonious orderly and efficient growth and development of the
Village.
A. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "Webster Village Historic
Preservation Commission."
B. The Commission shall consist of five members, to be appointed to the extent
available in the Village of Webster, by the Mayor as follows:
(1) At least one shall be an architect experienced in working with historic
structures, and when one is unavailable, arrangements will be made to have
one participate as a consultant;
(2) At least one shall be an historian;
(3) At least one shall be a resident of an historic district or structure;
(4) At least two shall demonstrate significant interest in and commitment to the
field of historic preservation evidenced either by involvement in a local
historic preservation group, employment, or volunteer activity in the field of
historic preservation, or their serious interest in the field; and
(5) All members shall have shown a known interest in historic preservation and
architectural development within the Village of Webster.
C. The Webster Village Preservation Commission members shall serve for terms of
six years, with the exception of the initial term of four members, two which shall
be three years, one which shall be four years, and one of which shall be six years.
§ 175-45 ZONING § 175-46
175:77
§ 175-47. Historic Preservation Commission responsibilities and authorities.
It shall be the duty of the Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission to exercise
aesthetic judgment and maintain the desirable character of sites and structures which
were issued certificates of appropriateness within the designated historic district, prevent
construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition out of harmony with existing
building insofar as style, materials, line and detail are concerned; and thus prevent
the degeneration of property, safeguard public health, prevent fire, promote safety,
and preserve the beauty and character of the Historic District. In addition to the
aforementioned powers, the Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission shall
have the power and responsibility to:
§ 175-48. Designation of landmark or historic district.
D. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three members of the
Commission's members, but not less than a majority of the full authorized
membership may approve or disapprove applications for certificate of
appropriateness applications for the designation of an individual property as a
landmark, and the approval or disapproval of applications for the establishment of
an historic district.
E. The Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission shall meet monthly on the
third Tuesday of each month.
F. The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve a period of one
year.
A. Conduct surveys of the exterior of the buildings and sites for the purpose of
determining those of historic and/or architectural significance and pertinent facts
about them.
B. Formulate recommendations concerning the preparations of maps, brochures and
historical markers for selected historic and/or architectural sites and buildings.
C. Approve or disapprove applications for certificates of appropriateness pursuant to
historic structures and sites. Approve or disapprove applications for landmark
status, and applications for the establishment of an historic district.
D. Recommend acquisition of a landmark structure by the Village government where
its preservation is essential to the purpose of this section and where private
preservation is not feasible.
E. Increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural, and architectural
preservation by developing and participating in public education programs.
F. Adopt criteria for the identification of significant historic, architectural, and cultural
landmarks in the Historic District.
G. Recommend to the Village Board, where appropriate, the acquisition of facade
easements or other interests in real property as necessary to carry out the
preservation of historic or architectural significant property.
A. Designation of an individual property as a landmark, or as part of an historic
§ 175-46 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-48
175:78
§ 175-49. Certificate of appropriateness required.
No person shall carry out exterior alterations, restorations, reconstruction, demolition,
new construction, or moving of a landmark or property within an historic district, nor
shall any person make any material change in the appearance of such property, in its
light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements which
affect the appearance and cohesiveness of the landmark or historic district, without first
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission.
§ 175-50. Criteria for approval of certificate of appropriateness.
preservation district is accomplished through the owner making application to the
Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission and the Commission approving
the owner's application. The Webster Village Historic Commission cannot
designate a property as a landmark or part of an historic preservation district
without the owner's consent. The Webster Village Historic Commission may
approve or disapprove an individual property as a landmark if it:
(1) Possesses special character or historic or aesthetic interest or value as part of
the cultural, political, economic, or social history of the locality, region, state,
or nation; or
(2) Is identified with historic personages; or
(3) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style; or
(4) Is the work of a designer whose work has significantly influenced an age; or
(5) Because of unique location or singular physical characteristic, represents an
established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood.
B. The Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission may approve or disapprove
a group of adjoining properties as an historic district if it:
(1) Contains properties which meet one or more of the criteria for designation as
a landmark; and
(2) By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct section of the
Village.
C. The boundaries of each historic district designated henceforth shall be specified in
detail on the Webster Village Zoning Map.
D. The Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing
prior to the approval of any landmark or historic district. The Commission, owners,
and any interested parties may present testimony or documentary evidence at the
hearing which will become part of a record regarding the historic, architectural, or
cultural importance of the proposed landmark or historic district. The record may
also contain reports, public comments, or other evidence offered outside of the
hearing.
A. In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall not consider changes to the interior spaces, unless
§ 175-48 ZONING § 175-50
175:79
§ 175-51. Procedure for application for certificate of appropriateness.
they are open to the public. The Webster Village Historic Preservation
Commission's decision shall be based on the following principles:
(1) Properties which contribute to the character of the historic district shall be
retained, with their historic features altered as little as possible;
(2) Any alteration of existing properties shall be compatible with its historic
character, as well as with the surrounding district; and
(3) New construction shall be compatible with the district in which it is located.
B. In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission shall consider the
following factors:
(1) The general design, character, and appropriateness to the property of the
proposed alteration or new construction;
(2) The scale of the proposed alteration or new construction in relation to the
property itself, surrounding properties, and the neighborhood;
(3) Texture, materials, and color and their relation to similar features to other
properties in the neighborhood;
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including proportion of the
property's front facade, proportion and arrangement of windows and other
openings within the facade, roof shape, and the rhythm of spacing of properties
on streets, including setback; and
(5) The importance of historic, architectural, or other features to the significance
of the property.
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate or appropriateness
(for properties that have been designated historic landmarks in accordance with this
article), the owner shall file an application for such a certificate with the Building
Inspector. The application shall contain:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of applicant;
(2) Location and photographs of property;
(3) Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent properties, if
available;
(4) Samples of color or materials to be used;
(5) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the
type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of
materials to be used, method of illumination, and a plan showing the sign's
location on the property; and
(6) Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary in order to
visualize the proposed work.
§ 175-50 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-51
175:80
§ 175-52. Alteration hardship criteria.
An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed alteration has been
denied may apply for relief on the grounds of unnecessary hardship as defined in
connection with use variance applications to this Code in § 175-76C(1)(a) through (d)
within 30 days of receiving the disapproval notice from the Webster Village Historic
Preservation Commission. The application shall be made in writing to the Webster
Village Historic Preservation Commission for review of said decision. The Webster
Village Historic Preservation Commission shall, after public notice, hold a public
hearing to which the Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission, the owners of
the property in question, and other interested parties shall be invited. Within 30 days
after the hearing, the Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission shall either
confirm or disallow the original decision.
B. No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. The
certificate of appropriateness required by this section shall be in addition to and not
in lieu of any building permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the
Village.
C. The Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission shall approve, deny or
approve the permit with modifications within 60 days from receipt of the completed
application. The Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a
public hearing on all applications at which an opportunity will be provided for the
public to present their views.
D. All decisions of the Webster Village Historic Preservation Commission shall be in
writing. A copy shall be sent the applicant and a copy filed with the Village Clerk's
office for public inspection. The Webster Village Historic Preservation
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for denying or modifying the
application.
E. Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for one year, after which time the
owner must reapply if he/she still wishes to undertake work on the property.
§ 175-51 ZONING § 175-52
175:81

ARTICLE XVII
Parking; Signs; Maintenance; Supplemental Regulations
§ 175-53. Parking requirements. [Amended 1-9-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989;
5-13-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999; 4-22-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
A. Off-street requirements. For each structure hereafter constructed or altered, the
following parking spaces shall be provided and maintained on the same lot with the
structure, except as set forth in Subsection B:
Structures Number of Parking Spaces
Single- and 2-family dwelling 2 for each dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit
Motels and hotels 1 for each guest room
Bed-and-breakfast 1 per each room plus one for owner
Churches, auditoriums, theaters, funeral
homes and other places of public
assembly
1 for each 4 seats at maximum capacity
Offices
General 1 for each 300 square feet
Medical 2 for each treatment room, plus 1 for
each doctor/dentist and other employees
Barbershop and beauty parlor 3 per chair
Stores and shopping centers
0 to 5,000 square feet of gross floor
area
1 for each 250 square feet of gross floor
area
5,000 square feet and over 20, plus 1 for each 250 square feet over
5,000
Laundromat 1 for each 3 washing/drying machines
Industrial, warehousing or
manufacturing establishment
1 for each 500 square feet of gross floor
area
Restaurants 1 for each 60 square feet of gross floor
area
Bowling alleys 10 for each alley
Other commercial enterprises 1 for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area
Institutions, hospitals and nursing
homes
1 for each 2 patients or residents
B. Off-site parking areas. Up to 100% of the parking spaces required for a structure in
Subsection A may be otherwise located upon approval of the Zoning Board of
Appeals pursuant to Article XIV and upon:
§ 175-53 ZONING § 175-53
175:83
§ 175-54. Signs, billboards and lighting. [Amended 10-23-1978 by L.L. No. 2-1978;
11-23-1981 by L.L. No. 4-1981; 3-8-1982 by L.L. No. 1-1982; 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994; 5-13-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999; 4-22-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004; 6-23-2005 by
L.L. No. 4-2005]
(1) Finding that there is insufficient available parking on the same lot with the
structure;
(2) Finding that the required spaces are provided in a permanent and accessible
manner;
(3) Finding that the off-site parking is within 500 feet of the site of the structure
and within the same or less restricted district; and
(4) Such other reasonable restrictions as may be prescribed by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
C. Loading berths. Loading berths are required for all industrial, warehousing or
manufacturing establishments in excess of 25,000 square feet in area. There shall
be one berth for each 25,000 square feet of gross floor area.
D. Business vehicles. No more than one commercial vehicle with more than four
wheels shall be parked out of doors on any lot in a residential district.
E. Unregistered vehicles and machinery may not be parked out of doors on any
property within the Village for longer than two weeks except as provided in § 58-4
of this Code. Unregistered recreational vehicles and boats may be stored outdoors
for up to six months, provided that the unregistered recreational vehicle or boat is
located behind the front line of the nearest structure. [Amended 12-28-2006 by
L.L. No. 3-2006]
F. A lot in a residential district without a principal structure shall not be used for
parking or storage of vehicles, machinery or similar equipment.
G. Reservation of parking areas. Up to 25% of the parking spaces required in
Subsection A may be landscaped and reserved for future parking upon approval of
the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Article XIV.
H. Parking is prohibited in the front, side or rear yard of any lot improved with a
building containing one to six dwelling units, except that parking is permitted on
the driveway serving the property. No driveway is permitted in that portion of a
front yard lying between the planes of the side walls of the main dwelling extended
to the front property line, except as provided in Subsection E of this section. No
driveway shall be placed closer than three feet from the property line. [Amended
6-1-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the quantity, quality, safety, and
maintenance of signs and bulletins consistent with consideration of the public
welfare, improvement of the appearance of the community and reasonable
identification of residences, businesses, and facilities in the Village of Webster.
B. General. The following shall apply to all signs and billboards, hereinafter referred
to collectively as "signs":
§ 175-53 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-54
175:84
(1) A permanent advertising display upon any structure shall be regarded as a sign
subject to this section.
(2) Sign permits, to be issued by the Building Inspector, shall be required for all
signs.
(3) The area of a sign shall be measured by the area of its background frame where
such frame has been affected by materials, paint, lighting or other means.
Where a sign consists solely of independent letters or symbols without frame,
its area shall be measured by the rectangular areas encompassing the letter or
symbol groupings.
(4) No sign attached to a building in any district shall project above the height of
the wall upon which it is attached.
(5) No illuminated sign shall direct light in a way that would cause a traffic hazard
or be unreasonably detrimental to adjoining or neighboring residences, and
any illuminated sign will be constructed and operated so as to focus the light
upon itself and prevent glare upon the surrounding areas.
(6) Other than signs permitted by these regulations, all exterior advertising
devices, such as but not limited to bunting, pennants, streamers or peripheral
lighting, are prohibited. No exterior sign shall be flashing, revolving,
animated, or otherwise in motion except the traditional barber pole, which may
be revolving, and time and temperature signs. Any parking lot lighting,
security lighting or entrance lighting will be constructed and operated so as to
prevent glare or projection of light upon the surrounding areas.
(7) No sign shall obstruct any fire escape, window, door or opening used for firefighting
purposes, for ventilation or as an exit. No sign shall be placed on any
sidewalk, hydrant, utility pole, fence or on any other public property except as
permitted by other provisions of this section.
(8) A nonconforming sign may not be changed, replaced or altered in any manner
unless the resulting sign complies with the current regulations of this section.
(9) All signs, conforming or nonconforming, shall be maintained in a safe and
attractive condition and shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all
hazards, such as but not limited to faulty wiring and loose fastenings. In the
event of a violation of any of the foregoing provisions, upon notice sent to the
address listed on the sign's permit application and to the property address, and
the failure of the owner or operator to correct said violation within 30 days, the
sign's permit shall be revoked without need for any further action on the part
of the Village.
(10) All signs erected or placed after the date of adoption of the amendments to this
section will be in conformity with this section. Nonconforming signs shall be
brought into conformity upon being materially altered or with a change of
ownership, whichever shall occur first. A sign shall be deemed to be materially
altered upon the happening of any of the following: any change in the text,
names or words on the sign, other than the price of gasoline in the case of
gasoline filling stations or the message on signs approved with space for
§ 175-54 ZONING § 175-54
175:85
movable letters; any change in the symbol or logos from those allowed when
the sign was approved; installation of new or replacement panels on the sign;
modification, alterations, or rebuilding of the structure support or framing of
the sign.
(11) A single, nonilluminated temporary sign, with not more than six square feet of
area per side in residential districts and 10 square feet of area per side in all
other districts, advertising the sale or rental of the property upon which it is
located may be freestanding or attached to the building. Such sign must be
removed upon the sale or rental of the property.
(12) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or maintain any
sign, billboard, banner or placard, the total area of which shall exceed 16
square feet, in, upon and across a street or streets of the Village of Webster, or
from one building to another therein, without the consent of the Village Board.
"Street" is defined to include the area commonly used for pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, including pavement, curbs, sidewalks and all land included
within the lines of the streets as determined by the terms of the deeds of
dedication where such streets have been dedicated, and all land included
between the sides of the sidewalks nearest to the building lines in the streets
which have not been dedicated.
(13) No person shall post, affix, print, write, or paint any bill, advertisement or
other notice on any fence, post, railing, tree, or public building in said Village
or upon any private building without permission from the owner or occupant
thereof. Any such notice posted in violation hereof shall be subject to
confiscation by the Village.
(14) Signs for garage sales shall be permitted as provided in Chapter 54, Garage
Sales.
(15) All signs shall be constructed by a professional.
C. In residential districts, no sign shall be erected or used except:
(1) A single professional or announcement sign, which may be illuminated by
white light, not more than two square feet in area and no more than six inches
in depth, attached to and parallel to a principal building facade so that its top
shall not extend higher than six feet above finished grade.
(2) Signs of duly constituted government bodies, including traffic or similar
regulatory devices, legal notices or location and directional signs appropriate
to public or quasi-public facilities, such as government offices, schools,
hospitals, churches or public parking.
(3) Signs, posters, flags, plaques or emblems of political, civic, philanthropic,
educational or religious organizations, when such displays are of a temporary
nature, such as signs shall not be erected more than 30 days prior to and be
removed within 10 days after the event by the sponsoring organization.
(4) Signs not visible off the lot upon which they are situated.
(5) Nonilluminated resident identification signs not more than 1 1/2 square feet in
§ 175-54 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-54
175:86
area.
(6) Single builders', architects', and engineers' signs not more than 15 square feet
in area on a site during construction of a structure or structures, such sign to be
removed within 14 days after issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the
last structure on the site.
(7) Private parking control signs, up to 1 1/2 square feet per side, are permitted
and shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. No
advertising is permitted on these signs.
(8) Apartment complexes covered in Subsection D(5).
D. In all other districts (Central Business, West End Business, Neighborhood
Business, General Industrial and Planned Unit Development), no signs shall be
erected or used except:
(1) Signs permitted in residential districts.
(2) No more than one sign for the identification of each business conducted on the
premises, except that if the building is located on two or more intersecting
streets, one sign for each facade may be permitted. Except as provided in
Subsection D(3), (4) and (5), such signs shall be attached to and parallel to the
street facade of the principal building, may be illuminated and shall have a
total area not greater than 10% of that proportion of the main facade as the
floor space of such business bears to the total floor space of the building, but
no greater than a total of 75 square feet.
(3) Where features of grade, setback or adjacent architecture obstruct or obscure
visibility of a facade sign, application may be made to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for permission to erect one freestanding sign or one off-premises sign
if necessary, as deemed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, in addition to a
facade sign, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Freestanding signs or off-premises signs, together with the facade sign,
may exceed the maximum requirements by 50%, but may not exceed 100
square feet in total area. A freestanding sign itself may not exceed 35
square feet per side; if ground-mounted, may have a total height of not
more than six feet above ground level; if elevated, must allow at least
eight feet of clearance above finished grade and must be no higher than
20 feet; must be at least 20 feet from a street line and at least 10 feet from
a side line; and may not overhang a public walkway or roadway.
(b) The owner(s) of a perpendicular sign or freestanding sign extending into
the public right-of-way must deliver to the Village of Webster an
insurance policy insuring the Village against all loss, liability or damage
suffered by all persons by reason of the construction or maintenance of
such sign, which policy shall be written at limits of $500,000 minimum
for bodily injuries to one person and $1,000,000 minimum for bodily
injuries for more than one person as the result of one accident.
(c) Off-premises sign standards.
§ 175-54 ZONING § 175-54
175:87
[1] The sign shall be no more than four inches high by 30 inches wide
for each business.
[2] The sign shall be mounted on a single standard and shall be located
on the Village right-of-way and be a maximum of six feet high.
[3] The sign shall consist only of three-inch high white letters on a green
background.
[4] The sign may be lettered on both sides.
[5] Two or more businesses may advertise on the same sign. Such a
combined sign must meet the standards for each business stated
above in Subsection D(3)(c)[1] through [4].
[6] The sign shall be posted only at a street or parking lot intersection,
and only one sign standard may be erected at each intersection.
[7] The exact location of the sign post or standard must be approved by
the Building Inspector.
[8] The Village of Webster shall provide and maintain the sign and shall
charge an installation fee that is sufficient to cover the costs of such
provision and installation. The business or businesses advertised on
the sign shall pay the Village a yearly fee to maintain/replace the
sign if it becomes unsightly because of deterioration or damage.127
[9] Fifteen days after the mailing date of a notice from the Building
Inspector to the advertising business, the Village of Webster shall
remove off-premises signs if the advertising business has ceased
operation or if the sign is unsightly because of deterioration or
damage.
(d) The A-frame sign must be located on the business's property and not
within any public right-of-way and can only be displayed during business
hours. The sign must not exceed four feet high by three feet wide and
must be constructed of durable material.
(4) Where two or more business establishments are located on the same lot or in
the same building, the sign for each shall be considered a separate sign under
the requirements of this section and shall be of a design compatible in style
and color with the sign for each other establishment on the site. Upon special
application to the Zoning Board of Appeals and with its approval, such signs
may be combined into a single sign, either facade or freestanding as the Zoning
Board of Appeals may direct, after consideration of features of grade, setback
or architecture, equaling in size the combined square footage of the single
signs permitted, but not to exceed 75 square feet.
(5) Where groupings of buildings of one business or industry or apartment
complex in residential area exceed four in number and the total in excess of
50,000 square feet of gross floor area, a single freestanding sign identifying
127.Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 175-54 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-54
175:88
the business or industrial complex may be permitted exceeding the maximum
requirements by 50%. In cases where features of grade, setback or location
make facade sign identification ineffective and impractical, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may approve a single freestanding sign indicating a group or
adjoining businesses of less than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area. Such
signs shall not exceed 12 feet in height, and if used, each establishment or
building within the group shall be required to reduce its permitted sign area by
50%. If the design of the complex includes a canopy, individual establishment
signs shall be located beneath it.
E. Projection signs. In the Central Business District, the owners of businesses not
located at intersections of streets and/or driveways may apply to the Zoning Board
of Appeals for a projection sign that projects perpendicular to the facade of their
business in lieu of a facade sign. The minimum clearance height of the sign above
finished grade must be eight feet. The maximum dimensions of the sign including
the frame are two feet high by five feet wide. The sign may have advertising on
both sides but may not be illuminated internally. The owners of the sign must
provide the Village of Webster insurance in accordance with Subsection D(3)(b) of
this section.
F. Temporary signs. All signs of a temporary nature, such as posters, banners,
promotional devices and other signs of a similar nature, may be granted a temporary
permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals for a period not to exceed 60 days, provided
that such signs are not attached to fences, trees, utility poles or the like, and further
provided that such signs are not placed in a position that will obstruct or impair
vision or traffic or in any manner create a hazard or disturbance to the health and
welfare of the general public. Such signs shall not be illuminated nor shall any
lighting device be used in connection therewith. Such signs shall not exceed 16
square feet in area and shall not be located within any highway right-of-way nor on
any public property. A nonrefundable fee, as set by the Village Board in the annual
fee schedule, shall be paid upon the issuance of a permit. In addition, a cash deposit
of $25 shall be made to ensure the removal of such sign at the expiration of the
permit. The Building Inspector, after five days' written notice to the permit holder
to remove such sign and the failure of the permit holder to do so, shall cause said
sign to be removed, and the cash deposit shall be forfeited to help defray the cost of
removal. Temporary real estate sale and open house signs are exempt from the fee
provision but must conform in all other respects. [Amended 8-14-2008 by L.L. No.
9-2008]
(1) An "open" banner must be no more than three feet by five feet in size, must
have no other word than the word "open" on it, and must be displayed only
during business hours. The banner must be safely and securely mounted in
such a way that it will not impede or be a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
(2) Decorations or outdoor displays celebrating special days or occasions
including sales are considered temporary signs and as such are limited to a
period of 30 days after such event or occasion. Merchandise that is for sale
shall not be exhibited outdoors in the Central Business District, West End
Business District, and Neighborhood Business District without prior approval
of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 175-54 ZONING § 175-55
175:89
§ 175-55. Fire escapes.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the projection of an open fireproof fire escape or
stairway into a rear or side yard for a distance not to exceed eight feet.
§ 175-56. Height exceptions. [Amended 9-14-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995]
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to limit or restrict the height of a church
spire, belfry, clock tower, chimney flue, water tank, elevator bulkhead, stage tower,
scenery lift or similar structure.
§ 175-57. Nonconforming uses.
A. "Use," under this section, is the general purpose for which land or building is
designed and occupied. A use or structure becomes nonconforming when it
lawfully existed prior to the adoption, amendment or revision of this chapter but
fails to conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment. [Amended 3-26-1990 by L.L. No.
1-1990; 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
B. A nonconforming structure or use may be continued subsequent to adoption of this
chapter, provided that no such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity, and no such use shall be enlarged or increased to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
C. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a structure which
were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of this
chapter. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use
disallowed by this chapter.
D. To avoid undue hardship, nothing herein contained shall require any change of
plans, construction or designated use of a structure for which a building permit was
issued more than 30 days prior to the enactment of this chapter and the construction
of which is begun and diligently prosecuted within three months after the enactment
of this chapter or an amendment hereof. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
E. The term "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or structure, shall be
construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied," except as to nonconforming uses or structures. [Amended 3-26-1990 by
L.L. No. 1-1990]
F. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any Village
official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
G. Reversion of nonconforming structures and uses. A nonconforming structure or use
may not be altered, rebuilt or resumed, except in conformity with the regulations
for the district in which it is located, if: [Amended 3-26-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990]
(1) Either a nonconforming structure or use has once been changed to a
conforming use.
§ 175-55 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-57
175:90
§ 175-58. Minimum building size.
(2) In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, premises, building or
structure or any part or portion thereof has been discontinued for a period of
six months, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and
all future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Discontinuance of the active and continuous operation of such nonconforming
use or a part or portion thereof for such period of six months is hereby
construed and considered to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use,
regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon the same or of an
intent to resume active operations.
(3) Actual abandonment in fact is evidenced by the removal of buildings,
structures, machinery, equipment and other evidences of such nonconforming
use of the land and premises; the abandonment shall be construed and
considered to be completed within a period of less than six months, and all
rights to reestablish or continue such nonconforming use shall thereupon
terminate.
(4) A nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to the extent of 75% or
more of either its value or its bulk. However, any residential structure
nonconforming only as to yard size, if so destroyed, may be rebuilt upon the
same location upon the same foundation size.
H. District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to
transfer an area from a district of one classification to a district of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall apply to nonconforming uses created
by such transfer.
A. For all one-story single-family dwellings, the minimum first-floor area used for
living purposes shall be 960 square feet.
B. For all one-and-one-half-story and split-level single-family dwellings, the
minimum area used for living space shall be 900 square feet.
C. For all two-story single-family dwellings, the minimum first-floor area used for
living purposes shall be 660 square feet.
D. Minimum apartment unit size. In addition to areas for common use of all tenants,
such as corridors, stairs, lobbies, storage space and other incidental space proper for
the use of the building as an apartment, each apartment must have the following
minimum area:
(1) Efficiency apartment: 450 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom apartment: 650 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom apartment: 760 square feet. Not more than two-thirds (2/3) of
the total apartments in one application for site approval, building permit and
certificate of occupancy may be two-bedroom apartments.
E. Minimum size of a townhouse shall be 1,100 square feet. [Amended 11-23-1981
by L.L. No. 3-1981]
§ 175-57 ZONING § 175-59
175:91
§ 175-59. Accessory structures.
A. Private garages and accessory buildings. Notwithstanding the applicable side or
rear yard requirements, on each lot there shall be permitted in a side yard or a rear
yard in any residential district one garage, either attached or detached, and one
accessory building. In all residential zones, no garage shall be more than 600 square
feet in area, and all accessory buildings shall have a maximum size of 192 square
feet or 1% of gross land area, whichever is less. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in
all residential districts, a 120-square-foot accessory structure shall be allowed
regardless of lot size. No detached garage or other accessory building shall be
constructed nearer to the front property line than the rear of the main building or, in
the case of a corner lot, nearer to the side street line than a distance equal to 1/2 the
width of the lot. In all residential zones, no garage shall be more than 600 square
feet in area, and no accessory building shall be more than 100 square feet in area.
The exterior of detached garages shall be finished with similar siding and roofing
as the siding and roofing of the principal building. [Amended 2-9-1987 by L.L.
No. 1-1987; 1-9-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
B. Wireless communications facilities. [Added 8-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019128]
(1) Purposes.
(a) The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for the siting,
design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless communications
facilities in the Village of Webster (referred to herein as the "Village").
While the Village recognizes the importance of wireless communications
facilities in providing high-quality communications service to its
residents, the Village also recognizes that it has an obligation to protect
public safety and to minimize the adverse effects of such facilities
through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
(b) By enacting these provisions, the Village intends to:
[1] Accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities while
regulating their location and number so as to ensure the provision of
necessary services;
[2] Provide for the managed development of wireless communications
facilities in a manner that enhances the benefits of wireless
communication and accommodates the needs of both Village
residents and wireless carriers in accordance with federal and state
laws and regulations;
[3] Establish procedures for the design, siting, construction, installation,
maintenance and removal of both tower-based and non-tower-based
wireless communications facilities in the Village, including facilities
both inside and outside the public rights-of-way;
[4] Address new wireless technologies, including, but not limited to,
128.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection B, Communications antennas, added 9-14-1995 by L.L.
No. 2-1995.
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:92
distributed antenna systems, data collection units, cable Wi-Fi, small
WCF and other wireless communications facilities;
[5] Minimize the adverse visual effects and the number of such facilities
through proper design, siting, screening, material, color and finish
and by requiring that competing providers of wireless
communications services co-locate their commercial
communications antennas and related facilities on existing towers
where feasible;
[6] Promote the health, safety and welfare of the Village's residents.
(2) General and specific requirements for non-tower wireless communications
facilities.
(a) The following regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCF:
[1] Permitted in all zones subject to regulations. Non-tower WCF are
permitted in all zones, subject to the restrictions and conditions
prescribed below and applicable permitting by the applicable
Village entity.
[2] Nonconforming wireless support structures. Non-tower WCF shall
be permitted to co-locate upon existing nonconforming tower-based
WCF and other nonconforming structures. Co-location of WCF
upon existing tower-based WCF is encouraged even if the towerbased
WCF is nonconforming as to use within a zoning district.
[3] Standard of care. Any non-tower WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed
in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including but not limited to the most recent
editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code,
National Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code, or to
the industry standard applicable to the structure. Any non-tower
WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person
or damage any property in the Village.
[4] Wind and ice. All non-tower WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the standard designed
by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as
amended), or to the industry standard applicable to the structure.
[5] Aviation safety. Non-tower WCF shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
[6] Public safety communications. Non-tower WCF shall not interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:93
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
[7] Radio frequency emissions. A non-tower WCF shall not, by itself or
in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including, but
not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin
65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for
Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as
amended.
[8] Removal. In the event that use of a non-tower WCF is discontinued,
the owner shall provide written notice to the Village of its intent to
discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
Unused or abandoned WCF, or portions of WCF, shall be removed
as follows:
[a] All abandoned or unused WCFs and accessory equipment shall
be removed within 90 days of the cessation of operations at the
site unless a time extension is approved by the Village Building
Inspector.
[b] If the WCF or accessory equipment is not removed within 90
days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any longer
period approved by the Village, the WCF and/or associated
facilities and equipment may be removed by the Village and the
cost of removal assessed against the owner of the WCF.
[9] Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a non-tower WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity
exists in the applicable area and that the type of WCF being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap in
wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in
wireless coverage or capacity shall be a precondition to the Village
Board of Trustees' decision on an application for a non-tower WCF.
This condition shall also be satisfied when the WCF applicant
demonstrates that the non-tower WCF is being proposed to densify
an existing wireless network, introduce new services or otherwise
improve service capabilities.
[10] Timing of approval.
[a] Within 60 days of receipt of an application for a non-tower
WCF that meets the definition of a small WCF on a preexisting
structure, the Village Building Inspector shall make a final
decision on whether to approve the application and shall notify
the WCF applicant in writing of such decision.
[b] Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
non-tower WCF that does not meet the definition of a small
wireless facility is filed with the Village, the Village Board of
Trustees shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of any
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:94
information that may be required to complete such application.
Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete application,
the Village shall make its final decision on whether to approve
the application and shall advise the WCF applicant in writing
of such decision. If additional information was requested by the
Village Board of Trustees to complete an application, the time
required by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall
not be counted toward the Village's sixty-day review period.
[11] Permit fees. The Village may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Village's actual costs in reviewing
and processing the application for approval of a non-tower WCF, as
well as related inspection, monitoring and related costs. Such fees
shall comply with the applicable requirements of the FCC.
[12] Third-party property. Where the non-tower WCF is located on a
property that is not owned by the WCF applicant, the WCF applicant
shall present documentation to the Board that the owner of the
property has granted an easement or other form of land control, if
necessary, for the proposed WCF and that vehicular access will be
provided to the facility.
[13] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower WCF
shall annually provide the Village with a certificate of insurance
evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the nontower
WCF.
[14] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a non-tower
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Village, its elected and appointed officials, employees
and agents at all times against any and all claims for personal injury,
including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part
from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person,
its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not
limited to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the non-tower WCF. Each person that owns or operates
a non-tower WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against
the Village in which it is claimed that personal injury, including
death, or property damage was caused by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of a non-tower
WCF. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall
include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments,
injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable
expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
[15] Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[a] The non-tower WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:95
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
[b] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure compliance
with applicable structural safety standards and radio frequency
emissions requirements.
[c] All maintenance activities shall utilize industry standard
technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(b) In addition to the requirements in § 175-59B(2)(a) above, the following
regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCF that meet the requirements
of an eligible facilities request pursuant to 47 CFR § 1.40001:
[1] Building permit required. WCF applicants proposing the
modification of an existing non-tower WCF that does not
substantially change the dimensions of the WCF shall obtain a
building permit from the Village Building Inspector. In order to be
considered for such permit, the WCF applicant must submit a permit
application to the Village Building Inspector in accordance with
applicable permit policies and procedures. Such application shall
designate in writing that the application is an eligible facilities
request.
[2] Accessory equipment. Ground-mounted accessory equipment shall
not be located within 50 feet of a lot in residential use. If the WCF
applicant proposes that ground-mounted accessory equipment be
located 50 feet or less in distance from a lot in residential use, the
WCF applicant shall be required to obtain special use approval from
the Village Board of Trustees prior to the installation of the WCF.
(c) In addition to the requirements in § 175-59B(2)(a) above, the following
regulations shall apply to all non-tower WCF that substantially change
the wireless support structure to which they are attached:
[1] Noncommercial usage exemption. Village residents utilizing
satellite dishes, citizen and/or band radios, and antennas for the
purpose of maintaining television, phone, and/or internet
connections at their residences shall be exempt from the regulations
enumerated in this section.
[2] Prohibited on certain structures. No non-tower WCF shall be located
on single-family detached residences, single-family attached
residences, twin-homes, duplexes, or any residential accessory
structure.
[3] Special use permit required. Any WCF applicant proposing the
construction of a new non-tower WCF that substantially changes the
wireless support structure to which they are attached, or the
modification of an existing non-tower WCF, shall first obtain a
special use permit from the Village Board of Trustees pursuant to
§ 175-44. The special use application shall demonstrate that the
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:96
proposed WCF complies with all applicable provisions in the
Village of Webster Zoning Ordinance.
[4] Small wireless facilities. Any WCF applicant proposing the
construction of a new non-tower WCF that meets the definition of a
small WCF shall first obtain a building permit from the Village
Building Inspector. The permit application shall demonstrate that the
proposed WCF complies with all applicable provisions in the
Village of Webster Zoning Ordinance.
[5] Historic Buildings. No non-tower WCF may be located within 100
feet of any property, or on a building or structure that is listed on
either the National or New York State Register of Historic Places, or
eligible to be so listed, located within an historic district, or is
included in the official historic structures list maintained by the
Village.
[6] Retention of experts. The Village may hire a qualified consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Village in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the WCF and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the
terms and conditions of these WCF provisions. The WCF applicant
and/or owner of the WCF shall reimburse the Village for all costs of
the Village's consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and
consultation in connection with these activities. Such cost recovery
fees shall comply with the applicable requirements of the FCC.
[7] Development regulations. Non-tower WCF shall be located or colocated
on existing structures, such as existing buildings or towerbased
WCF, subject to the following conditions:
[a] The total height of any wireless support structure and mounted
WCF shall not exceed 20 feet above the maximum height
permitted in the underlying zoning district.
[b] In accordance with industry standards, all non-tower WCF
applicants must submit documentation to the Village Board of
Trustees justifying the total height of the non-tower WCF. Such
documentation shall be analyzed on an individual basis.
[c] If the WCF applicant proposes to locate accessory equipment
in a separate building, the building shall comply with the
minimum requirements for the applicable zoning district.
[d] A security fence not to exceed eight feet in height shall
surround any separate communications equipment building.
Vehicular access to the communications equipment building
shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular circulations on
the site for the principal use.
[e] Any separate communications equipment building shall also be
surrounded by a screen of evergreen trees, each at least four
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:97
feet in height, located along the perimeter of the security fence.
Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
[8] Design regulations.
[a] Non-tower WCF shall employ stealth technology and be treated
to match the wireless support structure in order to minimize
aesthetic impact where reasonably necessary. The application
of the stealth technology utilized by the WCF applicant shall be
subject to the approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
[9] Removal, replacement and modification.
[a] The removal and replacement of non-tower WCF and/or
accessory equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing
the WCF is permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does
not substantially change the overall height of the WCF or
increase the number of antennas.
[b] Any substantial modification to a WCF shall require notice to
be provided to the Village Building Inspector, and possible
supplemental permit approval to the original permit or
authorization as determined by the Building Inspector.
[10] Inspection. The Village reserves the right to inspect the applicable
lease/license area of any WCF to ensure compliance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found
within the Village Code or state or federal law. The Village and/or
its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator,
to ensure such compliance.
[11] Financial security. Prior to receipt of a use permit for the
construction or placement of a non-tower WCF, the WCF applicant
shall provide to the Village financial security sufficient to guarantee
the removal of the non-tower WCF. Said financial security shall
remain in place until the non-tower WCF is removed.
(d) Regulations applicable to all non-tower WCF located in the public rightsof-
way. In addition to the applicable non-tower WCF provisions listed in
§ 175-59B(2)(a), the following regulations shall apply to non-tower WCF
located in the public rights-of-way:
[1] Location. Non-tower WCF in the ROW shall be co-located on
wireless support structures. If co-location is not technologically
feasible, the WCF applicant shall locate its non-tower WCF on
existing poles or freestanding structures that do not already act as
wireless support structures with the Village Board of Trustees'
approval.
[2] Design requirements.
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:98
[a] WCF installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW, including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and
joint utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that
are no more than six feet in height and that are compatible in
scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are
mounted. All equipment shall be the least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
[b] Antennas and accessory equipment shall be treated to match the
supporting structure and may be required to be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support
structure upon which they are mounted.
[3] Time, place and manner. The Village Building Inspector shall
determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance,
repair and/or removal of all non-tower WCF in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations.
[4] Equipment location. Accessory equipment shall be located
underground or, if undergrounding is demonstrated to be unfeasible,
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction
to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the Village.
In addition:
[a] In no case shall ground-mounted accessory equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb, within four feet of the edge of the roadway, or within an
easement extending onto a privately owned lot;
[b] Ground-mounted accessory equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened from surrounding views, to the
fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Village Board of
Trustees. Ground-mounted accessory equipment shall be
screened, when possible, by utilizing existing structures. If
screening by utilizing existing structures is not possible,
ground-mounted accessory equipment shall be made
architecturally and aesthetically compatible with the
surrounding area through the use of coatings, landscaping, and/
or screening walls or enclosures to the satisfaction of the
Village Board of Trustees.
[c] Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in
with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Village.
[d] Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any accessory
equipment shall be removed within 30 days upon notification
by the Village at the sole expense of the owner.
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:99
[e] Any proposed underground vault related to non-tower WCF
shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Board of
Trustees.
[f] Accessory equipment attached to the wireless support structure
shall have a minimum of eight feet of vertical clearance above
finished grade.
[5] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 90 days following written
notice from the Village, or such longer period as the Village
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case
of an emergency, an owner of a WCF in the ROW shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any WCF when the Village, consistent with its
police powers, shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[a] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Village or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
[b] The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
[c] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
[d] An emergency as determined by the Village.
[6] Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every non-tower WCF in the ROW is
subject to the Village Board of Trustees' right to fix annually a fair
and reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW.
Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related to the
Village's actual ROW management costs, including, but not limited
to, the costs of the administration and performance of all reviewing,
inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW management
activities by the Village. The owner of each non-tower WCF shall
pay an annual fee to the Village to compensate the Village for the
Village's costs incurred in connection with the activities described
above. Such fees shall comply with the applicable requirements of
the FCC.
(3) General and specific requirements for tower-based wireless communications
facilities.
(a) The following regulations shall apply to all tower-based wireless
communications facilities.
[1] Standard of care. Any tower-based WCF shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed
in strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:100
safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the most recent
editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code,
National Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code, as
well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices
of the National Association of Tower Erectors. Any tower-based
WCF shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person
or damage any property in the Village.
[2] Special use permit required. Tower-based WCF are permitted as a
special use in certain zoning districts and at a height necessary to
satisfy their function in the WCF applicant's wireless
communications system. Prior to the construction of any towerbased
WCF, the WCF applicant shall first obtain a special use permit
from the Village Board of Trustees pursuant to § 175-44.
[a] Upon submission of an application for a tower-based WCF and
the scheduling of the public hearing upon the application, the
WCF applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property
within 300 feet of the proposed facility advising of the subject
matter and date of such hearing. The WCF applicant shall
provide proof of the notification to the Village Board of
Trustees.
[b] Prior to the Board of Trustees' approval of a special use permit
authorizing the construction and installation of tower-based
WCF, it shall be incumbent upon the WCF applicant to prove
to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the WCF
applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its communications
system by the use of equipment such as redoes, repeaters,
antennas and other similar equipment installed on existing
structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances and other
available structures. The WCF applicant shall further
demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF must be
located where it is proposed in order to serve the WCF
applicant's service area and that no other viable, less-intrusive
alternative location exists. This condition shall also be satisfied
when the WCF applicant demonstrates that the tower-based
WCF is being proposed to densify an existing wireless network,
introduce new services or otherwise improve service
capabilities.
[c] The special use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study or other technological reports evidencing the
need for the proposed tower or other communication facilities
and equipment, a description of the type and manufacturer of
the proposed transmission/radio equipment, the frequency
range (megahertz band) assigned to the WCF applicant, the
power in watts at which the WCF applicant transmits, and any
relevant related tests conducted by the WCF applicant in
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:101
determining the need for the proposed site and installation.
[d] The special use permit application shall also be accompanied
by documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
[e] Where the tower-based WCF is located on a property that is not
owned by the WCF applicant, the WCF applicant shall present
documentation to the Board that the owner of the property has
granted an easement or other form of land control, if necessary,
for the proposed WCF and that vehicular access will be
provided to the facility.
[f] The special use application shall also be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower-based
WCF complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
[3] Engineer inspection. Prior to the Village Board of Trustees' issuance
of a permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower-based
WCF, a professional engineer registered or licensed in New York
shall issue to the Village Board a written certification of the
proposed WCF's ability to meet the structural standards offered by
either the Electronic Industries Association or the
Telecommunication Industry Association and certify the proper
construction of the foundation and the erection of the structure. This
certification shall be provided during the public hearings or at a
minimum be made as a condition attached to any approval given
such that the certification be provided prior to issuance of any
building permits.
[4] Visual appearance and land use compatibility. Tower-based WCF
shall employ stealth technology which may include the tower
portion to be painted a color approved by the Board or have a
galvanized finish, where reasonably necessary. All tower-based
WCF and accessory equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment and
shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the existing
surroundings and neighboring buildings to the greatest extent
possible.
[5] Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower-based WCF
shall demonstrate that the proposed tower-based WCF cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or building. The
Board may deny an application to construct a new tower-based WCF
if the WCF applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the
commercial communications antenna(s) on an existing structure.
The WCF applicant shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of
appropriate, reasonably possible co-location candidates in or near
the search ring, sought permission to install an antenna on those
structures, buildings, and towers and was denied for one of the
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:102
following reasons:
[a] The proposed antenna and accessory equipment would exceed
the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or
tower, and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
[b] The proposed antenna and accessory equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing equipment for
that existing building, structure, or tower and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
[c] Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate the
proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
[d] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
[6] Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, any WCF applicant proposing the
modification of an existing tower-based WCF which increases the
overall height of such WCF shall first obtain a building permit from
the Village Building Inspector. To the extent permissible under law,
nonroutine modifications shall be prohibited without a building
permit.
[7] Gap in coverage. A WCF applicant for a tower-based WCF must
demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity
exists in the applicable area and that the type of WCF being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap in
wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in
wireless coverage or capacity shall be a precondition to the Village's
decision on an application for a tower-based WCF. This condition
shall also be satisfied when the WCF applicant demonstrates that the
tower-based WCF is being proposed to densify an existing wireless
network, introduce new services or otherwise improve service
capabilities.
[8] Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
WCF, the WCF applicant shall provide the Village with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to co-locate
antennas on tower-based WCF where technically and economically
feasible. To the extent permissible under state and federal law, the
owner of a tower-based WCF shall not install any additional
antennas without obtaining the prior written approval of the Village.
[9] Wind and ice. Any tower-based WCF structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the standard designed
by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association and
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:103
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as
amended), or the industry standard applicable to the structure.
[10] Public safety communications. No tower-based WCF shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
[11] Maintenance. The following maintenance requirements shall apply:
[a] Any tower-based WCF shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance,
replacement or repairs.
[b] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the WCF in order to promote the safety and security of the
Village's residents and utilize the best available technology for
preventing failures and accidents.
[12] Radio frequency emissions. A tower-based WCF shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency
emissions in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC,
including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering
Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
[13] Historic buildings. No tower-based WCF may be located within 100
feet of any property, or on a building or structure that is listed on
either the National or New York State Register of Historic Places, or
eligible to be so listed, located within an historic district, or is
included in the official historic structures list maintained by the
Village.
[14] Signs. All tower-based WCFs shall post a sign in a readily visible
location identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact
in the event of an emergency. The only other signage permitted on
the WCF shall be those required by the FCC, or any other federal or
state agency.
[15] Lighting. No tower-based WCF shall be artificially lighted, except
as required by law. If lighting is required, the WCF applicant shall
provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state
and federal regulations. The WCF applicant shall promptly report
any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to the
appropriate governmental authorities and to the Village Clerk.
[16] Noise. Tower-based WCF shall be operated and maintained so as not
to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state
law and the Village Code, except in emergency situations requiring
the use of a backup generator, where such noise standards may be
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:104
exceeded on a temporary basis only.
[17] Retention of experts. The Village may hire a qualified consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Village in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of a special use permit for the
tower-based WCF and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating
any potential violations of the terms and conditions of these
provisions. The WCF applicant and/or owner of the WCF shall
reimburse the Village for all costs of the Village's consultant(s) in
providing expert evaluation and consultation regarding these
activities. Such cost recovery fees shall comply with the applicable
requirements of the FCC.
[18] Timing of approval.
[a] Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for a
tower-based WCF is filed with the Village Board of Trustees,
the Village Board shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of
any information that may be required to complete such
application. All applications for tower-based WCFs shall be
acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed
application for the approval of such tower-based WCF, and the
Village Board shall advise the WCF applicant in writing of its
decision. If additional information was requested by the Village
Board of Trustees to complete an application, the time required
by the WCF applicant to provide the information shall not be
counted toward the 150-day review period.
[b] Within 90 days of receipt of a complete application for a towerbased
WCF that meets the definition of small wireless
communications facility, the Village Board of Trustees shall
make a final decision on whether to approve the application and
shall notify the WCF applicant in writing of such decision.
[19] Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based WCF which are
hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be
repaired and restored at their former location but must otherwise
comply with the terms and conditions of this section. The colocation
of antennas is permitted on nonconforming structures.
[20] Removal. In the event that use of a tower-based WCF is planned to
be discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Village Building Inspector of its intent to discontinue use and the
date when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned WCF
or portions of WCF shall be removed as follows:
[a] All unused or abandoned tower-based WCFs and accessory
facilities shall be removed within 90 days of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the
Village Building Inspector.
[b] If the WCF and/or accessory facility is not removed within 90
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:105
days of the cessation of operations at a site, or within any
longer period approved by the Village, the WCF and accessory
facilities and equipment may be removed by the Village
Building Inspector and the cost of removal assessed against the
owner of the WCF.
[c] Any unused portions of tower-based WCF, including antennas,
shall be removed within 90 days of the time of cessation of
operations. The Village must approve all replacements of
portions of a tower-based WCF previously removed.
[21] Permit fees. The Village may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Village's actual costs in reviewing
and processing the application for approval of a tower-based WCF,
as well as related inspection, monitoring, and related costs.
[22] FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
over 40 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC license,
including the name, address, and emergency telephone number for
the operator of the facility.
[23] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based WCF
greater than 40 feet in height shall provide the Village with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns
or operates a tower-based WCF 40 feet or less in height shall provide
the Village with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering each tower-based WCF.
[24] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
WCF shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Village, its elected and appointed officials, employees
and agents, at all times against any and all claims for personal injury,
including death, and property damage arising in whole or in part
from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person,
its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not
limited to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower-based WCF. Each person that owns or operates
a tower-based WCF shall defend any actions or proceedings against
the Village in which it is claimed that personal injury, including
death, or property damage was caused by the construction,
installation, operation, maintenance or removal of tower-based
WCF. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and defend shall
include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments,
injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable
expert fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:106
[25] Engineer signature. All plans and drawings for a tower-based WCF
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural
engineer, licensed in the State of New York.
[26] Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for the
construction or placement of a tower-based WCF, the WCF
applicant shall provide to the Village financial security sufficient to
guarantee the removal of the tower-based WCF. Said financial
security shall remain in place until the tower-based WCF is
removed.
(b) In addition to the requirements of § 175-59B(3)(a), the following
regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless communications facilities
located outside the public rights-of-way:
[1] Development regulations.
[a] Tower-based WCF shall not be located in, or within 50 feet of,
an area in which all utilities are located underground.
[b] Tower-based WCF are permitted outside the public rights-ofway
in the following zoning districts as a special use, subject to
the requirements of this chapter:
[i] G-I General Industrial District.
[ii] WEB West End Business District.
[c] Tower-based WCF that meet the definition of a small WCF are
permitted outside the public rights-of-way in all zoning districts
as a special use, subject to the requirements of this chapter.
[d] Sole use on a lot. A tower-based WCF shall be permitted as a
sole use on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets the
minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district. The
minimum distance between the base of a tower-based WCF and
any adjoining property line or street right-of-way line shall
equal 110% of the proposed WCF structure's height.
[e] Combined with another use. A tower-based WCF may be
permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant
parcel in combination with another use, except residential,
subject to the following conditions:
[i] The existing use on the property may be any permitted use
in the applicable district, and need not be affiliated with
the WCF.
[ii] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with the
requirements for the applicable zoning district and shall be
the area needed to accommodate the tower-based WCF
and guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting if the proposed WCF is greater than 40 feet
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:107
in height.
[iii] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between the
base of a tower-based WCF and any adjoining property
line or street right-of-way line shall equal 110% of the
proposed height of the tower-based WCF.
[f] For good cause shown, an applicant may seek a waiver or
variance from the foregoing development regulations or
location and development standards from the Village Board of
Trustees. The Village Board of Trustees may grant said waiver
or variance following a public hearing held on 10 days' notice
by publication in the official newspaper of the Village of
Webster.
[2] Design regulations.
[a] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact where
reasonably necessary. Application of the stealth technology
utilized by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval
of the Village Board of Trustees.
[b] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall be designed structurally,
electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both the WCF
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for future users.
[c] Any tower-based WCF over 40 feet in height shall be equipped
with an anticlimbing device, as approved by the manufacturer.
[3] Surrounding environs.
[a] The WCF applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation,
trees and shrubs located within proximity to the WCF structure
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
[b] The WCF applicant shall submit a soil report to the Village
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/TIA-222, as amended, to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation of the towerbased
WCF, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
[4] Fence/screen.
[a] A security fence having a height not to exceed eight feet shall
completely surround any tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet
in height, as well as guy wires, or any building housing WCF
equipment.
[b] A screen of evergreen trees planted eight feet on center, each at
least four feet in height, shall surround the tower-based WCF
and security fence. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:108
maximum extent possible.
[5] Accessory equipment.
[a] Ground-mounted accessory equipment associated or connected
with a tower-based WCF shall not be located within 50 feet of
a lot in residential use, unless the WCF applicant shows to the
satisfaction of the Village Board of Trustees that locating such
accessory equipment within 50 feet of a lot in residential use is
necessary for the provision of wireless service and that no less
intrusive location is technically feasible.
[b] Ground-mounted accessory equipment associated, or
connected, with a tower-based WCF shall be placed
underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies, as described above.
[c] All accessory equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into the
environment in which they are situated and shall meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
[6] Height. Tower-based WCFs shall be designed and kept at the
minimum functional height. The maximum total height of a towerbased
WCF which is not located in the public ROW shall not exceed
125 feet, as measured vertically from the ground level to the highest
point on the structure, including antennas and subsequent
alterations. No WCF applicant shall have the right under these
regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height specified in this
section unless it proves the necessity for such height. The WCF
applicant shall demonstrate to the Village Board of Trustees that the
wireless support structure for the tower-based WCF is the minimum
height necessary for the service area.
[7] Accessory equipment. Either one single-story wireless
communications equipment building not exceeding 500 square feet
in area or its equivalent may be located on the site for each unrelated
company sharing antenna space on the tower-based wireless
communications facility greater than 40 feet.
[8] Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall be
provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to towerbased
WCF. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or
private, shall be made to the extent practicable. Road grades shall
closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance
and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the WCF owner shall
present documentation to the Village Board of Trustees that the
property owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
[9] Parking. For each tower-based WCF greater than 40 feet in height,
there shall be one off-street parking space.
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:109
[10] Inspection. The Village reserves the right to inspect the applicable
lease/license area of any tower-based WCF to ensure compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found within
the Village Code or state or federal law. The Village and/or its
agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon which a
WCF is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the operator,
to ensure such compliance.
(c) In addition to the requirements of § 175-59B(3)(a), the following
regulations shall apply to tower-based wireless communications facilities
located in the public rights-of-way.
[1] Location and development standards.
[a] Tower-based WCF in the public ROW are prohibited in public
rights-of-way in which all utilities are located underground.
[b] Tower-based WCF in the public ROW shall not be located in
the front yard area of any structure.
[c] Tower-based WCF in the public ROW shall be permitted in all
zoning districts, subject to the applicable requirements of
§ 175-59B(3).
[d] For good cause shown, an applicant may seek a waiver or
variance from the foregoing development regulations or
location and development standards from the Village Board of
Trustees. The Village Board of Trustees may grant said waiver
or variance following a public hearing held on 10 days' notice
by publication in the official newspaper of the Village of
Webster.
[2] Time, place and manner. The Village Building Inspector shall
determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance,
repair and/or removal of all tower-based WCF in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Village.
[3] Equipment location. Tower-based WCF and accessory equipment
shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction
to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, create safety hazards to pedestrians
and/or motorists, or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the
ROW as determined by the Village Board of Trustees. In addition:
[a] In no case shall ground-mounted accessory equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb, four feet of the edge of the roadway or within an easement
on a privately owned lot.
[b] Ground-mounted accessory equipment that cannot be placed
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-59
175:110
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Village Board of Trustees.
[c] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in
with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Village
Board of Trustees, subject to the approval of the utility
provider.
[d] Any graffiti on the tower or on any accessory equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner within 30 days of
notification.
[e] Any underground vaults related to tower-based WCFs shall be
reviewed and approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
[4] Design regulations.
[a] The WCF shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the
surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact where
reasonably necessary. The application of the stealth technology
chosen by the WCF applicant shall be subject to the approval
of the Village Board of Trustees.
[b] Tower-based WCF in the public ROW shall not exceed 40 feet
in height.
[c] To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any
height extensions to an existing tower-based WCF shall require
prior approval of the Village Building Inspector, and shall not
increase the overall height of the tower-based WCF to more
than 40 feet.
[d] Any proposed tower-based WCF shall, to the extent feasible,
be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects to
accommodate both the WCF applicant's antennas and
comparable antennas for future users.
[5] Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 90 days following written
notice from the Village, or such longer period as the Village
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case
of an emergency, an owner of tower-based WCF in the ROW shall,
at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any WCF when the Village, consistent
with its police powers, shall determine that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
[a] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Village or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
[b] The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in
§ 175-59 ZONING § 175-59
175:111
§ 175-60. Area and width exceptions.
Any parcel of land with an area or width less than that prescribed for a lot in the district
in which such lot is situated, if any such parcel was under one ownership on the date of
enactment of this chapter and the owner thereof owned no adjoining land, may be used
as a lot for any purpose permitted in the district, provided that there shall be compliance
with all other regulations prescribed for the district by this chapter.
§ 175-61. Alteration of existing dwellings. [Amended 4-14-1980 by L.L. No.
3-1980]
The Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize the issuance of a permit for the alteration
of a single-family dwelling existing at the time of adoption of this chapter in any district
except a Residential R-1-13.6 and a Residential R-1-9.6 District for a double-house use,
provided that:
§ 175-62. Frontage upon street.
Every dwelling hereafter built, erected or altered shall have a clear and unobstructed
frontage upon a street.
the right-of-way;
[c] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
[d] An emergency as determined by the Village.
[6] Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower-based WCF in the ROW is
subject to the Village's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee
to be paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation
for ROW use shall be directly related to the Village's actual ROW
management costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by
the Village. The owner of each tower-based WCF shall pay an
annual fee to the Village to compensate the Village for the Village's
costs incurred in connection with the activities described above.
Such fees shall comply with the applicable requirements of the FCC.
A. After alteration of the building, the area of the lot upon which the building is located
amounts to not less than 5,000 square feet for each dwelling unit.
B. No dwelling unit shall have a total floor area less than 600 square feet used for
living purposes.
C. No living quarters are placed in a basement or in any other room or space having
less than six feet of ceiling clearance above average outside ground level.
D. There is not exterior alteration of the building except as may be necessary for safety
and for improved access to the building.
§ 175-59 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-63
175:112
§ 175-63. Excavation and topsoil removal.
In any district, except upon approval of the Board of Appeals granted in accordance
with Article XV, no person shall strip, excavate or remove topsoil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the same shall be taken; and, except in industrial
districts, no excavation of land shall be permitted which will result in a slope of more
than one-foot vertical on two feet horizontal, unless through proper use of retaining walls
and fencing an equivalent safety factor to persons and property can be obtained; and no
such excavation shall be permitted to cause unreasonable erosion gullies and soil loss.
§ 175-64. Corner lots.
§ 175-65. Fences. [Amended 6-23-2005 by L.L. No. 4-2005]
A. In the case of a corner lot, each yard abutting a street shall have a minimum depth
equal to the front yard depth of the adjacent lot on the same street or the front yard
depth required in the district in which such adjacent lot is located, whichever is the
lesser and, if in a residential district, shall be unoccupied except for fences and/or
other decorative or landscaping use.
B. Each other yard of such corner lot shall have a minimum width of the site yard
which it adjoins or the side yard width of the district in which such adjoining side
yard is located, whichever is the lesser, and, if such corner lot is in a residential
district, shall be unoccupied adjacent to the boundary of the adjoining yard to such
minimum width except for fences and/or decorative or landscaping use.
A. Fence permits are required prior to construction. The Building Inspector shall issue
a fence permit to any applicant who has:
(1) Submitted an instrument survey map and site plan showing the height and
placement of the proposed fence to be in conformity with code.
(2) Paid the application fee in the amount established by resolution of the Village
Board.129
(3) A temporary fence as defined in Subsection I shall not require a permit.
[Added 6-1-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
B. No fence will be permitted in the front yard without Zoning Board of Appeals
approval.
C. Fences in excess of four feet in height shall be erected a minimum of 20 feet from
the front setback limit of the property.
D. Fences in the rear and side setbacks shall be a maximum of six feet in height.
E. The face side of any fence erected in any district shall face the nearest abutting
property, and all posts or supports shall be on the inside of the fence unless the posts
or supports constitute an integral part of the face side of the fence.
F. No barbed wire, razor wire or similar type fences, or electric fences or fencing shall
129.Editor's Note: The Village Fee Schedule is available in the Village office and can also be found on the Village website.
§ 175-63 ZONING § 175-65
175:113
§ 175-66. Swimming pools.
Private swimming pools shall be permitted upon recognition that the following
requirements have been fulfilled:
be permitted in any residential lot within the Village of Webster. A temporary
fence as defined in Subsection I shall not be used as a permanent fence. [Amended
6-1-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
G. Fences on elevated decks around swimming pools shall be no higher than four feet.
H. All fences shall be maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition. Exterior
wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or protective covering or treatment. In the event of
a violation to maintain the fence in a safe and structurally sound condition, written
notice shall be sent to the property owner.
I. A temporary fence is defined as fencing of a temporary nature such as a snow fence,
construction fence, special event fence, or any other type of temporary fencing used
as a barrier to protect construction, to prevent public access or is installed in the
interest of public safety for an event. [Added 6-1-2015 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
(1) Construction and event fencing shall be allowed only during the length of the
project or event. A snow fence shall be allowed from October 1 to April 1 of
any year.
(2) All temporary fences shall be adequately maintained and be structurally sound.
No temporary fence shall be placed in the public right-of-way without
permission from the Superintendant of Public Works.
A. Any wading pool, play pool or ornamental pool less than 24 inches in depth may be
used subject to the following restrictions:
(1) That there is constant, effective, adult supervision of the pool at all times when
it contains water.
(2) If not so supervised, the pool must comply with all the regulations of
swimming pools as in Subsection B below.
B. Pools 24 or more inches deep may be constructed on application to the Building
Inspector, in compliance with all setback restrictions for structures.
(1) 130Fences and or barriers shall be constructed as required in the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. [Added 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994; amended 12-11-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
(2) The fencing or barrier provisions of this chapter shall apply to existing pools
as well as to those installed hereafter. [Amended 12-11-2014 by L.L. No.
2-2014]
(3) All illumination shall be so directed as to cast no direct light upon adjoining
130.Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(1), (2) and (3), which provided specific fencing requirements, were repealed
6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994.
§ 175-65 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-66
175:114
§ 175-67. Maintenance standards. [Added 6-8-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000]
All structures shall be maintained in a structurally safe and sound condition, in
compliance with fire, electrical and building codes then in effect. Any structure that
is unusable for its intended purpose on the date of enactment of this amendment, or
which thereafter becomes unusable for its intended purpose due to fire, other casualty or
deterioration, shall be restored to a usable condition in compliance with fire, electrical
and building codes then in effect. In the case of structures damaged by fire or other
casualty, the restoration shall be completed within 90 days after the casualty. In the case
of structures that are unusable on the date of the adoption of this amendment or structures
becoming unusable due to deterioration, the restoration shall be completed within 90
days after notice from the Code Enforcement Officer. Any approval or permit issued in
connection with such restoration shall recite that the restoration is to be completed within
that ninety-day period. The recipient of any such approval or permit may apply to the
Board or official who issued it for an extension of six months in which to complete the
restoration.
§ 175-68. Demolition. [Added 6-8-2000 by L.L. No. 4-2000; amended 6-23-2005 by
L.L. No. 4-2005]
properties. No overhead electrical wires shall be permitted within 15 feet of
the pool enclosure.
(4) No wastewater from a swimming pool shall be discharged into a public
sanitary system or permitted to flow in or on a neighboring property or street.
(5) Upon the abandonment of any private swimming pool, the surface of the yard
shall be returned to its original grade and its former condition.
(6) Swimming pools shall not be permitted in front yards.
(7) A pool wave alarm shall be required in accordance with the provisions of the
New York Stake Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. [Added
12-11-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
A. Any application for demolition of any building shall be immediately referred to the
Historical Preservation Commission, which may submit such report and
recommendations as it deems proper for consideration of the Zoning Board of
Appeals in its determination of whether the building is of significant historical
value.
B. Demolition may be permitted only after submission and approval of plans for the
site, including Zoning Board of Appeals approval for new construction, if any. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall require a timetable for the proposed project and may
require guaranties for the proposed project and may require guaranties secured by
performance bonds for demolition and completion of the project. In no case shall
the time between demolition and the commencement of new construction exceed
six months.
(1) No structure may be demolished unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds
either:
§ 175-66 ZONING § 175-68
175:115
(a) The structure is not of significant historical value; or
(b) Where the structure is of significant historical value, the structure is
deteriorating and that the owner has demonstrated that he cannot
economically afford to preserve the structure; has sought financial
assistance under established programs for historic preservation and failed
to obtain sufficient assistance to enable him economically to preserve the
structure; and has offered to sell the parcel upon which the structure is
located and has been unable to find a purchaser at the fair market value
who would agree to preserve the structure on the parcel. If the Zoning
Board of Appeals finds that the structure should be preserved it may,
notwithstanding the demonstration made by the owner, withhold approval
of demolition for a period not exceeding one year from the date of the
application for a demolition permit. If, during that period, the owner, the
Zoning Board of Appeals or other interested parties are able to obtain
sufficient financial assistance to preserve the structure or a purchaser at
the fair market value who will agree to preserve the structure on the
parcel, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall deny a permit to demolish the
structure. For purposes of this subsection, "economically afford" means,
in the case of a single-family or two-family owner-occupied house, an
inability to preserve the structure without financial hardship; in the case
of rental or commercial property, an inability to earn a reasonable return
on the property if the structure is preserved; in the case of property owned
and used by a nonprofit organization, an inability to preserve the structure
without financial hardship. Preservation of a structure includes such
additions or other alterations as may exist.
(2) Moving of structures or buildings may be permitted as an alternative to
demolition.
§ 175-68 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-68
175:116
ARTICLE XVIII
Administration
§ 175-69. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such provisions shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, convenience and
general welfare.
§ 175-70. Enforcement. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village of Webster Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 175-71. Building permits.
§ 175-72. Certificates of occupancy.
§ 175-73. Application for building permits and certificates of occupancy.
Applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be made upon such
forms and shall be accompanied by such layout or plot plans as shall be prescribed by
the Building Inspector to facilitate enforcement of this chapter.131
§ 175-74. Expiration of permits, approvals and variances. [Amended 4-5-1982 by
L.L. No. 3-1982; 3-9-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
A. No structure shall be erected or altered unless a building permit has been issued for
it by the Building Inspector.
B. Except upon a written order of the Board of Appeals, no building permit shall be
issued for any structure or alteration or use which would be in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter.
A. No structure hereafter erected shall be used, and no land shall be used or changed
in use, until a certificate of occupancy therefor has been issued by the Building
Inspector. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a survey map or tape
location map is submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector.
B. No structure hereafter altered shall continue to be used for more than 30 days after
the alteration is completed unless a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued
by the Building Inspector.
C. Except upon a written order of the Board of Appeals, no certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for any structure or use which would be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Any approval issued by any Village official under this chapter, any subdivision
approval granted under Chapter 137, Subdivision of Land, any zoning variance and
any other permit of any kind which is approved under this chapter, with the
exception of building permits issued under the provisions of § 175-8E(2), shall
131.Editor's Note: See Ch. 30, Building Construction, § 30-11.
§ 175-69 ZONING § 175-74
175:117
expire if the construction or use permitted by such approval, variance or permit is
not begun within one year after the granting of the approval, variance or permit.
The recipient of any such approval, variance or permit may apply to the Board or
official who issued the approval, variance or permit for an extension of one year in
which to begin construction. [Amended 4-13-2000 by L.L. No. 3-2000]
B. Building permits issued under the provisions of § 175-8E(2) shall be limited to a
period of 90 days. The recipient of such a permit may apply to the Zoning Board of
Appeals for an extension of up to six months.
C. This section shall apply to all approvals, variances and permits granted before the
effective date of this chapter or hereafter.
§ 175-74 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-74
175:118
ARTICLE XIX
Board of Appeals
§ 175-75. Organization. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 12-14-2006 by
L.L. No 1-2006; 11-12-2020 by L.L. No. 3-2020]
§ 175-76. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994; 11-12-2020
by L.L. No. 3-2020]
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Webster hereby abolishes the existing
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals. A new Zoning Board of Appeals is
hereby created. Said Board shall consist of five members. The Mayor, with the
consent of the Board of Trustees, shall designate and appoint the Chairperson of the
new Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall appoint its own
secretary and may prescribe rules for the conduct of its affairs. Of the members of
the Board first appointed, one shall hold office for a term of one year, one for the
term of two years, one for the term of three years, one for the term of four years and
one for the term of five years, from and after appointment. All members' terms are
based upon the Village official year. Each member's term shall expire at the end of
the Village official year during the last year of such member's term. Each member's
successors shall be appointed for a term of five years from and after the expiration
of the term of their predecessor in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of term, the Village Board shall appoint the new member for the
unexpired term. The Mayor shall have the power to remove any member of the
Board of Appeals for cause and after public hearing.
B. Alternate members.
(1) Definition: An individual appointed, as provided herein, to serve on the
Zoning Board of Appeals when required to obtain or maintain a quorum.
(2) Appointment; terms; powers; procedure; applicability of state and local laws.
(a) Two alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
concurrence of the Board of Trustees.
(b) Alternate members shall be appointed for a term of five years.
(c) The Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall designate an
alternate member or members to serve when necessary, to fill an absence,
to maintain a quorum of such Board to conduct business. When so
designated, the alternate members shall possess all of the powers and
responsibilities of a member of such Board.
(d) All provisions of state and local law relating to eligibility, compensation,
residency, vacancy, attendance, removal, compatibility of office, and
service on other Boards shall apply to alternate members during their
period of appointment, whether serving or not.
A. The new Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties of a
Planning Board and a Zoning Board of Appeals as set forth in New York State
Village Law, Chapter 137 of the Code of the Village of Webster, Subdivision of
§ 175-75 ZONING § 175-76
175:119
Land, and Chapter 175 of the Code of the Village of Webster, Zoning. Wherever
the terms "Zoning Board," "Zoning Board of Appeals" or "Planning Board" appear
in the Code of the Village of Webster, said terms shall hereafter mean and refer to
the Zoning Board of Appeals created upon the adoption of this local law.132
B. In addition, the Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties particularly
set forth in Village Code § 175-76A, B, C, D and E.
C. Use variances.
(1) To grant use variances authorizing a use of the land which otherwise would
not be allowed or which would be prohibited by the terms of this chapter. No
use variance shall be granted unless the Board shall find that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. No finding of
unnecessary hardship shall be made unless all of the following are established:
(a) Under applicable zoning regulations, the applicant is deprived of all
economic use or benefit from the property in question, which deprivation
shall be established by competent financial evidence.
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique and
does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or neighborhood.
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(2) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant the
minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to address the
unnecessary hardship proved by the applicant and at the same time preserve
and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
D. Area variances.
(1) To grant area variances from the area or dimensional requirements of this
chapter. In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed
against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or
community by such grant. In making such determination, the Board shall also
consider whether:
(a) An undesirable change will be produced in the character of the
neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created by the
granting of the area variance;
(b) The benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some method,
feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an area variance;
(c) The requested area variance is substantial;
132.Editor's Note: "This local law" refers to L.L. No. 3-2020, adopted 11-12-2020, the New Zoning Board of Appeals Local
Law of 2020.
§ 175-76 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § 175-76
175:120
§ 175-77. Procedures.
(d) The proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on the
physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or district; and
(e) The alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration shall be
relevant to the decision of the Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily
preclude the granting of the area variance.
(2) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant the
minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and at the same
time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health,
safety and welfare of the community.
E. Conditions. With respect to the granting of both use variances and area variances,
to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and
incidental to the proposed use of the property or the period of time such variance
shall be in effect. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of
this chapter and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact
the variance may have upon the neighborhood or community.
A. The Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by
law and by this chapter. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in
writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every appeal or application shall refer
to the specific provision of the local law involved and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is appealed from or the details of the variance that is applied for
and the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted, as the
case may be. [Amended 1-9-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020]
B. Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, each of which shall
contain a full record of the findings of the Board in the particular case.
C. All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson
and at other times as such Board may determine. Such Chairperson or, in the
Chairperson's absence, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of such Board shall be open to the public.
Such Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
also keep records of its examination and other official actions. Every rule or
regulation and every amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
§ 175-76 ZONING § 175-77
175:121

ARTICLE XX
Penalties; Construal of Provisions
§ 175-78. Penalties for offenses; enforcement. [Amended 6-9-1994 by L.L. No.
2-1994]
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any owner or lessee or other person shall
constitute an offense, and each week's violation shall be deemed a separate offense,
punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days or a fine not exceeding
$250, or by both such imprisonment and fine, punishable as provided in the New York
State Penal Law and any amendments thereto. The Village shall have all powers in
equity and in law to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Building Inspector shall
be the enforcing officer, and the Building Inspector is to report to the Village Board
any violations of this chapter of which the Building Inspector has knowledge or any
complaints of violations which are presented to the Building Inspector.
§ 175-79. Construal of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, morals, safety
and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, statutes or local laws, the
most restrictive thereof, or those imposing the highest standards, shall govern.
§ 175-80. Amendments.
The Village Board may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition or on
recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals, amend, supplement, change, modify
or repeal this chapter in accordance with the applicable provisions of law.
§ 175-81. Effect on pending actions and proceedings.
The adoption of this chapter shall not affect or impair any permit granted, act done,
offense committed or right accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred, prior to the time this chapter takes effect, under any prior zoning
local law of the Village of Webster; but the same may be enjoined, ascertained, enforced,
prosecuted or inflicted as fully and to the same extent as if this chapter had not been
adopted; and all actions and proceedings commenced under or by virtue of such prior
local law and pending at the time this chapter takes effect may be prosecuted and
defended to final effect in the same manner as they might have been if this chapter had
not been adopted.
§ 175-78 ZONING § 175-81
175:123

Disposition List
§ 175-81 ZONING § 175-81
175:125

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 3-1994 12-8-1994 Senior citizens tax
exemption
Superseded by L.L.
No. 2-2008
L.L. No. 1-1995 2-9-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 2-1995 9-14-1995 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 3-1995 9-28-1995 Peace and good order: adult
uses amendment
Ch. 93, Art. II
L.L. No. 1-1996 1-11-1996 Animals: dogs Ch. 24, Art. I
L.L. No. 1-1997 4-10-1997 Solid waste amendment Ch. 127
L.L. No. 1-1998 2-12-1998 Alternative veterans tax
exemption
Superseded by L.L.
No. 3-2008
L.L. No. 1-1999 2-11-1999 Senior citizens tax
exemption amendment
Superseded by L.L.
No. 2-2008
L.L. No. 2-1999 5-13-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 3-1999 5-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 156; 175
L.L. No. 4-1999 3-11-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 5-1999 4-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 6-1999 8-12-1999 Business Improvement
District
Ch. 33
L.L. No. 7-1999 8-12-1999 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2000 2-24-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 2-2000 3-9-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 3-2000 4-13-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 4-2000 6-8-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 5-2000 7-27-2000 Retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No. 1-2001 1-25-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 2-2001 6-14-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 3-2001 8-23-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
§ 175-81 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 4-2001 12-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 1-2002 10-24-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 1-2003 6-26-2003 Skateboards amendment Ch. 117
L.L. No. 2-2003 9-11-2003 Residency requirement for
appointed officials
Ch. 13, Art. I
L.L. No. 1-2004 4-22-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 1-2005 1-13-2005 Utilities tax Ch. 143, Art. IV
L.L. No. 2-2005 6-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 3-2005 6-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 4-2005 6-23-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 5-2005 8-11-2005 Administration and
enforcement of building
construction code
amendment
Ch. 30, Art. I
L.L. No. 6-2005 8-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 7-2005 10-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 1-2006 12-14-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 2-2006 12-28-2006 Gasoline stations and repair
shops amendment
Ch. 58
L.L. No. 3-2006 12-28-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 1-2007 6-14-2007 Building construction:
administration and
enforcement amendment;
fire prevention amendment
Chs. 30, Art. I; 46
L.L. No. 2-2007 11-8-2007 Lead paint removal Ch. 71
L.L. No. 3-2007 4-27-2007 Parks and recreation fee
amendment
NCM
L.L. No. 4-2007 7-26-2007 Assessment Ch. 7
L.L. No. 1-2008 2-28-2008 Tax exemption for disabled
persons with limited
income
Ch. 143, Art. V
L.L. No. 2-2008 2-28-2008 Senior citizens tax
exemption
Ch. 143, Art. II
§ DL-1 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 3-2008 2-28-2008 Alternative veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 143, Art. III
L.L. No. 4-2008 2-14-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 5-2008 4-24-2008 Business Improvement
District amendment
Ch. 33
L.L. No. 6-2008 4-24-2008 Business Improvement
District amendment
Ch. 33
L.L. No. 7-2008 Declared invalid by
court
L.L. No. 8-2008 5-8-2008 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 50
L.L. No. 9-2008 8-14-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 10-2008 9-11-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 11-2008 11-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 12-2008 11-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 1-2009 5-28-2009 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 113, Part 1
L.L. No. 2-2009 5-28-2009 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 113, Part 1
L.L. No. 3-2009 8-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 1-2010 8-26-2010 Ethics, Code of Ch. 9
L.L. No. 2-2010 9-9-2010 Parks and recreation areas:
park hours of operation
Ch. 90, Art. I
L.L. No. 3-2010 11-11-2010 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 97
L.L. No. 4-2010 11-11-2010 Business improvement
district amendment
Ch. 33
L.L. No. 1-2011 6-9-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 2-2011 6-23-2011 Officers and employees:
residency requirement for
appointed officials
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I
L.L. No. 1-2012 2-23-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 2-2012 4-12-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
L.L. No. 3-2012 5-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 4-2012 8-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 5-2012 10-11-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No. 6-2012 8-11-2012 Moratorium on site plan or
subdivision approval
NCM
L.L. No. 7-2012 12-13-2012 Dumpsters Repealed by L.L. No.
2-2014
L.L. No. 1-2013 6-13-2013 Officers and employees:
antinepotism
Ch. 13, Art. II
L.L. No. 1-2014 10-9-2014 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 50
L.L. No. 2-2014 12-11-2014 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No. 1-2015 6-11-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 175
L.L. No. 1-2016 4-14-2016 Sewer rents Ch. 113, Part 3
L.L. No. 2-2016 8-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 156
L.L. No. 1-2017 3-23-2017 Zoning Map amendment NCM
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
L.L. No.
1-2019
8-8-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175 3
L.L. No.
2-2019
8-8-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 156 3
L.L. No.
1-2020
1-9-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175 3
L.L. No.
2-2020
1-9-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 156 3
L.L. No.
3-2020
11-12-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 175 3
§ DL-1 WEBSTER VILLAGE CODE § DL-1
DL:4