8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 1/277
Village of Westfield, NY
Tuesday, August 4, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the local laws, ordinances
and certain resolutions of the Village of Westfield, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 155, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the
"Code of the Village of Westfield," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village of Westfield" to any
other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the
appropriate chapter title, chapter number, Article number or section number appearing in the Code as if
such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of local laws,
ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of the Code by this local law
are intended as a continuation of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior
local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and
are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield, and it is
the intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as
it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Village of Westfield in force on
the date of the adoption of this local law and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued
in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 2/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law shall not affect the
following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved
from repeal:
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the Village
of Westfield prior to the effective date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this local law in violation of any
legislative provision of the Village of Westfield or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may
result therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this local law, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Village of Westfield.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Village
of Westfield.
Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Westfield providing for the laying out, opening, altering,
widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance
or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place within
the Village of Westfield or any portion thereof.
Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Westfield appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond of the Village of Westfield or other instruments or evidence of the Village's indebtedness.
Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property, or any
lawful contract or obligation.
The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
The annexation or dedication of property.
Any legislation relating to salaries.
Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
Any legislation adopted subsequent to January 16, 1995.
Legislation relating to water and the water system of the Village.
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of this local law or of any local law,
ordinance or resolution included in this Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by
any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section,
Article, chapter or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have
been rendered.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Village Clerk of the Village of
Westfield and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 3/277
local law; and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village Clerk of the
Village of Westfield by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village of Westfield, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all
purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the local laws, ordinances and
resolutions known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Westfield" or any new local laws or
resolutions, when enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees
to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code
shall be understood and intended to include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements.
Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be enacted or
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book
containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained herein, and such local laws,
ordinances or resolutions may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of
Trustees deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code of the Village of Westfield required to be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the
public. All changes in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate the intention of said Board to
be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary
attachment of copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or
resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village of Westfield upon the
payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by
resolution for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or amends, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the Village of Westfield or who alters or tampers with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Westfield to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law shall be guilty of an
offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment
for a term of not more than 15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 4/277
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions for publication as the Code
of the Village of Westfield, no changes in the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and
resolutions have been made, except as provided for in Subsections B, C and D hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more
of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
In addition, the following amendments and/or additions are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this local law. (Chapter and section number references are to the local
laws, ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)[1]
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-11B, the chapters, parts and sections which were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this local law are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with the following wording: "amended (added)
10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995." A complete description of all changes is on file in the Village
offices.
Penalties. The following sections were added or amended to provide for a standard maximum
penalty of a fine of $250 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both: §§ 64-5; 103-
3; 114-12; 128-18B; and 138-5.
Fees. In the following sections, specific fee amounts have been replaced with the sentence "Fees
shall be as provided from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees": §§ 85-7; 114-7; 132-
8; 138-2C; and 155-74A.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the Code of the Village of
Westfield, such local law to be entitled "General Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the
sections of this local law shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of State of the State of New
York.
§ 1-14. (Reserved)
Article II. General Penalty and Word Usage
[Adopted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 1-15. Penalties for offenses.
Except where a penalty is specifically provided in legislation contained in this Code or inserted into this
Code subsequent to publication, a violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be punishable by
a fine of $250 or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or both. Each day's violation shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
§ 1-16. Word usage.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 5/277
A.
Whenever the terms "he," "him" or "his" or any pronouns referencing the masculine gender shall be
used, such terms shall be construed to include the feminine and the neuter.
Chapter 3. Administrator, Village
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 1-7-1985 by L.L. No. 1-1985.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 12.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 39.
§ 3-1. Office established; purpose.
In order to provide the most economical and efficient overall direction, coordination and control of the
day-to-day activities and operations of the Village of Westfield, to minimize the administrative details
now handled by the Board of Trustees, to provide centralized direction, coordination and control of
Village employees and to formalize the staff and advisory functions necessary to the foregoing, the
office of Village Administrator is hereby established for said Village.
§ 3-2. Appointment and term of office.
Appointment to this position shall be made by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees, at the annual meeting of the Board of Trustees. The term of office shall be for a one-year
period. For the first appointment, and whenever there shall be a vacancy, an appointment may be
made by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, with such appointment to end at
the first annual meeting after the initial appointment.
§ 3-3. Executive assistant to Mayor and Board of Trustees.
The Village Administrator shall act as the executive assistant of the Mayor and the Board of Trustees in
connection with the conduct of the affairs of the Village, subject to and in accordance with the rules
and regulations as may be promulgated from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees, which shall
prescribe the authority, functions, duties and responsibilities of the Village Administrator in addition to
those set forth herein.
§ 3-4. Supervision by Board of Trustees.
The Village Administrator shall report to and be under the supervision of the Mayor and the Board of
Trustees.
§ 3-5. Powers and duties.
Subject to the approval, direction and control of the Board of Trustees, or in those instances where
approval, direction and control is, by applicable law, reserved to the Mayor, then under the approval,
direction and control of the Mayor, and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the Board of Trustees as provided in § 3-3 of this chapter, the Village Administrator
shall:
With the approval and direction of the Mayor, direct and coordinate the activities of the Recreation
Department, Police Department, and Administration and Finance Department in accordance with
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 6/277
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
the policies of the Board of Trustees. The heads of such departments shall be responsible to and
report directly to the Village Administrator.
[Amended 6-23-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014[1]]
Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Subsections B and C and provided for the
relettering of former Subsections D through V as Subsections B through T, respectively.
Attend meetings of the Board of Trustees, prepare agendas, keep the Board of Trustees fully
informed on all matters of importance in the conduct of Village business, take part in discussions
of the Village Board of Trustees and make recommendations to the Board of Trustees for changes
in policy and legislation for its consideration.
Attend meetings of the Board of Public Utilities, prepare agendas and record minutes, advise,
assist and consult with the Board of Public Utilities (BPU) as necessary and coordinate BPU
activities with the activities of the Village Board.
As directed by the Village Board, see that all inquiries and comments by Village residents and
other interested persons are adequately taken care of and referred if necessary to the appropriate
Village officials for prompt investigation and response.
Provide for appropriate Village publicity through news items, notices and releases; and maintain
contact with other Village organizations and their activities and coordinate to the extent necessary.
Represent, or direct and supervise the representation of, the Board of Trustees in collective
bargaining negotiations with employee representatives and to propose agreements to the Board of
Trustees for final approval; and implement and enforce personnel policies, rules and regulations
enacted by the Board of Trustees or prescribed by law or collective bargaining agreements.
Investigate complaints and inquiries by the Mayor and Trustees concerning government
operations and services and report corrective actions taken, as well as proposals for any
necessary legislative or policy action, to the Board of Trustees; and make such other reports as
the Board of Trustees may require concerning the operations and services of the departments of
Village government.
Subject to the approval and direction of the Mayor, oversee the fulfillment of provisions of
franchises, permits and privileges granted by the Village and contracts to which it is a party and
recommend appropriate remedial action to the Board of Trustees in the event that commitments
are not fulfilled.
Represent the Village, with the approval of the Mayor and Village Board, in its relations with the
federal, state and county governments and other municipalities.
Keep the Village Board informed as to federal aid projects and state aid projects and any other aid
programs for which the Village may qualify.
Subject to the approval and directions of the Mayor, oversee the enforcement of the rules,
regulations, ordinances, local laws and codes of the Village so that they are administered
efficiently and fairly.
Conduct a continuing study of all functions and activities of the Village and make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees as to measures or programs which he believes will
improve the efficiency or economy of Village government.
Supervise the activities of the Village Treasurer.
See that the Board of Trustees, in cooperation and conjunction with the Village Treasurer, is kept
fully advised of the financial condition of the Village.
Prepare, in conjunction with the Treasurer and Village Board, the annual budget.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 7/277
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
Supervise the preparation of necessary documents required for obtaining bids on materials,
equipment or capital projects, as authorized by the Board of Trustees.
Serve as records access officer of the Village.
Maintain contacts with all Village boards and commissions, and provide any necessary
coordination to ensure appropriate administration of policies and regulations.
Supervise the activities of the Village Clerk.
Supervise the activities of the Village Inspection Officer.
§ 3-6. Assigned liaisons.
The Village Administrator shall keep the Mayor and the appropriate Trustee assigned as liaison to a
department currently informed as to matters affecting the efficient functioning of the department to
which the Trustee is so assigned.
§ 3-7. Budget officer.
In addition to the powers and duties set forth, the Village Administrator shall serve as budget officer if
and when he is so designated by the Mayor, in accordance with § 5-500 of the Village Law.
§ 3-8. Position to be full-time.
The position of the Village Administrator may be filled by a person holding other positions in the Village
employ, but this position shall be held only by a full-time employee.
§ 3-9. Powers and duties of other officers to be unchanged.
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or construed as abolishing, transferring or curtailing any
powers or duties of the Board of Trustees, other Village boards or commissions or the Mayor,
Treasurer or Clerk as prescribed by the Village Law or other applicable laws of the state.
Chapter 12. Defense and Indemnification
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 3-19-1990 by L.L. No. 1-1990.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 12-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide representation and indemnification to the extent set out herein
for elected and appointed officials as well as other public employees who are sued civilly in their
individual capacity for alleged acts or omissions while they were acting within the scope of their official
duties. In enacting this chapter, the Board of Trustees finds that the State of New York has enacted
similar provisions for the legal and financial security of its officers and employees and further finds that
similar security is also required for those in service for the Village of Westfield.
§ 12-2. Definitions.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 8/277
A.
B.
C.
A.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE
Any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the Village
of Westfield, whether or not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a
municipally sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an independent contractor. The
term "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal
representative.
§ 12-3. Provision of and payment for defense.
Upon strict compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 12-5 of this chapter and upon the
written recommendation of the Village Attorney that the act or omission alleged occurred within the
scope of the employee's public employment or duties and such act or omission was done in good
faith, without malice and without intentional or reckless conduct, and that there is not insurance
carried by the Village of Westfield that will respond to the action or proceeding brought against the
employee; then the Village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil action or
proceeding, in any state or federal court to the extent herein set out, arising out of any alleged act
or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have occurred while the employee
was acting in good faith and without malice and without intentional or reckless conduct and within
the scope of his public employment or duties or which is brought to enforce a provision of § 1981
or 1983 of Title 42 of the United States Code. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise
where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Village of Westfield.
Subject to the conditions set out in this chapter the employee shall be entitled to be represented
by the Village Attorney; provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to representation by
private counsel in any civil judicial proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based
upon his investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that representation
by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon
appropriate motion or by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and that
the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel. The Village Attorney may require,
as a condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation, that appropriate
groups of such employees be represented by the same counsel. If it has been determined that an
employee or group of employees is entitled to representation by private counsel under the
provisions of this section, the Village Attorney shall so certify to the Village Board, and thereupon
reasonable attorney fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the Village to such private
counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding upon certification
by the Village Attorney that the employee is entitled to representation under the terms and
conditions of this chapter and also upon certification by the head of the department, board,
commission, division, office or agency in which such employee is employed and upon the audit
and warrant of the Village Clerk. Nothing herein contained shall prevent an employee from
employing his or her own counsel at the expense of the employee.
Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the Village Attorney as
required by § 12-5 of this chapter, the Attorney shall take the necessary steps, including the
retention of private counsel where required under the terms and conditions of this chapter, on
behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of any question
pertaining to the obligation to provide for a defense.
§ 12-4. Indemnification of employees.
The Village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees to the extent herein set out, in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state or federal court or in the
amount of any settlement of a claim not paid by the Village's insurance carrier, provided that the
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 9/277
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose occurred while the employee was
acting in good faith and within the scope of his public employment or duties, except that the duty
to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or
damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing, malice or reckless conduct on the part of the
employee.
An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be submitted to the Village Board any
proposed settlement which may be subject to indemnification by the Village, and, if not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall certify such settlement and submit
such settlement and certification to the Village Attorney. The Village Attorney shall review such
proposed settlement as to form and amount and shall render a report as to whether in his
professional opinion the settlement is in the best interest of the Village. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to authorize the Village to indemnify or save harmless an employee with
respect to a settlement that has not been first reviewed by the Village Attorney and the Mayor and
approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the settlement of the claim, the
employee shall cause to be served a copy of such judgment or settlement, personally or by
certified or registered mail within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Mayor, and, if
not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such warrant shall then be issued by the Village
Clerk.
§ 12-5. Duty of employees.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter shall be conditioned
upon:
Delivery to the Village Attorney or his assistant, at his office, by the employee of the original or
a complete copy of any and all summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading
within five days after he is served with such document.
The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and in
defense of any action or proceeding against the Village based upon the same act or omission
and in the prosecution of any appeal.
Compliance with all other provisions of this chapter and cooperation with and obedience to
the requests of the Village insurance carrier(s).
Delivery of the documents as set out in this section shall be deemed a request by the employee
that the Village provide for his defense pursuant to this chapter.
§ 12-6. Limitations.
The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees as defined herein and shall not enlarge
or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any provision of this chapter be construed to
affect, alter or repeal any provision of the Workers' Compensation Law.
Any conditions imposed or legal representation offered by an insurer of the Village of Westfield
providing insurance which may respond to the action or proceeding brought against the employee
shall supersede any right, procedure or privilege conferred by this chapter.
This chapter does not extend to sums assessed in punitive or exemplary damages, fines or
penalties or recoveries pursuant to § 51 of the General Municipal Law.
The rights and obligations afforded employees by this chapter are limited to those specifically set
out herein.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 10/277
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
§ 12-7. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify the rights and
obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall not be
construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or
conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the Village or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in accordance with or by
reason of any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law.
Chapter 14. Discipline of Public Officers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 4-17-1995 by L.L. No. 2-1995.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 14-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted to establish a procedure whereby public officers in the Village of Westfield may
be afforded a due process hearing in the event a need arises for the appointing authority to pursue
disciplinary charges against such an officer.
§ 14-2. Procedure.
A person holding a public office in the Village of Westfield in the noncompetitive or exempt class of the
civil service may be disciplined by the officer or body having the power of appointment in accordance
with the procedure set forth in Subdivision 2 of § 75 of the Civil Service Law, as it existed on April 1,
1995.
§ 14-3. Disciplinary action.
If an officer is found guilty of disciplinary charges, the disciplinary action to be imposed may
consist of either or all of the following:
A reprimand;
A suspension without pay for a period not exceeding two months; or
A termination from office.
If the officer is found guilty, he or she shall be provided a copy of the charges, the written answer
thereto, a transcript of the hearing and the determination rendered by the appointing authority. The
civil service agency having jurisdiction shall be notified of the determination.
§ 14-4. Procedural limitations.
No proceeding pursuant to this chapter shall be commenced more than two years after alleged
incompetence or misconduct has occurred or has become known to the appointing authority. This
limitation shall not apply where the alleged incompetency or misconduct would, if proven in a judicial
proceeding, constitute a crime.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 11/277
A.
§ 14-5. Appeal of adverse determination.
The determination rendered by the appointing authority pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a final
determination of the Village of Westfield and may be reviewed upon a petition filed in accordance with
the provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
Chapter 16. Ethics, Code of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 12-7-1970. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 16-1. Legislative intent.
The Village Board of the Village of Westfield recognizes that there are state statutory provisions
mandating villages to establish rules and standards of ethical conduct for public officers and
employees which, if observed, can enhance public confidence in local government. It is the purpose of
this chapter to implement this objective through the establishment of standards of conduct, to provide
for punishment of violation of such standards and to create a Board of Ethics to render advisory
opinions to the Village officers and employees as provided for herein.
§ 16-2. Applicability.
The standards, prohibited acts and procedures established herein are in addition to any prohibited
acts, conflicts of interest provisions or procedures prescribed by statute of the State of New York and
also in addition to common law rules and judicial decisions relating to the conduct of village officers, to
the extent that the same are more severe in their application than this chapter.
§ 16-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
VILLAGE
Any board, commission, district, council or other agency, department or unit of the government of
the Village of Westfield.
VILLAGE EMPLOYEE
Any officer or employee of the Village of Westfield, whether paid or unpaid, whether serving in a
full-time, part-time or advisory capacity.
§ 16-4. Conflicts of interest.
No Village employee shall have any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any
business or transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature which is in
substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest.
§ 16-5. Standards of conduct.
No Village employee shall accept other employment which will impair his independence of
judgment in the exercise of his official duties.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 12/277
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
No Village employee shall accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity
which will require him to disclose confidential information which he has gained by reason of his
official position or authority.
No Village employee shall accept an offer of future employment which will impair his
independence of judgment in the exercise of his official duties or which will conflict in any way with
his official duties.
No Village employee shall use or attempt to use his official position to secure unwarranted
privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
No Village employee shall engage in any transaction as representative or agent of the Village with
any business entity in which he has a direct or indirect financial interest that might reasonably tend
to conflict with the proper discharge of his official duties.
A Village employee shall not by his conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any
person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of his official
duties or that he is affected by the kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or person.
Each Village employee shall abstain from making personal investments in enterprises which he
has reason to believe may be directly involved in decisions to be made by him or which will
otherwise create substantial conflict between his duty in the public interest and his private interest.
Each Village employee shall endeavor to pursue a course of conduct which will not raise suspicion
among the public that he is likely to be engaged in acts that are in violation of his trust.
Each Village employee shall make a full disclosure of whatever interest he may have, whether
financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, in legislation that is before any Village governing body.
No Village employee employed on a full-time basis nor any firm or association of which such
employee is a member nor corporation, a substantial portion of the stock of which is owned or
controlled directly or indirectly by such employee, shall sell goods or services to any person, firm,
corporation or association which is licensed or whose rates are fixed by the Village in which such
employee serves or is employed.
§ 16-6. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any such Village employee who shall
knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of this chapter may be fined, suspended or
removed from office or employment in the manner provided by law.
§ 16-7. Establishment and membership of Board of Ethics.
There is hereby established a Board of Ethics consisting of at least three members to be appointed by
the Village Board, all of whom reside in the Village of Westfield and who shall serve without
compensation and at the pleasure of the Village Board of the Village of Westfield. A majority of such
members shall be persons other than Village employees, but such Board of Ethics shall include at
least one member who is an elected or appointed Village employee of the Village of Westfield.
§ 16-8. Duties of Board; advisory opinions.
The Board of Ethics established hereunder shall render advisory opinions to Village employees on
written request and, upon request of the Village Board, make recommendations to such Village Board
as to any amendments of this chapter. The opinions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory and
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 13/277
confidential, and in no event shall the identity of the Village employee be disclosed except to
authorized persons and agencies. Such opinions shall be on the advice of counsel employed by the
Board of Ethics or, if none, of the Village Attorney.
§ 16-9. Rules and regulations; records.
Upon its formation, such Board of Ethics shall promulgate its own rules and regulations as to its form
and Village procedures and shall maintain appropriate records of its opinions and proceedings.
§ 16-10. Distribution and posting of code.
Upon the adoption of this chapter, the Village Mayor shall cause a copy thereof to be distributed to
every Village employee of this Village. Failure to distribute any such copy or failure of any Village
employee to receive such copy shall have no effect on the duty of compliance with this code nor the
enforcement of provisions hereof. The Village Mayor shall further cause a copy of this chapter to be
kept posted conspicuously in each public building under the jurisdiction of the Village. Failure to so
post this chapter shall have no effect on the duty of compliance herewith nor on the enforcement of
provisions hereof.
§ 16-11. Filing of copy with state.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Within 30 days of the adoption of this chapter or any amendments thereto, the Village Clerk shall file a
copy thereof in the office of the appropriate state agency.
§ 16-12. Appropriations for Board of Ethics.
The Village Board may appropriate moneys from the general Village funds for the maintenance of and
for personal services to the Board of Ethics established hereunder, but such Board of Ethics may not
commit the expenditure of Village moneys except within the appropriations provided herein.
Chapter 32. Local Laws, Publication of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-
1995. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 32-1. Publication specifications.
Every local law and every amendment or supplement to a local law hereinafter adopted or approved by
the Village Board of the Village of Westfield which is or may be required to be published in one or more
newspapers in order to make such law, amendment or supplement effectual shall not be so published
in full, but it shall be sufficient to publish in such newspaper or newspapers a notice setting forth the
title thereof, a brief description of the provisions thereof and a statement that the full text thereof is on
file and may be inspected in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 32-2. Effect on statutory provisions.
This chapter, adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, shall supersede in its
application to the Village of Westfield the provisions of § 7-706 of the Village Law relating to the
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 14/277
[1]
publication of every zoning law and every amendment thereto and any other provision of the Village
Law requiring publication of a local law, amendment or supplement approved by the Village Board.
§ 32-3. Petition for referendum; when laws effective.
Every local law and every amendment to a local law, other than with respect to the manner of
publication after adoption as provided in §§ 32-1 and 32-2 above, shall be subject to referendum on
petition pursuant to § 24 of the Municipal Home Rule Law and shall take effect immediately upon filing
in the office of the Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of such law.
Chapter 39. Officers and Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 16.
Article I. Acting Village Justice
[Adopted 11-19-1979 by L.L. No. 3-1979; amended in its entirety 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 39-1. Residency requirements.
The Board of Trustees may appoint an Acting Village Justice who resides anywhere in Chautauqua
County.
Article II. Residency Requirements for All Appointive Offices
[Adopted 4-8-1987 by L.L. No. 5-1987; amended 9-5-2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006]
§ 39-2. Legislative declaration.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield, recognizing that there may well exist a difficulty in
securing the best person for a particular appointive Village office if the person eligible to serve is
restricted to Village residency and acting under the authority granted by § 3-300 of the Village Law of
the State of New York, has determined that any appointed Village official need not reside within the
Village of Westfield but must reside within the County of Chautauqua.
§ 39-3. Residency of appointed Village officials.
In the considering of positions of appointive public office (e.g., Village Administrator, Clerk, Treasurer,
Deputy Clerk, Deputy Treasurer, Clerk to Justice), the Board of Trustees shall consider eligible and
qualified candidates who reside in the Village, then the Town, and then finally the rest of Chautauqua
County.[1]
Editor’s Note: Former Art. III, Village Clerk, adopted 7-1-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996, was superseded 9-5-
2006 by L.L. No. 6-2006.
Chapter 43. Police Force, Auxiliary
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 15/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 6-1-1987 by L.L. No. 7-1987.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 43-1. Purpose.
The Village of Westfield is authorized to adopt and amend local laws that are consistent with the
Constitution and general state laws in relation to the government, protection, order, conduct, safety,
health and well-being of persons or property in the Village [Municipal Home Rule Law § 10,
Subdivision 1(ii)a(12)]. Therefore, the Village of Westfield by local law may employ persons not having
the status of police or peace officer for crowd or traffic control and other related duties during special
events in the Village and road closings due to special hazards. The Village may grant to these persons
the authority to issue appearance tickets to enforce the crowd and traffic regulations.
§ 43-2. Duties and authority.
There shall be established in the Village of Westfield a cadre of persons known as the "auxiliary
police officers of the Village of Westfield." Their participation shall be on a volunteer basis. Their
duties shall consist of the following:
Crowd and traffic control during special events in the Village of Westfield.
To supervise road closings due to special hazards.
To assume other related duties during special events in the Village as directed by the Chief of
Police of the Village of Westfield, who shall be the commanding officer of the auxiliary police
force.
The authority of the auxiliary police shall be limited to the municipal corporate limits of the Village
of Westfield and on property owned by the Village of Westfield outside of its corporate limits.
§ 43-3. Workers' compensation coverage provided.
Consistent with the provisions of Chapter 470 of the Laws of 1986,[1] it is the intention of the
Village of Westfield to provide its auxiliary police officers with the benefits of the Workers'
Compensation Law and to deem such volunteers to be employees within the meaning of that term
as defined by § 2, Subdivision 4, of the Workers' Compensation Law. Any doubt as to the
coverage of an auxiliary police officer within the scope of this chapter shall be resolved in favor of
the auxiliary police officer.
Editor's Note: See § 2, Subdivision 4, of the Workers' Compensation Law.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield hereby recognizes the contributions made by
auxiliary police officers to the Village and recognizes the potential for loss of wages and medical
expenses associated with a potential injury or illness to such an auxiliary police officer arising out
of and in the course of performance of auxiliary police duties. The Village Board finds that it is in
the public interest of the residents of the Village of Westfield and others to protect those who might
serve as an auxiliary police officer from a loss of wages in a regular employment and potential
personal expense for medical services resulting from an injury or illness arising out of and in the
course of performance auxiliary police duties. The Village Board further finds that such workers'
compensation coverage serves to encourage such voluntary participation of individuals in the
Village's auxiliary police efforts.
§ 43-4. Definitions.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 16/277
[1]
A.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICER
An individual who is a member of the auxiliary police force of the Village of Westfield.
EMPLOYMENT
Participation on a voluntary basis with an auxiliary police effort made within the Village of
Westfield, consistent with the provisions of § 43-5 of this chapter.
WAGES
As applied to an auxiliary police officer, such money rate applying in his or her regular vocation but
in no event less than $30 per week. The scope of the term "wages" shall be consistent with the
meaning of this term pursuant to § 2, Subdivision 9(j), and § 14, Subdivision 6, of the Workers'
Compensation Law.
§ 43-5. Coverage.
For the purposes of this chapter, a member of the Village's auxiliary police force shall be deemed an
employee of the Village, as that term is defined in § 2, Subdivision 4, of the Workers' Compensation
Law, when such an auxiliary police officer is engaged in one or more of the following designated
services as authorized by the Chief of Police of the Village of Westfield or other appropriate officials as
designated by the Chief of Police who might be involved in the control of activities or efforts of the
auxiliary police officers. An auxiliary police officer shall be deemed to be employed by the Village solely
for the services or activities as described in § 43-2 above.
§ 43-6. Notification of provisions.
A copy of this chapter shall be provided to the Chief of Police of the Village of Westfield, who is in
charge of the auxiliary police force, and to each auxiliary police officer of the Village; provided,
however, that the failure of the Village of Westfield to do so shall not affect the application of this
chapter to any auxiliary police officer covered by this chapter.
Chapter 45. Public Works, Department of
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 7-9-1996 by L.L. No. 7-1996.
[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 124.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 132.
Water — See Ch. 150.
Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 45, Public Utilities, Board of,
adopted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 4-1995.
§ 45-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Westfield Public Works Law."
§ 45-2. Word usage; definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, words used in the singular include the plural and vice versa:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 17/277
B.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
(d)
(1)
(2)
B.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD
Board of Public Works.
DEPARTMENT
The Village of Westfield Department of Public Works.
DIRECTOR
Director of the Department of Public Works, as Chief Executive of said Department.
§ 45-3. Department of Public Works created; Director.
There shall be in the Village of Westfield a Department of Public Works. The principal executive
officer and administrative head of such department shall be the Director who shall be appointed by
the mayor subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees in the exempt or noncompetitive
classification as determined by civil service for the term and at such salary as may from time to
time be fixed by said Board of Trustees. The Director shall be appointed on the basis of his
administrative experience and qualifications for the duties of such office and such additional
standards as may be required by the Board of Trustees. The Director shall be the head of the
Department and shall have supervision of all supervisors and employees within the Department.
Such supervisory authority shall include the power and authority to remove supervisors and
employees under his jurisdiction in accordance with civil service and other applicable laws. In
addition, the Director shall have the power and authority to appoint those new supervisors and
employees from names recommended by the Board of Trustees.
Department divisions; funds.
Until such time as the same may be either amended or modified, the Department shall be
divided into the following divisions:
Water.
Electric.
Water Pollution Control Facility and Sewers.
Streets.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1)(e), Code Enforcement, was repealed 7-21-1997
by L.L. No. 2-1997.
Separate funds and accounts shall be kept for the water, sewer and electric utilities by the
Village Treasurer as required by the Uniform System of Accounts, the Department of Audit
and Control of the State of New York and other regulatory agencies. A separate fund and
account shall also be kept for the streets division by the Village Treasurer as required by the
Uniform System of Accounts and the Department of Audit and Control of the State of New
York. Each division may be operated with some independence of the others, except insofar as
the Director shall determine joint operations to be advisable and economical. Expenses
incurred in joint operations shall be equitably prorated among the divisions by the Director
after consultation with the Village Treasurer or his Deputy.
§ 45-4. Board of Public Works creation and membership.
[Amended 6-23-2014 by L.L. No. 3-2014]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 18/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
Pursuant to Village Law § 3-308, there is hereby created a Board of Public Works which shall
advise and assist the Director and the Board of Trustees in the operations of the electric, water
and sewer utility systems of the Village.
Number of Commissioners. The BPW shall consist of seven members of whom one shall be a
member of the Board of Trustees, which member shall be appointed at the organizational meeting
by the Mayor and serve a one-year term.
Appointment and tenure. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Board of Trustees, for terms which shall be so fixed that one shall expire each official year for
the following six years, and one per year thereafter, as provided by the Village Law, unless they
shall resign or be removed from office as provided in the Public Officers Law of the State of New
York.
Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, as provided in the Village Law of the State of
New York, for the unexpired term. No vacancy in the BPW shall impair the right of the remaining
BPW membership to exercise all the powers of the BPW.
Qualifications. Pursuant to Village Law § 3-300, Subdivision 2, resident electors of the Town of
Westfield or Village of Westfield shall be eligible for appointment to the BPW, except that not more
than two members shall reside in the Town of Westfield outside of the Village of Westfield. A
member ceasing to possess any of these qualifications shall vacate his office as prescribed by the
Village Law and Public Officers Law of the State of New York.
§ 45-5. Authority of Board of Public Works.
Policy. The Board shall be an advisory board and may recommend policies to assist the Director
and the Board of Trustees in governing its assigned responsibilities for utility management in
conformance with the Village Law of the State of New York, the Code of the Village of Westfield,
regulatory agency regulations and industry standards.
Clerk. The Village Clerk shall be the Clerk of the Board of Public Works.
Budget and rate structures. The Board may advise and assist the Director and the Village
Treasurer in establishing an annual budget setting forth the expenditures and expected revenue,
including rate structures, for the separate accounts to be maintained for the water, sewer and
electric divisions in accordance with the laws of the State of New York, Code of the Village of
Westfield, regulatory agency regulations and industry standards.
Other issues. The Board may also assist and advise the Director and the Board of Trustees in
other matters that come before it regarding the general operations and maintenance of the utilities
as requested from time to time by the Director or the Board of Trustees.
§ 45-6. Powers and duties of Director.
The powers and duties of the divisions of the DPW shall be established by and be under the
administration, direction and control of the Director, subject to the approval of the Board of
Trustees.
The Director may, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, establish, consolidate or abolish any
divisions now existing or hereafter created in said Department.
The Director is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the prior approval of the Board of
Trustees, except that such prior approval will not be required in cases of emergency, to retain and
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 19/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
employ private engineers, architects and consultants or firms practicing such profession for the
purposes of:
Preparing designs, plans and estimates of structures or projects of any type and character.
Rendering assistance and advice in connection with any project, whether defined or proposed
and under the supervision of the Department of Public Works.
Performing such other and necessary services as the Director may deem necessary in the
normal administration of the Department.
Sale of services, construction, contracts and real estate. The Director, in the efficient and
economical operation of the Department, both inside and outside the Village limits, may, subject to
the approval of the Board of Trustees and any restrictions and limitations imposed on the Village
by the Laws of the State of New York, sell its products and services to public and private
corporations and to other consumers; and construct plants, transmission lines and pipelines and
other facilities. Contracts, leases and agreements as well as the purchase or sale of real estate
and franchises must be approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
Extensions of services. The Director, with the assistance of the Board of Public Works, may
recommend to the Board of Trustees regulations or policies governing extensions of services both
inside and outside the Village limits.
Joint operations with others. The Director, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, may
enter into contracts and agreements with any public or private corporation or any individual, both
inside and outside the boundaries of the Village and state, for the joint use of property belonging
either to the Department or to the other contracting party or jointly to both parties. Pursuant to the
provisions of the Local Finance Law of the State of New York, the Department may enter into
contracts and agreements for the joint acquisition of personal property and the joint financing,
construction and operation of plants, buildings, transmission lines and other facilities subject to the
approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
Use of thoroughfares for utility installations. The Department may use the ground over, under or
along any Village-owned street or right-of-way but shall, in all cases and subject to applicable
general regulations of the Village, cause the surface of the public way to be restored to its usual
condition.
Rates. The Director after review and consultation with the Village Treasurer or his Deputy, shall
recommend rates to be charged for electricity, water and sewer utilities sold and services rendered
for review and approval by the Board of Trustees. Rates shall be fair, reasonable and
compensatory and shall be uniform for all consumers within the same class; but different rate
schedules may be applied to different classes of consumers as determined by the Board of
Trustees. Rates charged for sewer use shall be consistent with Environmental Protection Agency
rules, regulations and the provisions of any grants made to the Village. Rates for electric shall be
consistent with rules and regulations of the Power Authority of the State of New York and/or the
Public Service Commission, whichever shall be appropriate. Rates within the Village limits may be
less but shall be no greater than for the same class of consumers outside the Village limits. Rates
shall be sufficient to pay all operating and maintenance expenses of each respective utility
operation and all capital costs of the respective utility operations. Rates shall also be sufficient to
provide an annual contribution-in-lieu-of-taxes from the Electric, Water and Sewer Departments to
the general fund of the Village, as required by the Village Trustees. The DPW may require
reasonable deposits as security for the payment of charges for utility services and may provide for
the return of the deposits when satisfactory consumer credit has been established in accordance
with limitations imposed by the New York State Law and Regulations of the New York Power
Authority and/or Public Service Commission, if appropriate. A public hearing will be held for all rate
increases in accordance with Article 21 of the Village Law of the State of New York.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 20/277
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
Bond issues. The Director may recommend to the Board of Trustees that it may fund projects
either by using current funds or by financing them through the issuance of general obligation
bonds or notes.
Public information expenditures. The Director, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees,
may authorize reasonable expenditures to acquaint the public with the operations, programs and
plans of the DPW and to encourage conservation.
Investment of surplus funds. The Director, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees and
through the Village Treasurer or his Deputy, may invest Department surplus funds, if any, only in
the same manner as the Village Treasurer is authorized to invest other public funds.
Accounting and budget reports. The Director, upon consultation with the Village Treasurer or his
Deputy, in addition to the reports and accounting it may otherwise be required by law to make,
shall furnish the Board of Trustees its annual financial report which shall include a balance sheet
and a statement of operations showing the financial condition of each separate division prepared
according to generally accepted public utility accounting principles. The funds and accounts of the
Department shall be audited annually by an outside accountant with municipal utility expertise and
shall be open to public inspection. The Director, after consultation with the Village Treasurer or his
Deputy, shall also annually prepare a budget estimate for the ensuing year and furnish a copy to
the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
§ 45-7. Powers reserved to Board of Trustees.
Nothing herein shall be construed to delegate or transfer any power of the mayor or Board of Trustees
contained in the Village Law of the State of New York or any other statutory or constitutional authority
other than that authority that is specifically delegated herein.
§ 45-8. Elimination of Board of Public Utilities.
All the properties (real, personal and mixed), leases, easements, licenses and interests of every kind,
rights, privileges, powers and franchises and any other assets held or claimed by the Board of Public
Utilities shall become the property of and be held by the Village of Westfield Board of Trustees. The
Village of Westfield Board of Trustees shall assume all liabilities, contractual obligations and rights of
creditors of the Board of Public Utilities.
Chapter 48. Recreation Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 9-17-1957. Amendments
noted where applicable.]
§ 48-1. Establishment; composition; terms of office; vacancies.
Under the provisions of § 243 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, there is
hereby established a Recreation Commission.
This Commission shall consist of seven persons serving without pay, four of whom shall be
appointed by the Village of Westfield Board of Trustees and three of whom shall be appointed by
the Town Board of the Town of Westfield.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The term of office shall be for three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified,
except that the members of such Commission first appointed shall be appointed for such terms
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 21/277
D.
that the term of one member from each Board shall expire annually thereafter.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995; 10-17-2016 by L.L. No. 2-2016]
Vacancies in such Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled by
the Village of Westfield Board of Trustees or the Town Board of the Town of Westfield, according
to the original appointment.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 48-2. Officers; bylaws, rules and regulations.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Immediately after their appointment, they shall meet and organize by electing one of their members as
Chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. The Commission shall have the power to
adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of public recreation for the Town and Village
of Westfield, such rules and regulations to be approved by the Board of Trustees and the Town Board
of Westfield.
§ 48-3. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
The Commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation
centers and other recreation facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the
town or Village with the approval of the Board of Trustees or the Town Board, as the case may be, or
on other properties with the consent of the owners and authorities thereof. It shall have the power to
conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a
constructive and wholesome manner, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees and the Town
Board.
§ 48-4. Director of Recreation.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The Village Board of Trustees shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as Director
of Recreation who is trained and properly qualified for the work and such other personnel as the
Village Board of Trustees deems proper.
§ 48-5. Budget; gifts or bequests.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Annually, the Recreation Commission shall submit a budget to the town and Village governing bodies
for their approval. The Commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other
personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent
use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. Any gifts or bequests shall be turned over to the
Village Treasurer within five days of receipt of the same.
§ 48-6. Reports.
The Commission shall make full and complete annual reports to the respective governing bodies of the
town and Village and other reports from time to time as requested.
Chapter 50. Fire Department
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 22/277
A.
B.
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 7-20-2015 by L.L. No. 3-2015.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 50-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Westfield Fire Department Law."
§ 50-2. Word usage; definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, words in the singular include the plural and vice versa.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COUNCIL OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
The Chief, the Assistant, and the wardens of the several companies of the Fire Department of
the Village of Westfield.
FIRE DEPARTMENT
The Fire Department of the Village of Westfield.
§ 50-3. Fire Department Council Treasurer.
The Council of the Fire Department shall appoint a Treasurer at its annual meeting, who shall
serve for one year unless sooner removed by the Council. Any member of the Fire Department in
good standing shall be eligible to be appointed Treasurer.
This subsection is intended to supersede § 10-1014 of the New York's Village Law, which requires
that the Council of the Fire Department appoint a Treasurer "from its own number." The said law
shall otherwise apply to the Fire Department in all respects, unless superseded by a later local
law.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 62. Advertising Materials
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Art. XV, of
the 1961 Ordinances; amended in its entirety 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 114.
§ 62-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall post upon any tree or telephone, telegraph or electric light pole any handbills or other
advertising matter whatsoever.
§ 62-2. Penalties for offenses.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 23/277
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 64. Alcoholic Beverages
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Village Property
[Adopted 8-4-1986 by L.L. No. 3-1986]
§ 64-1. Findings and determinations.
The risk exposure created by the availability, use, consumption, sale and/or distribution of alcoholic
beverages without proper liability insurance or other security and financial safeguards presents a direct
and immediate threat to the security of the Village and its taxpayers. The Board hereby determines that
such activities must be severely limited to protect the public interest.
§ 64-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE(S)
Includes those beverages as now or hereafter defined in § 3, Subdivision 1, of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Law of the State of New York.
BOARD
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield, New York.
PARTY
A firm, partnership, association, corporation, governmental unit or other legally recognized and
constituted entity.
PERSON
A natural person.
VILLAGE
The Village of Westfield, New York.
VILLAGE PROPERTY
Includes any and all real, personal and/or mixed property owned, leased or otherwise directly
controlled, supervised and managed by the Village.
§ 64-3. Prohibited acts.
No person or party shall sell, give away, distribute, serve, consume or drink any alcoholic beverage(s)
in or upon Village property at any time, subject to the exceptions set forth in § 64-4 of this article.
§ 64-4. Exceptions.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 24/277
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
In its sole discretion, the Board may, by majority affirmative vote, authorize alcoholic beverages in or
upon Village property for specific and identified events or functions when the person or party hosting,
sponsoring or operating the event or function complies with all of the following conditions:
The person or party must make written application to the Village for the event or function at least
30 days prior to the date of the event or function.
The person or party provides to the Village at least three days prior to the date of the event or
function a nonrevocable certificate of insurance showing that the person or party has procured and
is maintaining for the duration of the event or function a policy, as the facts and circumstances
require, of either legal liquor or host liquor liability insurance on which the Village and its officers
and employees are named as additional insureds for purposes of coverage only and not for
payment of premium.
The person or party signs a statement agreeing that under no circumstances shall any person
under the age of 21 years be served, sold, given or allowed to drink or consume any alcoholic
beverage at the event or function.
§ 64-5. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Editor's Note: Original Section V, Subsection A, regarding posting of copies, was deleted 10-30-1995 by
L.L. No. 5-1995.
Article II. Open Containers
[Adopted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 64-6. Title.
This article shall be entitled a "Local Law Regulating Open Containers of Alcoholic Beverages in Public
Places in the Village of Westfield."
§ 64-7. Legislative intent and findings.
Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect and promote the safety, health and well-being of
the people of the Village of Westfield and to regulate the conduct of persons in the Village of
Westfield by prohibiting the consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places and on property
owned or leased by another person without the invitation or consent of such person.
Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield finds that the possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages in public streets and public places, except under certain conditions, is
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Westfield,
causes unsightly and unsanitary conditions, creates a nuisance and interferes with the peace
and good order of said Village.
The Board of Trustees further finds that the possession or consumption of alcoholic
beverages on public streets and public places is a serious, substantial and significant cause
of persons (especially persons who are under the legal age for alcoholic consumption)
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 25/277
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
becoming unruly, disruptive, disorderly, uncontrollable, obnoxious, offensive and of a general
character detrimental to the health, welfare and peaceful orderliness of the community. In
addition, the allowance of possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on public streets
and public places has been proven to be a significant and substantial cause in the
congregation of persons who in turn significantly and substantially cause and promote unruly,
disruptive, disorderly, uncontrollable, obnoxious, offensive and generally detrimental behavior.
The Board of Trustees further finds that there is a significant relationship between the
possession of an open or unsealed container of an alcoholic beverage on public streets or
places and the general health, welfare and safety of the public and that it has been
demonstrated to this Board of Trustees that the allowance of open or unsealed containers of
alcoholic beverages is the most significant and substantial factor contributing to the
consumption of such alcoholic beverages.
The Board of Trustees further finds that this article is necessary and proper to promote the
health, welfare and safety of the general public and that the restrictions on conduct created by
this article are not unduly harsh or restrictive and are necessary and proper pursuant to the
police power of the Village of Westfield.
§ 64-8. Definitions and word usage.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural number include the singular, words used in the singular number include the plural and
words in the masculine include the feminine.
For the purposes of this article, the following words, phrases and terms and their derivations shall
have the meanings given herein:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
Includes, alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER
Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or used to hold any liquid.
MOTOR VEHICLE
Every vehicle, including a snowmobile, which is or can be operated or driven upon a public
highway and which is propelled by any power other than muscular power, other than a public
omnibus used in the business of transporting passengers for hire.
OPEN CONTAINER
Any container of an alcoholic beverage shall be deemed open or opened if the bottler's or
distiller's original seal or closure has been broken or removed; or
Any open, resealed or partly filled container containing any quantity of an alcoholic
beverage.
PUBLIC PLACE
A place in the Village of Westfield to which the public or a substantial group of persons has
access and includes, but is not limited to, highways, sidewalks, parking areas, parks,
playgrounds, shopping centers, schoolyards and hospital grounds or other public places as
defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
§ 64-9. Consumption and possession prohibited.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 26/277
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
C.
No person shall drink an alcoholic beverage or have in his possession any open bottle, can or
other container of alcoholic beverage while such person is in a public place or on property owned
or leased by another person without the invitation or consent of such person.
No person shall drink an alcoholic beverage or have in his or her possession any open container
of an alcoholic beverage with intent to consume such alcoholic beverage in any of the following
circumstances:
While such person is the operator of or an occupant or passenger in or of a motor vehicle
which is parked, standing or being operated in a public place or on the property owned or
leased by another without the invitation or consent of such other person.
While such person is the operator of or occupant or passenger in an animal-drawn
conveyance, such as a wagon or sleigh, which is parked, standing or being operated in a
public place or on the property owned or leased by another without the invitation or consent of
such other person.
Presumptions.
The possession of an open bottle or open container unwrapped or with the top exposed in a
public place as herein defined shall be presumptive evidence that such open bottle or open
container is intended to be consumed in a public place.
An open bottle or open container in any vehicle while in or on any public sidewalk, street,
highway, parking lot, public park or other public place as defined by § 64-8 of this article, shall
be presumptive evidence that the same is in the possession of all the occupants thereof.
§ 64-10. Persons less than 21 years of age.
No person less than 21 years of age shall possess any alcoholic beverage excepting on property
owned by them or their parents or in the capacity of their employment.
§ 64-11. Exemptions.
Any facility or establishment licensed to serve or dispense alcoholic beverages by the State Liquor
Authority or other authority pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law of the State of New
York is exempt from this article.
This article shall not apply to the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in the Village
of Westfield parks by persons who have a valid permit issued therefor. This exemption shall not
apply to § 64-10.
This article shall not apply to and within the bounds of a neighborhood block party, provided that
prior approval is granted by the Village Board of Trustees for the holding of the block party. This
exemption shall not apply to § 64-10.
§ 64-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished, upon conviction, by a fine
not exceeding $250 or confinement to a maximum term of imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 66. Animals
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 27/277
A.
[1]
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Dogs
[Adopted 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Art. XXIX, of the 1961 Ordinances; amended in its entirety 6-18-1973]
§ 66-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide control of the keeping or the running at large of dogs in the
Village of Westfield in such a way as to protect the safety and property of the residents and persons in
the Village of Westfield.
§ 66-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OWNER
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, harboring or keeping a dog.
OWNER'S PREMISES
Any premises owned, occupied or under the control of the dog owner, but shall exclude any
portion which is part of a public street, sidewalk or public place.
RUN AT LARGE
A dog shall be deemed to be "running at large" if it is elsewhere than on the premises of the owner
while not in the control of the owner or the owner's agent and without the knowledge, consent or
approval of the owner of such lands.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 66-3. License required.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Every owner must secure a license for every dog of licensing age which he owns, harbors or keeps
and shall keep on each licensed dog a suitable collar, to which shall be securely attached the license
tag applicable to each such dog as provided in the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 66-4. Declaration of public nuisance.
No owner shall permit a dog to become a public nuisance. A dog shall be considered a public nuisance
if it:
Shall prolongedly or persistently bark or howl for 1/2 hour or more; or
When in heat, is not controlled so as not to permit undesired contact with other dogs.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995][1]
Editor's Note: Original §§ 51-5 and 51-6, regarding dangerous dogs and complaints, respectively,
which immediately followed this section, were deleted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995.
§ 66-5. Notices of violation and complaint.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 28/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
A complainant may notify, either orally or in writing, the Chief of Police or Dog Control Officer of the
Village of Westfield of any violation, giving details of the nature of said violation, including the time and
place of the same. The Chief of Police or Dog Control Officer shall then cause to be served a written
notice of the complaint upon the owners of the dog. If a subsequent complaint regarding the dog is
thereafter received and filed, the fact that a prior notice of a complaint had been served upon the
owner shall constitute presumptive evidence that the owner has knowingly permitted the dog to commit
the prohibited act.
§ 66-6. Control of dogs.
No dog shall be permitted or allowed to run at large within the Village of Westfield.
Every dog while off the owner's premises shall be restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding
eight feet in length and shall be under the charge and control of a person effectively able to control
and restrain the dog.
Every dog not so restrained and found off the owner's premises shall be seized by the Dog Control
Officer, by any police officer or by any other person or agency designated by the Village or
authorized by law to seize such dog, and such person(s) shall be empowered to exercise such
degree of humane force as shall be necessary to effect the seizure of the dog.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Owners shall be responsible for the immediate removal, cleanup and safe and sanitary disposal of
all waste matter created by their dog or pet.
[Added 10-5-1998 by L.L. No. 9-1998]
§ 66-7. Seizure of dogs; notice to owner; redemption.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
If the dog seized bears a license tag, the officer seizing the dog or the Dog Control Officer shall
ascertain the owner of the dog and shall give immediate notice by personally serving such owner
or adult member of his family with a notice, in writing, stating that the dog has been seized and will
be destroyed unless redeemed within the period herein provided.
The owner of a dog seized may redeem the dog within five days, except that the owner of a dog
bearing a license tag may redeem the dog within seven days, if notification to the owner is served
personally, or within nine days from the date of mailing, if notification is given by mail, by paying to
the Village Clerk the sum of $10 for the seizure of the dog. The owner shall also pay a charge of
$10 for each and every day the dog has been boarded. If the dog is not redeemed by the owner,
the dog shall be disposed of as provided in § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 66-8. Dog Control Officer.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
There is hereby created the position of Dog Control Officer, who shall be appointed by and serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees, with remuneration to be determined by the Board of
Trustees.
The Dog Control Officer shall have all the powers provided in § 114 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 29/277
C. The Dog Control Officer shall keep a record and description of each animal seized, including the
date of seizure, receipt by him of such animal, the date and manner of its disposition or
redemption and the name and address of the person by whom redeemed and any other
information required by the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 66-9. Interference with authorities prohibited.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
No person shall hinder, resist or oppose the Dog Control Officer, any police officer or agent or
employee or representative of the Village in the performance of his duties under this article.
§ 66-10. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Unless otherwise provided in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, any person, firm or
corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense
and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or
both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 66-11. Amendments; modifications.
[Added 10-5-1998 by L.L. No. 9-1998]
Modifications and amendments to this article as required may take effect only by resolution of the
Village Board of Trustees.
§ 66-12. When effective.
[Added 10-5-1998 by L.L. No. 9-1998]
This article shall be effective upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 69. Bicycles and Skateboards
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Art. XVIII,
of the 1961 Ordinances; amended in its entirety 11-5-1964. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 132.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 146.
§ 69-1. Bicycles, motorized bicycles and skateboards on
sidewalks in business district prohibited.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
No person shall ride a bicycle, motorized bicycle or skateboard upon any sidewalk in the business
district of the Village. The term "business district" shall, for the purposes of this chapter, include the
following only: sidewalk on the northerly side of East Main Street, extending from Portage Street to the
westerly bounds of the Methodist Church property; sidewalk on the southerly side of Main Street,
extending from Portage Street to Union Street; sidewalk on the east side of North Portage Street,
extending from Main Street to Clinton Street; sidewalk on the west side of North Portage Street,
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 30/277
A.
B.
[1]
extending from Main Street to Clinton Street; sidewalks on both sides of Market Street; sidewalks on
both sides of Elm Street, extending from Main Street to a point opposite the southerly side of Eason
Hall.
§ 69-2. Other restrictions on bicycles.
No more than one person shall ride a single bicycle on the sidewalks of the Village.
All bicycles operated or driven on any sidewalk in the Village shall have attached thereto all
equipment required by the laws of the State of New York when such vehicles are operated or
driven upon any public highway, including adequate brakes, steering mechanism in good working
order, sound device and proper lights.
§ 69-3. Impoundment.
Upon any violation of this chapter, the vehicle involved shall be impounded and held by the Police
Department until the penalty provided shall have been satisfied.
§ 69-4. Penalties for offenses.
[Added 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Unless otherwise provided in the Vehicle and Traffic Law, any person, firm or corporation who or which
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 74. Buildings, Unsafe
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 10-19-1998 by L.L. No. 10-
1998.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 85.
Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Ch. 74, Unsafe Buildings, adopted 10-30-1995 by L.L.
No. 5-1995.
§ 74-1. Purpose.
Unsafe buildings pose a threat to life and property in the Village of Westfield, New York. Buildings and
structures may become unsafe by reason of damage by fire, the elements of nature, age, general
deterioration and lack of maintenance. Vacant buildings not properly secured at doorways and
windows also serve as nuisances and hazards for young children who may be injured therein. A
dilapidated building also serves as a place for rodent infestation and as an attractive habitat for other
forms of wildlife, thereby creating a health menace to the community. It is the purpose of this chapter to
provide for the safety, health protection and general welfare of persons and property in the Village of
Westfield by requiring such unsafe buildings to be repaired or demolished and removed.
§ 74-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Westfield Unsafe Building Law."
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 31/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
§ 74-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING
A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls and a roof, affording shelter to
persons, animals or property.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Village of Westfield or such other person appointed by the
Board of Trustees to enforce the provisions of this chapter and/or the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code.
STRUCTURE
An assembly of materials forming a construction framed of component structural parts for
occupancy or use, including buildings.
§ 74-4. Conditions deemed unsafe or dangerous.
"Dangerous/unsafe buildings" shall mean any building or structure which has any or all of the following
conditions:
Those where any interior wall or walls or other structural load-bearing members list, lean or buckle
to such an extent that a plumb line, passing from any overhead supporting member through the
center of gravity, falls outside the middle third of its base.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the floors or
roofs are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose
used and which do not meet the minimum standards prescribed by the New York State Uniform
Fire Prevention and Building Code.
Those having inadequate or insufficient facilities for ingress and egress in the event of fire, panic
or other emergency, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, aisles,
passageways, corridors or other means of access and which do not meet the standards
prescribed by the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached or connected in such a manner that they
fall, collapse or cause damage and injury to the occupant thereof or other persons or property.
Those which, in whole or in part, are used for residential, mercantile, industrial, storage, assembly,
institutional or other purpose, which for need of repair, lack of insufficient fire escapes or exits or
by reason of age, fire or dilapidated condition or from any other cause may now be or shall at any
time hereafter become unsafe or dangerous structurally or a fire hazard or a nuisance to the
general public.
A vacant building, unguarded or open at a door or a window.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, act of vandalism or other causes so as to have
become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people
of the Village of Westfield.
Those which have become so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or unsanitary or which fail to provide
the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation and are likely to
cause sickness or disease so as to injure the health, safety or general welfare of those living
therein.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 32/277
I.
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Those having sanitary facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, safety or general
welfare of human beings who live or may live therein.
Those buildings or structures in which there exist violations of any provisions of any code,
ordinance or law of the Village of Westfield or any governmental agency having jurisdiction so as
to have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the
people of the Village of Westfield.
Those which, in whole or in part, have an existing electrical wiring system which is defective or
which fails to meet the requirements as prescribed by applicable provisions of law or which have
plumbing, sewage or drainage facilities that are not in conformity with applicable building or
plumbing codes or which are overcrowded.
§ 74-5. Nuisances.
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 74-4 of this chapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be vacated and/or repaired, secured, demolished and removed as hereinafter
provided.
§ 74-6. Investigations and recommendations.
When it shall come to the attention of the Code Enforcement Officer that any building within the Village
of Westfield may be dangerous or unsafe as defined in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee shall cause or make an inspection thereof and report, in writing, to the Board of Trustees
his findings and recommendations in regard to its repair or demolition and removal.
§ 74-7. Review by the Board of Trustees; notice to repair or
remove.
The Board of Trustees shall thereafter consider such report and, if in its opinion the report so warrants,
determine by resolution that such building is unsafe and dangerous as defined in this chapter and
order its repair if the same can be safely repaired or its demolition and removal and further order that a
notice be served upon the persons in the manner provided in this chapter.
§ 74-8. Contents of notice.
The notice shall contain the following:
A description of the premises.
A statement of the particulars in which the building is unsafe or dangerous.
An order describing the manner in which the building is to be made safe and secure or demolished
and removed.
A statement that the securing, repair or removal of such building shall commence within 30 days
of the service of the notice and shall be completed within 60 days thereafter, unless, for good
cause shown, such time shall be extended.
A statement that the owner or other persons receiving this notice shall, within 10 days of the
receipt of this notice, either:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 33/277
(1)
(2)
F.
A.
B.
C.
Certify his acceptance of the particulars contained in said notice, in writing, and serve such
acceptance either personally on the Code Enforcement Officer or a person designated by him
to accept service on his behalf or by certified mail to the officer; or
Certify his rejection of the particulars contained in said notice and request a hearing, in
writing, and serve such rejection either personally on the Code Enforcement Officer or a
person designated by him to accept service on his behalf or by certified mail to the officer.
Such hearing shall be held before the Village Justice acting as an administrative hearing
officer or, if he shall excuse himself, before any other attorney or person appointed by the
Village Board of Trustees within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days.
A statement that, in the event of neglect or refusal to respond to the notice to secure or demolish
and remove the building within 10 days, the Village is authorized to provide for its demolition and
removal, to assess all expenses thereof against the land on which it is located and to institute a
special proceeding to collect the costs of demolition and removal, including but not limited to
architectural fees, engineering fees and legal expenses.
§ 74-9. Service of notice.
Said notice shall be served:
By personal service of a copy thereof upon the owner, executor, administrator, agent, lessee or
any other person having a vested or contingent interest in such unsafe building, as shown by the
records of the receiver of taxes (or Tax Collector) or of the County Clerk, or, if no such person can
be reasonably found, by mailing to such owner by certified mail a copy of such notice directed to
his last known address, as shown by the above records;
By personal service of a copy of such notice upon any adult person residing in or occupying said
premises if such person can be reasonably found; and
By securely affixing a copy of such notice upon the unsafe building and by mailing a copy to the
owner by certified mail as stated in Subsection A above.
§ 74-10. Hearing.
At the hearing conducted pursuant to the request of the owner, the Code Enforcement Officer and the
owner or any other person having an invested or contingent interest in the building shall have an
opportunity to be heard and to present evidence. Following the hearing, the hearing officer shall make
a finding confirming, modifying or rescinding the order for the repair or demolition and removal of the
building. Any person appearing at the hearing in opposition to the order made pursuant to this chapter
shall provide the hearing officer with his or her name and a mailing address. In the event that the
hearing officer makes a decision confirming or modifying the order made pursuant to this chapter, a
copy of said decision shall be immediately forwarded by ordinary mail to such person or persons at the
address or addresses provided. A copy of any decision shall also be delivered to the Board of
Trustees, the Code Enforcement Officer and the Village Clerk.
§ 74-11. Removal by Village; competitive bidding.
In the event of refusal or neglect of the person so notified to comply with said order of the Board of
Trustees or with any decision issued by a hearing officer after a hearing conducted pursuant to this
chapter, the Village shall provide for the demolition and removal of such building or structure either by
Village employees or by contract. Except in an emergency, as provided in § 74-12 of this chapter, any
contract for demolition and removal of a building in excess of $10,000 shall be awarded through
competitive bidding.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 34/277
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 74-12. Cases of imminent danger.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds a building or structure or part thereof to be an
imminent danger to life and safety as a result of structural instability, fire, explosion or other
hazardous situation, in lieu of the procedures set forth in §§ 74-6 through 74-10, the Code
Enforcement Officer may order it to be made safe and secure or demolished and removed by the
owner thereof.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall require the occupants of any such building or structure or part
thereof to vacate the premises forthwith. No person shall use or occupy such building or structure
or part thereof until it is made safe.
Except for the owner, no person shall enter the premises which have been ordered vacated unless
authorized to perform inspections or repairs or to demolish and remove such buildings or structure
or part thereof.
§ 74-13. Recovery of Village removal costs.
The Village of Westfield shall also have a right to bring an action against the owner of the real property
for the costs involved in the demolition and removal, in addition to levying the amount against such
property on the tax roll. If recovery is had in this manner, the amount levied on the tax roll shall be
removed.
§ 74-14. Violations; penalties for offenses; severability.
Any owner who certifies his acceptance of a notice to repair, pursuant to § 74-8E(1), and fails to
commence repair or removal of such building within 30 days or fails to complete within 60 days
shall be considered in violation of this chapter.
Any person who, after a hearing pursuant to § 74-8E(2), fails to follow the decision of the hearing
officer shall be in violation of this chapter.
Any person, pursuant to § 74-8F, who neglects or refuses to respond to the notice shall be in
violation of this chapter.
A violation of this chapter shall be enforced by either:
Fines or imprisonment.
For a conviction of a first offense: a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment not to
exceed 15 days, or both.
For a conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of five
years: a fine of not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment not to exceed 30
days, or both.
Upon a conviction of a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a
period of five years: a fine of not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both.
Civil penalties.
For the first offense: a civil penalty not exceeding $350.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 35/277
(b)
(c)
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
For the conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed within a period of
five years: a civil penalty of not less than $350 nor more than $700.
Upon a conviction of a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a
period of five years: a civil penalty of not less than $700 nor more than $1,000.
Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation for which separate
and additional fines and punishment or civil penalties may be imposed and recovered.
In the event that the penalty sought is within the monetary jurisdiction of the Justice Court, as
established in Article 18 of the Uniform Justice Court Act, such action to recover such penalty may
and shall be determined by an attorney representing the Village and may be commenced as a
small claim pursuant to the provisions of Article 18 of the Uniform Justice Court Act.
If any of the other provisions of this chapter are held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any
court of a competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the chapter shall remain in effect.
§ 74-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 78. Curfew
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 9-18-1995 by L.L. No. 3-1995.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 78-1. Title.
This chapter shall be entitled "A Local Law of the Village of Westfield, County of Chautauqua, New
York, Establishing a Curfew for Minor Children Under the Age of Eighteen Years."
§ 78-2. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village of Westfield to minimize nocturnal crime,
juvenile delinquency and vandalism, and to prevent the destruction and damage of both public and
private property. The Village of Westfield seeks to promote the safety and general welfare of its
residents by prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community standards, a local law
concerning the presence of minors on streets, roads, highways, public parks or on other public
areas of the Village at night, for the good of minors, for the furtherance of family responsibility, and
for the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Parental responsibility for the location and activities of children is the accepted norm in this
community. Legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had a demonstrable effect in many
communities over the years. As parental control increases, there is a likelihood that juvenile
delinquency will decrease. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield finds that a curfew for
minors will meet a very local need and will reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of
parents and guardians over minors.
It is not the intent of this chapter to supplant parental supervision and control. The Board
recognizes the right of parents to direct their children's upbringing and family autonomy against
unreasonable interference. The Board also recognizes that under certain circumstances, the harm
to the physical or mental health of a child or to the safety, health and welfare of the public may as
a whole outweigh the qualified right of parental autonomy.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 36/277
D.
A.
It is also not the intent of this chapter to deprive minors of their ability to exercise valid rights
secured under the Constitution of the United States or under the State of New York that are
enjoyed by all citizens of the community. The function of this chapter is to protect juveniles and to
balance the right of all citizens of the Village of Westfield, so that the public as a whole may enjoy
the rights and privileges guaranteed by the Constitutions and the laws of this country and of this
state.
§ 78-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings provided herein:
MINOR
Any person under the age of 18 years or, in equivalent phrasing, any person 17 years of age
or less.
PARENT
Any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent, as a legal
guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis or as a person to whom legal custody has
been given by court order.
PUBLIC AREAS
Any place to which the public has access, including but not limited to a public street, road,
thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge, alley, plaza, park, library premises, school, recreation or
shopping area, public transportation facility, vehicles used for a public transportation, parking
lot or any other public building structure or area.
STREET, ROAD AND HIGHWAY
A way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for
purposes of vehicular or pedestrian travel. These terms include, but are not limited to, the
legal right-of-way, traffic lanes, curbs, sidewalks and any grass plots or other ground found
within the legal right-of-way of a "street," "road" or "highway." These terms apply irrespective
of what they are called or formally named, whether an alley, avenue, court, drive, boulevard or
otherwise.
TIME OF NIGHT
The prevailing standard of time that is generally observed by the public as constituting night.
VILLAGE
The Village of Westfield, County of Chautauqua, State of New York.
§ 78-4. Establishment of curfew.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person under the age of 18 years to be or
loiter or remain in or upon the streets, roads, highways, public parks or other public areas within the
Village of Westfield at night during the period beginning at 11:00 p.m. and ending at 6:00 a.m. Sunday
through Thursday, and beginning at 12:00 p.m. and ending at 6:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday nights.
§ 78-5. Exceptions.
A minor on or upon a Village street, road, highway, public park or other public area during the nighttime
hours for which this chapter applies shall not be considered in violation of this chapter under the
following circumstances:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 37/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
When the minor is also accompanied by a parent of such minor;
When the minor is also accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take said
parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of time and purposes within a
specified area;
When the minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected under the Constitution of the
United States, such as the free exercise of religion, speech and assembly, provided that such
minor can evidence the intention of such exercise by exhibiting to enforcement personnel a written
statement, signed by the minor and by a parent of such minor, specifying when, where and in what
manner the minor will be on public areas at night during hours when this chapter is otherwise
applicable, and specifying the home address and telephone number of said minor;
In the case of reasonable necessity for the minor to be or remain on public areas, provided that
such minor can evidence and establish, by exhibiting to enforcement personnel a written
statement signed by the minor and by a parent of such minor, the reasonable necessity relating to
specific public areas at a designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and
destination, specifying when, where and in what manner the minor will be on public areas at night
during hours when this chapter is otherwise applicable, and specifying the home address and
telephone number of said minor;
When the minor is on the sidewalk or property immediately in front of the place where such minor
resides;
When the minor is engaged in or traveling directly to or from a place of employment;
When the minor is engaged in an errand involving a certified medical emergency;
When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle and is engaged in normal travel to
and from a set destination. It is the intention of this provision to clearly exempt bona fide interstate
movements along major routes through the Village of Westfield and interstate travel beginning or
ending in the Village of Westfield.
When the minor is returning home from and within one hour after the termination of school- or
Village-sponsored activity or an activity of a religious or other voluntary association, provided that
such minor can evidence the written permission of a parent, signed by the minor and a parent of
said minor, and including the home address and telephone number of the minor and the place and
probable time of termination of the activity;
When authorized by a special permit from the Village Clerk or by a resolution duly passed by the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield, provided that such allowances are granted in writing
and are based upon a finding that they are reasonably necessary.
§ 78-6. Violation of curfew by minors under age 16.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a parent to knowingly permit or, by reckless
control, to allow a minor under the age of 16 to be, remain or loiter upon any street, road, highway,
public park or other public areas of the Village of Westfield under circumstances not constituting
an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this chapter. The term "knowingly" shall include
the knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the location and
activities of a minor in that parent's legal custody, and shall be judged through an objective test.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield intends by this chapter to provide an incentive for
neglectful and careless parents to maintain a reasonable community standard of parental control
and responsibility. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the location
and activities of such minor.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 38/277
B.
C.
A.
B.
Any law enforcement officer, upon finding any minor on or upon the streets, roads, highways,
public parks or other public areas of the Village of Westfield in prima facie violation of this chapter,
shall ascertain the name, address and age of said minor and may then take the minor into
custody.
Upon charging a minor under the age of 16 with a violation of this chapter, the Police Department
shall notify the parents. Such notice shall be given by telephone, personally by a member of the
Village of Westfield Police or in writing sent by regular or certified mail to the parents' last known
address. If at any time following the giving of notice as provided herein that minor is again charged
with a violation of the curfew provisions of local law, then it shall be rebuttably presumed that the
minor committed such subsequent violation with the knowledge, allowance or permission of the
parents, and the parent shall thereupon be charged with a violation of this chapter.
§ 78-7. Violation of curfew by minors 16 years of age and older.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a minor 16 years of age and older to remain
or loiter upon any street, road, highway, public park or other public area of the Village of Westfield
under circumstance's not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this
chapter.
Any law enforcement officer, upon finding any minor on or upon the streets, roads, highways,
public parks or other public areas of the Village of Westfield in prima facie violation of this chapter,
shall ascertain the name, address and age of said minor and may then take the minor into
custody.
§ 78-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable
by a fine of not more than $250 and/or imprisonment for not more than 10 days, or both. If the violation
is committed by a minor 16 years of age or older, such violation shall be enforced directly against the
minor, subject to any protection available to the minor under any other provisions of law.
§ 78-9. Construction of provisions.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to effectuate the stated purpose and intent of the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Westfield in enacting such provisions.
§ 78-10. Notice of enactment of regulations.
Notice of the enactment of this chapter and of the curfew regulations established by it shall be posted
in or about several public places in the Village of Westfield as may be determined by the Police Chief
of the Village of Westfield, in order to ensure that the public is fully informed of the existence of this
chapter and its regulations.
§ 78-11. Statutory references.
A curfew local law is a statutorily permissible exercise of the police power of the municipality. See
Bykofsky vs. Borough of Middleton, 401 F.Supp. 1242; and Neprstak vs. City of Norwich 545 F.2d 815.
Chapter 82. False Alarms
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 39/277
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 9-16-1996 by L.L. No. 8-1996.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 85.
§ 82-1. Purpose.
An intolerable amount of Fire Department resources are being expended in responding to alarms that
have been activated other than by a fire. The purpose of this chapter is to avoid the current waste of
Fire Department resources by reducing the number of false alarms to which the Fire Department must
respond.
§ 82-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALARM DEVICE
Any type of alarm system actuating equipment which provides warning of fire, smoke, flood or
other peril.
FALSE ALARM
The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation,
improper usage or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or through the error
or negligence of employees, guests or agents of the owner or lessee of the premises. It shall
include all alarm signal activation incidents which reveal no evidence of the existence of an
emergency condition. Those alarm signals that have been triggered by physical damage to the
protected premises as a result of hurricane, tornado, earthquake or other violent natural
phenomenon are excluded from the definition of "false alarm." If the owner or lessee can furnish
conclusive proof that an alarm was triggered by line trouble signals via dedicated telephone lines,
then that alarm activation will not be deemed a false alarm.
HORN
That device existing in the Fire Department of the Village of Westfield which emits audio
indications, thus requiring a response thereto by the Fire Department.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, corporation or association or any other legal entity.
VILLAGE CLERK
The Village Clerk of the Village of Westfield.
§ 82-3. Registration of alarm systems.
No person shall install, operate or maintain any type of fire alarm system within the Village of
Westfield, unless said fire alarm system has been registered with the Fire Chief and Village Clerk
of the Village of Westfield in accordance with the requirements of this section.
The owner of the premises in which the alarm system is to be installed shall file with the Village
Clerk and the Fire Chief a completed registration form which shall include, among other
information, the location of the device, the name of the installer of said device, type of device, a
description of intended testing procedures, a list of persons to be contacted in the event of an
alarm and other data as may be required by the Village and the Fire Chief intended to respond to
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 40/277
C.
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
any such alarm. Registration pursuant to this section may be accomplished by a lessee of the
premises upon the submission of written permission therefor by the owner of such premises.
Owners of alarm systems, upon registration, shall be deemed to have consented to inspection of
the premises in which said alarm devices are installed at reasonable hours by the Fire Chief or his
designated representative.
All systems presently in operation within the Village shall register no later than 45 days following
enactment of this chapter.
§ 82-4. False alarms.
The Fire Chief shall report all false alarms relayed by all alarm systems installed within the Village
and recorded pursuant to this chapter to the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of
all false alarms.
In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the Fire
Department, where applicable. Upon such occurrence, the Fire Chief may conduct an
investigation to confirm the false alarm, if circumstances dictate that an investigation should be
undertaken.
Penalties in accordance with the following schedule shall be imposed for the relay of a false alarm:
For the first five false alarms in any calendar year, a warning shall be issued by the Village
Clerk.
For the next three false alarms in the same period, a fine of $100 shall be paid by the property
owner to the Village of Westfield.
For each subsequent false alarm within a calendar year, the property owner shall be fined a
sum of $250.
The Fire Chief shall notify the Village Clerk of all false alarms. The Village Clerk shall then cause
written notice of any warning or fine imposed by this section to be mailed to the owner of the alarm
system by first-class mail. All fines imposed by this section shall be paid no later than 30 days
from the date of receipt of the aforesaid notice. Upon the failure of any owner of property in which
an alarm system has been installed to pay a fine assessed within the time period so designated,
the registration of the system at issue shall be revoked and the system shall be disconnected from
the appropriate Village alarm system. Upon recommendation by the Fire Chief or the Village Clerk
to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield, the Village may seek to recover said fine in the
Justice Court of the Village of Westfield.
Where an investigation of the Fire Department discloses a continued history of false alarms
emanating from any one alarm system, i.e., more than 10 false alarms within the same calendar
year, or a failure to take remedial steps to cease the issuance of false alarms, the Fire Chief shall
file a report detailing such situation with the Board of Trustees and the Board shall then make a
recommendation to the Mayor and the Board as to whether to revoke the registration of the
system and have it disconnected from the appropriate Village alarm system.
§ 82-5. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Fire Chief may from time to time propose rules and regulations to the Board of Trustees in order to
provide for efficient recordkeeping and the management of the system described herein. Such
proposed rules and regulations shall become effective upon the approval of the Board of Trustees.
Upon such approval, the Village Clerk shall cause copies of such rules and regulations to be mailed to
all owners of alarm systems registered pursuant to this chapter.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 41/277
[1]
Chapter 85. Fire Prevention and Building Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 11-20-2006 by L.L. No. 7-
2006.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 74.
Zoning — See Ch. 155.
Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Ch. 85, Fire Prevention and Building Construction,
adopted 3-18-1985 by L.L. No. 3-1985, as amended.
§ 85-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code) and the State Energy Conservation Construction
Code (the Energy Code) in this Village. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other state law, or other section of
this chapter, all buildings, structures, and premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT
A permit issued pursuant to § 85-4 of this chapter granting permission to begin any work. The term
"building permit" shall also include a building permit which is renewed, amended or extended
pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A certificate issued pursuant to § 85-7B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Code Enforcement Officer appointed pursuant to § 85-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL
The Code Enforcement Officer and all inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER
An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to § 85-15A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE
The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter
amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR
An inspector appointed pursuant to § 85-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT
A permit issued pursuant to § 85-10 of this chapter. The term "operating permit" shall also include
an operating permit which is renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this
chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 42/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON
An individual, corporation, limited-liability company, partnership, limited partnership, business
trust, estate, trust, association, or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER
An order issued pursuant to § 85-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE
A certificate issued pursuant to § 85-7D of this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE
The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, as currently in effect and as
hereafter amended from time to time.
VILLAGE
The Village of Westfield.
VILLAGE BOARD
The Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield.
§ 85-3. Code Enforcement Officer; inspectors.
The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
administer and enforce all the provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for building permits, certificates of
occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and
construction documents submitted with such applications;
Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits, certificates of occupancy,
temporary certificates and operating permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits such terms and conditions as the
Code Enforcement Officer may determine to be appropriate;
To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior to the issuance of
certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits, firesafety and property
maintenance inspections, inspections incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all
other inspections required or permitted under any provision of this chapter;
To issue stop-work orders;
To review and investigate complaints;
To issue orders pursuant to § 85-15A, Compliance orders, of this chapter;
To maintain records;
To collect fees as set by the Village Board;
To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
In consultation with this Village's attorney, to pursue such legal actions and proceedings as
may be necessary to enforce the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 43/277
(11)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
abate or correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this
chapter; and
To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred upon the Code Enforcement
Officer by this chapter.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Village Board. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall possess background experience related to building construction or fire prevention and
shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced inservice
training and other training as the State of New York shall require for code enforcement
personnel, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as such for any reason, an
individual shall be appointed by the Village Board to serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer.
The Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her appointment, exercise all
powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
One or more inspectors may be appointed by the Village Board to act under the supervision and
direction of the Code Enforcement Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the
exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer
by this chapter. Each inspector shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training,
in-service training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New York shall
require for code enforcement personnel, and each inspector shall obtain certification from the
State Fire Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors shall be fixed from time to
time by the Village Board.
§ 85-4. Building permits.
Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section, a building
permit shall be required for any work which must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy
Code, including, but not limited to, the change of occupancy, construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or structure or any portion thereof,
and the installation of a solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit.
No person shall commence any work for which a building permit is required without first having
obtained a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the following categories:
Construction or installation of one-story detached structures associated with one- or twofamily
dwellings or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) which are used for tool and
storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the gross floor area is less than 144
square feet (13.38 square meters);
Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated with a one- or two-family
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses);
Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses) where such pools are designed for a water depth of less than
24 inches and are installed entirely above ground;
Installation of fences which are not part of an enclosure surrounding a swimming pool;
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 44/277
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(12)
(13)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
Construction of retaining walls, unless such walls support a surcharge or impound Class I, II
or IIIA liquids;
Construction of temporary motion-picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery;
Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a one- or two-family dwelling
or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses);
Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine inches in height;
Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, siding, reroofing with like materials, replacement of
windows without altering the existing opening, or other similar finish work that does not effect
any structural component, electrical device or service, or means of egress;
Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation or cooling equipment or
appliances;
Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not alter the equipment's
listing or render it inconsistent with the equipment's original specifications;
Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition, or portion thereof, or of any
structural beam or load-bearing component;
The removal or change of any required means of egress; or the rearrangement of parts
of a structure in a manner which affects egress;
The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any building system; or
The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection system for any period of time;
or
Nonresidential farm buildings, including barns, sheds, poultry houses and other buildings
used directly and solely for agricultural purposes, including the housing of farm equipment
and nondomesticated animals.
Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work. The exemption from the
requirement to obtain a building permit for work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this
section shall not be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the Uniform
Code or the Energy Code.
Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit shall be made in writing on a
form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall
be signed by the owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by an authorized
agent of the owner. The application shall include such information as the Code Enforcement
Officer deems sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the
intended work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code. The application shall include or be accompanied by the following information and
documentation:
A description of the proposed work;
The Tax Map number and the street address of the premises where the work is to be
performed;
The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 45/277
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(5)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Code; and
At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or specifications) which:
Define the scope of the proposed work;
Are prepared by a New York State registered architect or licensed professional engineer
where so required by the Education Law;
Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of the work proposed;
Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code; and
Include a site plan that shows any existing and proposed buildings and structures on the
site, the location of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location of the
intended work, and the distances between the buildings and structures and the lot lines,
site drainage requirements, buried utilities, and any other information deemed necessary.
Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted as part of an application for
a building permit unless they satisfy the requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section.
Construction documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building permit shall
be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in writing or by stamp. One set of the
accepted construction documents shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set
of the accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at the work
site so as to be available for use by the code enforcement personnel, the last set submitted to the
Tax Assessor for review. However, the return of a set of accepted construction documents to the
applicant shall not be construed as authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a
building permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a building permit is
issued.
Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall be examined to ascertain
whether the proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and Energy Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the proposed
work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly displayed at the work site and
shall remain visible until the authorized work has been completed.
Work to be performed in accordance with construction documents. All work shall be performed in
accordance with the construction documents which were submitted with and accepted as part of
the application for the building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any change occurring
during the course of the work. The building permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that such change warrants a new or amended building permit,
such change shall not be made until and unless a new or amended building permit reflecting such
change is issued.
Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized work is commenced within
six months following the date of issuance. Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of
issuance. A building permit which has become invalid or which has expired pursuant to this
subsection may be renewed upon application by the permit holder, payment of the applicable fee,
and approval of the application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a
building permit was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or
that the work for which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the Energy
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 46/277
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building permit or suspend the building
permit until such time as the permit holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and all work
then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform
Code and the Energy Code.
§ 85-5. Construction inspections.
Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible and exposed until
inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer or by an inspector authorized by the
Code Enforcement Officer. The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for inspection.
Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the construction process shall be
inspected, where applicable:
Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
Footing and foundation;
Preparation for concrete slab;
Framing;
Building systems, including underground and rough-in (i.e., electrical, plumbing, and HVAC);
Fire-resistant construction;
Fire-resistant penetrations;
Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
Energy Code compliance; and
A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit has been completed.
Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall be noted as satisfactory as
completed, or the permit holder shall be notified as to where the work fails to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of the
Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work shall have been brought into
compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected,
and found satisfactory as completed.
§ 85-6. Stop-work orders.
Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue stop-work orders pursuant
to this section. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be contrary to any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code or Energy Code, without regard to whether such work is or is
not work for which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether a building
permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for which a building
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 47/277
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
permit is required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or has not been issued
for such work; or
Any work for which a building permit is required which is being performed without the required
building permit, or under a building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall be in writing, be dated and signed by the
Code Enforcement Officer, state the reason or reasons for issuance, and, if applicable, state the
conditions which must be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the stop-work order, or a
copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property (and, if the owner is not the
permit holder, on the permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served
on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their
agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the stop-work order,
personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person mentioned in
this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the stop-work order.
Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the owner of the affected
property, the permit holder and any other person performing, taking part in or assisting in the work
shall immediately cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be the exclusive remedy
available to address any event described in Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue
a stop-work order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the right and
authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other penalty under § 85-15, Enforcement;
penalties for offenses, of this chapter or under any other applicable local law or state law. Any
such other remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after
the issuance of a stop-work order.
§ 85-7. Certificates of occupancy.
Certificates of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any work which
is the subject of a building permit and for all structures, buildings, or portions thereof which are
converted from one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another. Permission to
use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof, for which a building permit was previously
issued shall be granted only by issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Issuance of certificates of occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of
occupancy if the work which was the subject of the building permit was completed in accordance
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, the
structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one use or occupancy classification
or subclassification to another complies with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and
Energy Code. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement
Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. In addition, where applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with
the provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be designated by or
otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant for the
certificate of occupancy, shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy:
A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report of special inspections; and
Flood hazard certifications.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 48/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
C.
D.
E.
Contents of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall contain the following
information:
The building permit number, if any;
The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
The name, address and Tax Map number of the property;
If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire structure, a description of that
portion of the structure for which the certificate of occupancy is issued;
The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
The type of construction of the structure;
The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to whether the sprinkler system is
required;
Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of the building permit; and
The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the certificate of occupancy and the
date of issuance.
Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to issue a temporary
certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit. However, in no event shall the
Code Enforcement Officer issue a temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the temporary
certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment
which has been installed is operational, and that all required means of egress from the building or
structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may include in a temporary
certificate such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure
safety or to further the purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall be
effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified period of
effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring the building or
structure into full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code.
Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a
certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate was issued in error because of incorrect,
inaccurate or incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not corrected to the
satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within such period of time as shall be specified by the
Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such certificate.
§ 85-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a property within this Village shall
promptly notify the Code Enforcement Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage,
fuel-burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 85-9. Unsafe buildings and structures.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 49/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Village shall be identified and addressed in accordance with
the procedures established by Chapter 74 of this Code, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from
time to time.
§ 85-10. Operating permits.
Operating permits required.
Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or using the categories of
buildings listed below:
Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in quantities exceeding those
listed in Table 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR
1225.1;
Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to commercial and industrial
operations which produce combustible dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an occupant load of 100
persons or more; and
Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a substantial potential hazard
to public safety, as determined by resolution adopted by the Village Board.
Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate any type of building listed in
this Subsection A shall be required to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such
activity or operation.
Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating permit shall be in writing on a
form provided by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit a
determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that quantities, materials, and activities conform to
the requirements of the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that tests or
reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall be performed or provided
by such person or persons as may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement
Officer shall inspect the subject premises prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity listed in Subsection A of
this section is to be conducted at a location, the Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate
operating permit for each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
Duration of operating permits. Operating permits for areas of public assembly shall be limited to
one year. Operating permits for all other occupancies as noted in Subsection A shall be not for
more than three years or shall coincide with the schedule of inspections as required by § 85-11 of
this chapter.
Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
any activity or building for which an operating permit was issued does not comply with any
applicable provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked or suspended.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 50/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 85-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings and structures
shall be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures which contain an
area of public assembly shall be performed at least once every 12 months.
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or structures being occupied as
dormitories shall be performed at least once every 12 months.
Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple dwellings not included in
Subsection A(1) or (2), and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2) shall be performed at least once every 36 months.
Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by Subsection A of this section, a
firesafety and property maintenance inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of
any dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer or an inspector
designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time upon: the request of the owner of the
property to be inspected or an authorized agent of such owner; receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the Uniform
Code or Energy Code exist; or receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable, giving rise to reasonable
cause to believe that conditions or activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy
Code exist; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as permitting an
inspection under any circumstances under which a court order or warrant permitting such
inspection is required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
§ 85-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints which allege or assert the
existence of conditions or activities that fail to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this
chapter, or any other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Code or the Energy Code. All filed complaints are encouraged to be in written form, through not
required, describing the allegations, with specific concerns to approximate dates and times. The
process for responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code
Enforcement Officer may deem to be appropriate:
Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to be in violation, and
documenting the results of such inspection;
If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected property and any other person
who may be responsible for the violation with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate,
correct or cure the violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 85-15,
Enforcement; penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected, performing an inspection to ensure
that the violation has been abated or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such
abatement or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
§ 85-13. Recordkeeping.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 51/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of all transactions and
activities conducted by all code enforcement personnel, including records of:
All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
All building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued;
All inspections and tests performed;
All statements and reports issued;
All complaints received;
All investigations conducted;
All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by §§ 85-4 through 85-12,
inclusive, of this chapter; and
All fees charged and collected.
All such records shall be public records open for public inspection during normal business hours.
All plans and records pertaining to buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be
retained for at least the minimum time period so required by state law and regulation.
§ 85-14. Program review and reporting.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Village Board a written report and
summary of all business conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the inspectors, including
a report and summary of all transactions and activities described in § 85-13, Recordkeeping, of
this chapter and a report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of State, on behalf of this
Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of State, a report of the activities of this Village
relative to administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York State Department of State,
provide to the New York State Department of State, from the records and related materials this
Village is required to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other information
and accounts of the activities of this Village in connection with administration and enforcement of
the Uniform Code.
§ 85-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to order, in writing, the remedying
of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in
violation of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any such
condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a compliance order. The
compliance order shall be in writing; be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter;
specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter which
is/are violated by the specified condition or activity; specify the period of time which the Code
Enforcement Officer deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance; direct that
compliance be achieved within the specified period of time; and state that an action or proceeding
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 52/277
B.
C.
D.
E.
to compel compliance may be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified period of
time. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be
served on the owner of the affected property personally or by certified mail. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy
thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction
superintendent, or their agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work being
performed at the affected property personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to
serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the compliance order.
Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each inspector are authorized to issue
appearance tickets for any violation of the Uniform Code.
Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law, any person who violates any
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any
building permit, certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or
other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this
chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not less than $500 up to a maximum of $1,000,
imprisonment term not in excess of one year, or both for each day or part thereof during which
such violation continues. The civil penalties provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an
action instituted in the name of this Village.
Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name of this Village, in a court of
competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce,
any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or condition of any
building permit, certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit,
compliance order, or other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any
provision of this chapter. In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the construction or use of
a building or structure is in violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this
chapter, or any stop-work order, compliance order or other order obtained under the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be commenced in the name
of this Village, in the Supreme Court or in any other court having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain
an order directing the removal of the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in
violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection shall be
commenced without the appropriate authorization from the Village Board.
Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section shall be the exclusive
remedy or penalty available to address any violation described in this section, and each remedy or
penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in § 85-6, Stop-work orders, of this
chapter, in any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty
specified in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after
the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty specified in this section, in § 85-6, Stop-work orders, of
this chapter, in any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In particular, but
not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty specified in this section shall be in addition to,
and not in substitution for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of the
Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section may be pursued at any time,
whether prior to, simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2)
of § 382 of the Executive Law.
§ 85-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees of this Village. Such fee
schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or
determined in accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and
collected for the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended building
permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates, operating permits,
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 53/277
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
firesafety and property maintenance inspections, and other actions of the Code Enforcement Officer
described in or contemplated by this chapter.
§ 85-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Village Board may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor of this Village to enter into an agreement, in
the name of this Village, with other governments to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that
such agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203 of
Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
Chapter 88. Flood Damage Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 5-18-1987 by L.L. No. 6-1987.
[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 85.
Zoning — See Ch. 155.
Editor's Note: Attached to the original local law were a sample flood hazard area development permit
application form and a sample certificate of compliance; those forms are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk and can be examined there during regular business hours.
§ 88-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield finds that the potential and/or actual damages from
flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the Village of Westfield and that such
damages may include destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat
of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is
adopted.
§ 88-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards
or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which
are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters.
Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood
damages.
Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
Qualify and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 54/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
§ 88-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
Protect human life and health.
Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public.
Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone,
sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard.
Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of
special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard.
Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their
actions.
§ 88-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
APPEAL
A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or
a request for variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING
A designated AO or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood
depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and where velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, V, VO,
VE or V1-30. It is also commonly referred to as the base floodplain or one-hundred-year
floodplain.
BASE FLOOD
The flood having a one-percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL
A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design
and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 55/277
A.
B.
BUILDING
any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for occupancy or storage.
CELLAR
Has the same meaning as "basement."
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA
The area subject to high velocity waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash. The
area is designated on a FIRM as Zone V1 - 30, VE, VO or V.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations,
located within the area of special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING
A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means
of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM)
An official map of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway
along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)
An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined but no water surface
elevation data is provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains
flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevations of
the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING
A general temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FLOOR
The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete
slab construction of top or wood flooring in wood frame construction.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 56/277
A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship repair. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
LOWEST FLOOR
Lowest level, including basement or cellar of the lowest enclosed area. An unfinished or floodresistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement or cellar is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided however, that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures
placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.
MEAN SEA LEVEL
For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME
Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD)
As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing elevations within the
floodplain.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this
chapter.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
Has the same meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND
That at least 51% of the actual cash value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a
Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as provided in § 88-12B of this chapter.
SAND DUNES
Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
The initiation, excluding planning and design, of any phase of a project or any physical alteration
of the property and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; installation
of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 57/277
A.
B.
A.
B.
erection of temporary forms. It also includes the placement and/or installation on the property of
accessory buildings (garages, sheds), storage trailers and building materials.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure, excluding land values, either before the improvement or
repair is started; or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to commence
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local building, fire,
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions.
Any alteration of a structure or contributing structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction or use in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
§ 88-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Village of
Westfield.
§ 88-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 7-17-1989 by L.L. No. 3-1989]
The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency on Flood Insurance Rate Maps enumerated on Map Index No. 360146A H-01-02, dated May
17, 1974. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be part of this chapter and are
filed with the Village Clerk, 23 Elm Street, Westfield, New York.
§ 88-7. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
This chapter is adopted in response to revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program effective
October 1, 1986, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of establishing
and maintaining eligibility for flood insurance.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted
rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall
govern.
§ 88-8. Penalties for offenses.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 58/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
No structure shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered and no land shall
be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and any other applicable
regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or
imprisoned for not more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a
separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Westfield from taking such
other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant
with the requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and
received an approved variance under §§ 88-16 and 88-17 will be declared noncompliant and
notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 88-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur
on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Village of
Westfield, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 88-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Office is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 88-11. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before the start of construction or any other development
within the areas of special flood hazard as established in § 88-6. Application for a development permit
shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to,
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the
area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the
location of the foregoing.
Application stage. The following information is required, where applicable:
Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement or
cellar) of all structures.
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed.
When required, a certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the utility
floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 88-13C.
Certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in § 88-14B.
Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 59/277
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
C.
Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or floodproofing by whatever means, it
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certificate of the as-built
elevation of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The elevation
certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
building, the flood proofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. Any further work undertaken
prior to submission and approval of the certificate shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stopwork
order for the project unless immediately corrected.
§ 88-12. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
Permit application review. The local administrator shall:
Review all development permit applications to determine that the requirements of this chapter
have been satisfied.
Review all development permit applications to determine that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed development
adversely affects the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, "adversely
affects" means physical damage to adjacent properties. A hydraulic engineering study may be
required of the applicant for this purpose.
If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be granted consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage mitigation measures shall be made a
condition of the permit.
Review all development permits for compliance with the provisions of § 88-13E,
Encroachments.
Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided
in accordance with § 88-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the local
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to § 88-
13D(4) in order to administer § 88-14, Specific standards for flood hazard reduction, and § 88-15,
Floodways.
Information to be obtained and maintained. The local administrator shall:
Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor,
including basement or cellar, of all new or substantially improved structures and whether or
not the structure contains a basement or cellar.
For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the
structure has been floodproofed.
Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §§ 88-13 and 88-14.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 60/277
(3)
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
I.
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter, including
variances, when granted, and certificates of compliance.
Alteration of watercourses. The local administrator shall:
Notify adjacent communities and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of
such notification to the Regional Director, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region
II, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
Interpretation of FHBM, FIRM or FBFM boundaries.
The local administrator shall have the authority to make interpretations when there appears to
be a conflict between the limits of the federally identified area of special flood hazard and
actual field conditions.
Base flood elevation data established pursuant to § 88-6 and/or § 88-12B, when available,
shall be used to accurately delineate the area of special flood hazards.
The local administrator shall use flood information from any other authoritative source,
including historical data, to establish the limits of the area of special flood hazards when base
flood elevations are not available.
Stop-work orders.
All floodplain development found ongoing without an approved permit shall be subject to the
issuance of a stop-work order by the local administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall
be subject to the penalties described in § 88-8 of this chapter.
All floodplain development found noncompliant with the provisions of this chapter and/or the
conditions of the approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stop-work order by the
local administrator. Disregard of a stop-work order shall be subject to the penalties described
in § 88-8 of this chapter.
Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall make
periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor
compliance with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the development is in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
Certificate of compliance.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any building or
premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been
issued by the local administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements
of either the development permit or the approved variance.
All other development occurring within the area of special flood hazard will have upon
completion a certificate of compliance issued by the local administrator.
All certificates shall be based upon the inspections conducted subject to Subsection G and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic information, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment
analysis which may have been required as a condition of the approved permit.
§ 88-13. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 61/277
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
E.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
Anchoring.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
All manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood
damage. Manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of overthe-
top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and
local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Construction materials and methods.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
Utilities.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service
facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. When designed for location
below the base flood elevation, a professional engineer's or architect's certification is
required.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Subdivision proposals.
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater
than either 50 lots or five acres.
Encroachments.
All proposed developments in riverine situations where no flood elevation data is available
(unnumbered A Zones) shall be analyzed to determine the effects on the flood-carrying
capacity of the area of special flood hazards set forth in § 88-12A(3), Permit review. This may
require the submission of additional technical data to assist in the determination.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 62/277
(2)
(3)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
B.
In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data is available pursuant to
§ 88-12B or Subsection D(4) and no floodway has been determined, the cumulative effects of
any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point.
In all areas of the special flood hazard where floodway data is provided or available pursuant
to § 88-12B, the requirements of § 88-15, Floodways, shall apply.
§ 88-14. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in
§ 88-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, and § 88-12B, Use of other base flood and
floodway data, the following standards are required:
Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any resident structure
shall:
Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation or be floodproofed to the base flood level.
If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas below the base flood elevation shall be
designed to automatically (without human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or a
licensed architect or meet the following criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
If the structure is to be floodproofed:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 63/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
C.
A licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural
design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and
methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice to make
the structure watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
A licensed professional engineer or licensed land surveyor shall certify the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is floodproofed.
The local administrator shall maintain on record a copy of all such certificates noted in
this section.
Construction standards for areas of special flood hazards without base flood elevations.
New construction or substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes,
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade next to the proposed foundation of the structure.
Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically (without human intervention) allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed
architect or meet the following criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher than one foot above the lowest
adjacent finished grade.
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices
provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 88-15. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodways (see definition, § 88-
4). The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to high velocity floodwaters carrying debris and
posing additional threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is available for a particular
site as provided by § 88-12B, all encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development are prohibited within the limits of the floodway unless a technical
evaluation demonstrates that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
§ 88-16. Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Board of Trustees shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the local administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal such decision to the
Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 64/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding
or erosion damage.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program of that area.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting search and
rescue operations during periods of flooding.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
search and rescue operations, maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges.
Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection D and the purposes of this chapter, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.
The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical
information and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request.
§ 88-17. Conditions for variances.
Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the provisions of § 88-16D(1)
through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures and
contributing structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in this chapter.
Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 65/277
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
[1]
[1]
The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met.
The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification:
A showing of good and sufficient cause.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant.
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor below the base
flood elevation shall be given written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk.
Chapter 91. Games of Chance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 1-11-1989 by L.L. No. 1-1989.
[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This local law was approved at referendum on 3-21-1989.
§ 91-1. Authority and permitted games.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
It shall be lawful for authorized organizations, upon obtaining a license therefor to conduct only the
types of games of chance listed herein, within the boundaries of the Village of Westfield, under the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, and the rules and
regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board adopted or to be adopted. Only the
following games of chance, as defined in 9 NYCRR 5620 of the rules and regulations of the New York
State Racing and Wagering Board, may be licensed to be conducted in this Village: bell jar, big six and
merchandise wheels.
§ 91-2. Statutory provisions incorporated by reference.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The provisions of the Games of Chance Licensing Law[1] and the rules and regulations of the New
York State Racing and Wagering Board control the licensing of authorized organizations and the
conduct of games of chance in the Village of Westfield, New York, and this chapter incorporate the
provisions of those statutes and regulations by reference as if fully set forth herein. Any inconsistency
between this chapter and said statutes and rules and regulations shall be resolved in favor of that
statute and those rules and regulations.
Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law § 185 et seq.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 66/277
A.
B.
[1]
§ 91-3. Issuance of licenses; authorized premises.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The Village Clerk is authorized to issue licenses to authorized organizations and lessors upon filing of
an application in accordance with the provisions of the Games of Chance Licensing Law, the rules and
regulations of the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and the restrictions of the Village of
Westfield herein set out and upon the payment of the prescribed fees. No premises or property of the
Village of Westfield, including the Village of Westfield Fire Department station(s), shall be used or
licensed for the conduct of games of chance, except:
The Fire Department station may be used on one occasion during and in connection with the
annual Ham Party, a pre-Easter event, and on one occasion during and in connection with the
annual Turkey Party, a pre-Thanksgiving Day event; and
Ottaway Park may be used on one occasion during and in connection with the annual Ox Roast,
held either on the first or second Sunday in July following the Fourth of July.
§ 91-4. Payment and remission of fees.
The Village Clerk is directed to remit to the Village Treasurer all license fees received by the Village
Clerk, and the Treasurer is directed to remit to the Comptroller of the State of New York the portion of
the fees directed to be paid and remitted to the Comptroller of the State of New York in the manner
described in the Games of Chance Licensing Law.[1]
Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law § 185 et seq.
§ 91-5. Sunday games.
The conduct of games of chance on Sundays is authorized except as otherwise provided in Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York.
Chapter 103. Littering
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 11-28-1962 (Ch. I, Art. XXX, of
the 1961 Ordinances). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 62.
§ 103-1. Covering of motor vehicle loads required.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the Village of Westfield carrying refuse,
rubbish, litter, sand, gravel or similar substances or materials unless covered, tied or suitably enclosed
in such a manner as to prevent littering upon the highway and/or adjacent lands.
§ 103-2. Prohibited acts.
[Added 11-20-1967]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, drop or throw any refuse, rubbish, trash or debris in any
public highway, public street, public parking area or public park or any area used for public purposes.
§ 103-3. Penalties for offenses.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 67/277
(1)
(2)
A.
[Added 11-20-1967; amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 109. Noise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 6-21-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sound devices — See Ch. 132, § 132-8.
§ 109-1. Title.
This chapter will be entitled and known as the "Noise Control Law of the Village of Westfield."
§ 109-2. Purpose and findings.
It is the policy of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield to maintain the peace and quiet of
the residential areas of the Village of Westfield. Unreasonable noise is determined by the Board of
Trustees to be a hazard to the public health, welfare and safety and to the quality of life of the
residential areas of the Village of Westfield. It is further declared that the provisions hereinafter
contained and enacted are in the pursuance of and for the purpose of preserving, protecting and
promoting the public health, safety and welfare, and the peace and quiet of the residential areas of the
Village of Westfield.
§ 109-3. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this chapter the following terms will have the meanings indicated:
AUDIBLE
Sound which is loud enough to be heard by a person.
KNOWINGLY
The same as defined in § 15.05, Subdivision 2, of the Penal Law of the State of New York.
PERSON
A human being and, when appropriate, a public or private corporation, an unincorporated
association or a partnership.
PREMISES
An apartment, building or parcel of land; however, when the restricted sound originates from
an apartment, "premises" will mean apartment only.
RESTRICTED SOUNDS
Sounds emanating from the following sources:
The playing of music by any band or orchestra.
The playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier, speaker or similar device that produces, reproduces or amplifies sound.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 68/277
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
The ringing of bells, sounding of gongs or blowing of any whistle, horn or signaling
device, except burglar alarms in any building or necessary warning signals upon a motor
vehicle or bicycle or motorcycle.
Shouting or yelling, unless necessary for protection of life or property.
Operation of any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other soundrestrictive
device in good working order and in constant operation.
UNREASONABLE NOISE
Any restricted sound, as defined by this chapter, originating within a residential area of the
Village of Westfield and which is an excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud sound or any
sound which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of a person. Standards to be considered in determining whether unnecessary noise
exists in a given situation include the following:
The intensity or loudness of the noise.
The intensity or loudness of the background noise, if any.
The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities.
The character of the neighborhood from which the noise emanates.
The time duration of the noise.
The disturbance to any persons created by the noise.
VEHICLES
Motorized or nonmotorized vehicle or machinery designed for the carriage of persons or
property.
All other words or terms used in this chapter shall have the meaning normally ascribed to such
word or term.
§ 109-4. Unlawful acts.
No person shall make, contrive, or cause to be made or assist in making any unreasonable noise.
No person who is a tenant or subtenant of a house or apartment or any person having any control
or authority over said building or apartment shall knowingly permit, suffer or allow unreasonable
noise to exist within such building or apartment or in any other area which the tenant or subtenant
has authority to use or occupy.
No person who is an owner of real estate or an agent of such owner shall knowingly permit, suffer
or allow unreasonable noise to exist within such real estate.
Other unlawful acts are:
Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort
of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any
such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 69/277
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
audible at a distance of 30 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or the uttering of
obscenities upon the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in
the vicinity.
Sound devices in motor vehicles. The playing of any radio, music player or audio system in a
motor vehicle at such volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons or at
a volume which is plainly audible to persons other than the occupants of such vehicle.
§ 109-5. Prima facie evidence of unreasonable noise.
Any restricted sound which is plainly audible off the premises or from the vehicle from which the sound
originates and from a distance of at least 30 feet from the source of said sound or the building or
structure from which said sound originates shall be prima facie evidence that such sound is
unreasonable noise.
§ 109-6. Presumption of guilt.
Any person present in any apartment or portion of a building or vehicle from which unreasonable noise
emanates shall be presumed to have made or assisted in making unreasonable noise.
§ 109-7. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the production of music in
connection with any military, civic or authorized parade or funeral procession or to prevent any
musical performance conducted by consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
Governmental exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sounds from any
municipal, federal or state vehicle, equipment, building or employee or agent or contractor thereof,
provided that said sounds are a result of and within the scope of work thereof.
§ 109-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating § 109-4 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 114. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Art. XXIV,
of the 1961 Ordinances. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising materials — See Ch. 62.
§ 114-1. License required; exemption of interstate commerce.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 70/277
(1)
[1]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
No person shall at any time offer for sale, as a hawker, peddler or solicitor, any goods, services, wares,
provisions or merchandise at retail in any manner on any of the public streets or places within the
Village of Westfield or engage in distributing and peddling handbills and other advertising matter in any
manner in any of the public streets or places or from house to house within said Village, without having
procured a license as required by the terms of this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to a person,
copartnership or corporation engaged in interstate commerce, and such person, copartnership or
corporation shall receive a license from the Village Clerk without charge therefor upon filing of
satisfactory evidence, by affidavit or otherwise, with said Clerk, showing that the person, copartnership
or corporation is engaged in interstate commerce.
§ 114-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HAWKER AND PEDDLER
Any person, either principal or agent, who, from any car on a railroad track or in the public streets
or public places or by going from house to house on foot or on or from any animal or vehicle, sells
or barters, offers for sale or barter or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or
merchandise, except milk and newspapers.
PERSON
One or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, jointstock
companies, societies and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued.
SOLICITOR
Any person who goes from place to place or house to house or stands in any street or public place
taking or offering to take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, except newspapers or milk, or
for services to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing or repairing any article or
thing whatsoever for future delivery.
§ 114-3. Exemptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to:
Any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
Any person selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 84-3A(3), which immediately followed this subsection, regarding
humanitarian exemptions, was deleted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995.
Farmers and truck gardeners who, themselves or through their employees, vend, sell or
dispose of products of their own farms and gardens, including meats, fish, fruit, vegetables
and farm produce.
Any honorably discharged member of the Armed Forces of the United States who has
procured a license as provided by the General Business Law of the State of New York.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Berry pickers who sell berries of their own picking.
This chapter shall not apply so as to unlawfully interfere with interstate commerce.
§ 114-4. Possession of license required.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 71/277
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the Village of Westfield to act as a
hawker, peddler or solicitor, as herein defined, or to distribute and peddle handbills or other advertising
matter without first having obtained and paid for, and having in force and effect, a license therefor.
§ 114-5. Application for license.
Any person desiring to procure a license as a hawker, peddler or solicitor, as herein provided, or to
procure a license for distributing and peddling handbills and other advertising matter shall file with
the Village Clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared by the Village Clerk and
furnished by the Village.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Such application shall give:
The name and kind of vehicles, if any, to be used by the applicant in carrying on the business
for which the license is desired.
The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he desires to sell or the kind of service he desires
to perform.
The method of distribution.
The name, address and age of the person, firm or corporation he represents.
The length of time the applicant desires the license.
Such other information as may be required by the Village Clerk.
Such applications shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Sealer of Weights and Measures
certifying that all weighing and measuring devices, if any, to be used by the applicant have been
examined and approved.
§ 114-6. Issuance of license; conditions.
Upon the filing of the application and certificate, as provided in the preceding section, the Village
Clerk shall, upon his approval of such application, issue to the applicant a license as provided in
§ 114-4, signed by the Village Clerk. Except as hereinafter provided, no license shall be refused,
except for a specific reason and for the protection of public safety, health or morals or general
welfare.
A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of such license who permits it to be used by any
other person and any person who uses such license granted to any other person shall each be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.
Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of a holder, his agent or employee, a
duplicate, in lieu thereof, under the original application, may be issued by the Village Clerk upon
the filing with him by the licensee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss and
what, if any, search has been made for its recovery.
All such licenses shall be issued from a properly bound book with proper reference stubs kept for
that purpose, numbered in the order in which they are issued, and shall state clearly the kind of
vehicle to be used, the kind of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or service to be
rendered, the dates of issuance and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the name and
address of the licensee.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 72/277
[1]
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Such license shall ordinarily expire on January 1 following the date of issuance of such license,
but such license may specifically state and provide for an earlier expiration date.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 84-6F, which immediately followed this subsection and which limited the
number of vehicles allowed, was deleted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995.
No applicant to whom a license which has been revoked shall make further application until a
period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection or revocation,
unless he can show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists.
Every licensee, while exercising his license, shall carry the license with him and shall exhibit the
same upon demand.
§ 114-7. License fees.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Fees shall be as provided from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 114-8. Revocation of license.
The Village Clerk may, at any time, for a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or law, revoke
any license. When a license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license shall be
made. Notice of such revocation and the reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by the
Village Clerk upon the person named in the application or by mailing the same to the address given in
the application and by filing a copy of such notice with the Village Clerk.
§ 114-9. Restrictions and regulations.
A licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor shall:
Not falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any article offered for
sale nor offer for sale any unwholesome, tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise.
Not allow the vehicle and receptacles used by him to become in an unsanitary condition and shall
keep the foodstuffs and eatables offered for sale well covered and protected from dirt, dust and
insects.
Not blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract public attention to his wares
nor shout or cry out his wares.
Not stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in any public place or street for more than 10
minutes or in front of any premises for any time if the owner of or lessee of the ground floor thereof
objects.
Not create or maintain any booth or stand or place any barrels, boxes, crates or any other
obstruction upon any street or public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any
goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 114-10. Orders accompanied by payment in advance.
All orders taken by licensed solicitors who demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in
advance of final delivery shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid
in advance, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time deposit of money is paid to the
solicitor.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 73/277
§ 114-11. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep a record of all applications and of all licenses granted
under the provisions of this chapter, giving the number and date of each license, the name and
residence of the person licensed, the amount of the license fee paid and also the date of revocation of
all licenses revoked.
§ 114-12. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 119. Records
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Public Access
[Adopted 12-2-1974; amended in its entirety 6-1-1978]
§ 119-1. Authority.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The Board of Trustees hereby promulgates this set of rules in accordance with the Public Officers Law
§ 89, Subdivision 1(b)iii.
§ 119-2. Records access officer.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
The Village Clerk, 23 Elm Street, Westfield, New York, is hereby redesignated as the records access
officer of the Village of Westfield, New York.
§ 119-3. Applications for public records.
In the event that such records are not readily available, the person seeking public records shall make
application to the records access officer upon the application form supplied by such officer.
§ 119-4. Availability of records; hours for making requests.
The records access officer is hereby directed to make available to persons requesting records those
public records which, by law, are required to be made available for public inspection and copying
during all hours that the Village office is regularly open for business. The law, as amended, states that
all records are accessible except those which may be withheld under specifically enumerated
categories of deniable records. In the event that the request for public records interferes with the
operation of the office of the Village Clerk and makes it difficult for members of the public to receive the
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 74/277
regular services of the Village Clerk, the records access officer is hereby authorized to establish hours
during each day when he shall process requests for records, including the times when such requests
shall be made in order to enable him to find the records for review and copying. The times so
established by the records access officer shall be conspicuously posted on the bulletin board in the
office of the Village Clerk at Eason Hall, 23 Elm Street, Westfield, New York.
§ 119-5. Copying charges.
The records access officer is authorized to copy any records which are within the purview of the law
and to charge $0.25 per page for photocopies not exceeding nine by 14 inches.
§ 119-6. Removal of records from public office prohibited.
No records shall be removed from the lawful custody of any public officer charged with the duty of
maintaining such records.
§ 119-7. Availability of records being used.
In the event that any requests cannot be met because such records are being used for current working
purposes, the applicant shall be advised of such fact, and every effort will be made to arrange a
specific time when such records will be available.
§ 119-8. Confidential records.
In the event that a question arises as to the nature of the records, in that public viewing of such records
may result in an unwarranted invasion of a citizen's personal privacy or may result in a disclosure of
material that must be confidential to promote effective law enforcement, or for any other reason which,
in the opinion of the records access officer, is valid to promote the public interest while consistent with
the new law, the records access officer shall confer with the Village Attorney before determining if such
records shall be made available for inspection.
§ 119-9. Procedure in case of denial of records.
In the event that any person is denied access to any public records in violation of the law, that person
shall advise the Village Board of Trustees of such denial, in writing, and set forth the records
requested, the reason for denial and the fact that the fees for such records were, in fact, tendered, if
such is the case.
§ 119-10. Purpose of regulations.
The purpose of these regulations shall be to maintain the spirit of the law and to recognize that the
concept of open records is consistent with the purpose of the Village Board of Trustees.
Chapter 124. Sewers
[L.L. No. 1-2000, adopted 5-30-2000, repealed former Ch. 124, Sewers, adopted 6-27-1998 by L.L.
No. 7-1998, and established new sewer use regulations. A copy of this local law is on file in the Village
offices.]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 75/277
A.
B.
A.
Chapter 126. Snowmobiles
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 1-5-1998 by L.L. No. 1-1998.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and skateboards — See Ch. 69.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 146.
§ 126-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, welfare and safety by regulating the operation of
snowmobiles on public highways, sidewalks and public lands in the Village of Westfield in a manner
which will be compatible with the use of such highways, sidewalks and public lands for vehicular and
pedestrian travel and other uses and which will promote the safe and proper use of snowmobiles for
recreation and commerce and minimize detrimental effects of such use on the environment.
§ 126-2. Definitions.
The terms, words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as such terms,
words and phrases are defined in § 21.05 of the Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation Law
of the State of New York, as now defined or may hereafter be defined.
Whenever the word "Village" is used herein, it shall mean the Village of Westfield, New York.
§ 126-3. Regulations applicable.
Operation of snowmobiles on highways, sidewalks and public lands within the corporate boundaries of
the Village shall be subject to the applicable provisions of Articles 21 through 27 of the Parks,
Recreation and Historic Preservation Law, the rules and regulations promulgated by the Office of
Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation, together with the rules, restrictions and conditions set
forth in this chapter.
§ 126-4. Operation generally prohibited.
It shall be unlawful, except as provided in § 126-5 of this chapter, for any person to drive or operate
any snowmobile on, over or across any public way or public lands, highways, roads, streets, avenues,
alleys, public places, public driveways, parks, sidewalks or other property of or owned by the Village.
§ 126-5. Limited operation allowed under certain circumstances.
A snowmobile may be operated on the public streets or highways of the Village only under the
following conditions:
Emergency. In an officially declared snow emergency in the Village for the purpose of emergency
travel only, during the period of time when, and at locations where, snow upon the highways
renders travel by automobiles impractical, as so declared and permitted by the Mayor of the
Village, the Westfield Police Department or other authorized person. A snowmobile may also be
operated on a street or highway in the Village in emergency situations when the specified travel
for a specific purpose is authorized or directed by a state or local police officer, highway
superintendent or executive office of a county, town or village.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 76/277
B.
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
Road crossings. Snowmobiles may take a direct crossing across streets and highways in the
Village, as authorized by § 25.05 of the Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation Law.
Special events. Snowmobiles may be operated on roadways in the Village at times and in places
relating to organized special events, as defined in § 25.11 of the Parks and Recreation and
Historic Preservation Law and as authorized by the New York State Commissioner of the Office of
Parks and Recreation.
Roadways.
A snowmobile may be operated on the roadway of the following Village streets or portions
thereof described herein:
North Gale Street.
South Gale Street.
Martin Wright Road.
Bliss Street.
Union Street.
Spring Street.
Grove Street.
Cass Street from East Main Street to Clark Street.
Clark Street.
East Pearl Street.
Pearl Street.
Clinton Street.
English Street.
Bourne Street.
Lake Avenue.
Nichols Avenue.
Roadways not designated in § 126-5D(1) may be traveled only for the purpose of traveling
directly to or from a designated roadway.
§ 126-6. Conditions and restrictions on operation.
Whenever the operation of a snowmobile is permitted in the Village as provided in this chapter, the
following conditions and restrictions are hereby imposed on all such snowmobile operations:
Nuisance. No person shall operate a snowmobile on public or private lands at such hours, in such
places or in such a manner as to disturb the quiet or peace of the people or to interfere with or
damage personal property or cause personal injury.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 77/277
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
(1)
B.
Financial security. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any public lands
or places of the Village unless the owner or operator of such snowmobile is insured against public
liability and carries with him proof of financial responsibility in the manner prescribed by the office
of parks and recreation and of the minimum amount as provided in Subdivision 2 of § 25-13 of the
Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation Law. Such proof shall be displayed by the owner or
operator of any snowmobile upon request to any law enforcement officer or to any person who has
suffered or claims to have suffered either personal injury or damage to property as a result of the
operation of such snowmobile by any such owner or operator.
Unattended snowmobiles. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to leave or allow a
snowmobile to be left unattended in operational mode or with keys in ignition on any Village
highway or public place.
Obedience to vehicular traffic controls. Each person operating a snowmobile on any Village
highway shall observe all vehicular traffic signs and signals and all other rules and regulations
applicable to vehicular traffic and shall obey the orders and directions of any state or local police
or other law enforcement officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
Direction of operation. No person shall operate a snowmobile on a street or highway within the
Village except upon the right side of such street or highway and in the same direction as the
highway traffic. Operation on other public places shall be only in the direction marked by
appropriate route direction markers.
Age of operator. No person under the age of 16 years shall operate a snowmobile within the
Village, except that a person 10 years of age but less than 16 years of age who has received
safety training as prescribed by the Commissioner and has received the appropriate snowmobile
safety certificate issued by the Commissioner may operate a snowmobile in the same manner as
a person who is 16 years of age or older.
Speed limit. No person shall operate a snowmobile within the Village at a speed greater than the
posted speed limit or at a speed that is greater than is reasonable and prudent for prevailing
current conditions.
Parking. No person shall park or be allowed to park a snowmobile on the Village streets between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. from November 1 through April 1.
Sidewalks. No person shall operate a snowmobile on the outside bank of the roadway when said
outside bank is a sidewalk or maintained right-of-way at a speed greater than that necessary to
maintain forward motion.
Right-of-way. When operation on outside banks is necessary, pedestrians and crossing motor
vehicles will be given absolute right-of-way, and the operator of the snowmobile shall stop or slow
in such a manner as to clearly evidence his or her intent of giving the right-of-way.
§ 126-7. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found guilty of conduct prescribed by this chapter shall be sentenced pursuant to § 27.11
of the New York State Parks and Recreation and Historic Preservation Law, to wit:
For a traffic infraction, if such person is found guilty of violating a provision of this chapter which
relates to traffic as specified in § 155 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, the penalties shall be as
stipulated in Article 45, § 1800, of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
For a violation or any other offense not included in Subsection A above:
A term of imprisonment authorized by Article 70 of the New York State Penal Law, to wit: A
sentence of imprisonment for a violation shall be a definite sentence, and when such a
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 78/277
(2)
(3)
sentence is imposed, the term shall be fixed by the court and shall not exceed 15 days; or
A fine authorized by § 27.11 of the Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation Law, to wit: A
sentence to pay a fine for a violation shall be a sentence to pay an amount fixed by the Court,
not exceeding $100; or
Both imprisonment and a fine, as specified above.
§ 126-8. Amendments and modifications.
Modifications and amendments to this law as required may take effect only by resolution of the Village
Board of Trustees.
Chapter 127. Snow Removal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 11-1-1999 by L.L. No. 3-1999.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 132.
§ 127-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to preserve the public peace and good order in the Village and to
contribute to the public welfare, safe and good order of its people; to contribute to the safe conveyance
of its people over the streets and sidewalks of the Village by establishing certain regulations for the
removal of snow and ice from the streets and sidewalks of the Village that are consistent with the rights
and privileges of other residents of the Village.
§ 127-2. Duty of property owner and occupant.
It shall be the duty of the owner and occupant, jointly, of every parcel of real estate adjoining a public
sidewalk, whether the parcel of real estate is occupied by a structure or not, to keep such sidewalks
adjoining such property free from snow and ice for the full paved width of such sidewalk.
§ 127-3. Time limit.
Snow and ice shall be removed within 24 hours after the end of a snowfall. In addition, sidewalks in
front of commercial establishments and commercial parking lots shall be kept free of snow and ice at
all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 127-4. Severe icing.
In case snow and ice on any sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that they cannot be removed without
injury to the sidewalk, they shall, within the time specified in § 127-3, be strewn and kept strewn with
sand, sawdust or other suitable material, so as to be no longer dangerous to life and limb. As soon as
practical thereafter, the sidewalk shall be completely cleared of snow, ice and other materials strewn
thereon, as provided in this chapter.
§ 127-5. Removal by Village.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 79/277
Whenever the owner or occupant of a parcel of real estate adjoining a public sidewalk fails to remove
the snow and ice from such sidewalk adjoining such property within the time specified in this chapter or
within four hours after notice by the Superintendent of Public Works to remove same, it shall be the
duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to remove said snow or ice from such sidewalk and notify
the Village Clerk of the expense incurred by the amount of labor, equipment and materials used. The
charge shall be not less than the equivalent of one hour's wage for the highest paid hourly Village
employee.
§ 127-6. Collection of costs for removal by Village.
The Village Clerk shall promptly present to the owner or occupant of each parcel a bill for the removal
of snow and ice as certified by the Superintendent of Public Works. If not paid within 30 days, the cost
thereof shall be assessed against the property, added to their tax bill and become a lien thereon,
collectible in the same manner as delinquent Village taxes.
§ 127-7. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings.
The owners or occupants of buildings adjacent to public sidewalks shall take measures to protect the
public from the falling snow, ice or water from such buildings.
§ 127-8. Depositing on streets.
No person, firm or corporation shall deposit, place or strew snow, nor shall any person, firm or
corporation cause to be deposited, thrown, placed or strewn, any snow or ice upon any street, avenue
or roadway within the Village.
§ 127-9. Removal of snow.
No person, firm or corporation shall plow snow across a Village street, causing snow to be deposited
onto a Village right-of-way or causing a hazard to the public. The Superintendent maintains the right to
grant prior written permission on a given basis for just cause and in writing and upon reasonable
conditions.
§ 127-10. Placing of snow and ice on another's property.
No person, firm, corporation, property owner or occupant shall remove snow or ice from any parcel of
real estate and place it upon another parcel of real estate without the express permission of the owner
of the parcel of real estate upon which the snow or ice is to be placed.
§ 127-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any sections of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $100 for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Chapter 128. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 80/277
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
Article I. Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 4-16-1990 by L.L. No. 2-1990]
§ 128-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, or in the resolutions duly adopted under the authority of this article by
the Board of Trustees, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context or subject matter
requires a different meaning, the following words shall have the respective meanings hereinafter set
forth:
ASHES
All substances or material which remain after combustion.
DISTINCTIVELY LABELED BAG
A plastic or other bag of such size and design as may be determined by the Board of Trustees
containing a distinctive imprint or label, to be used for the collection and disposal of nonrecyclable
garbage and trash in the Village of Westfield.
GARBAGE
All organic waste material, both animal and vegetable.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
A waste or combination of wastes which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical
chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
All those chemicals, waste, oils and/or those articles or materials listed under § 27-0903 of
the Environmental Conservation Law as drawn up by the Commissioner.
LANDFILL
A disposal facility or part of a facility where solid waste is placed in or on land, and which is not a
land treatment facility, a surface impoundment or an injection well.
PAPER
Wastepaper, cardboard, cardboard boxes and containers.
PERSON
An individual, trust, firm, joint-stock company, corporation, partnership, association or any
interstate body.
PERSON IN CHARGE
A natural person, association, partnership, firm or corporation that occupies, manages, uses or
controls premises.
RECYCLABLES
Those items or materials appearing on the official list of mandatory recyclable materials as
adopted by the Board of Trustees.
REFUSE
All other waste material not otherwise specifically defined.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 81/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
STORAGE
The containment of waste, garbage or refuse for a period of over 60 days in such a manner as not
to constitute disposal of such waste.
TRASH
All discarded material not suitable for further use.
VEHICLE
A motor vehicle designed or adapted for use in the removal of garbage and trash.
WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, trash, sludge and all other waste material not otherwise specifically defined.
WHITE GOODS
Washing machines, clothes dryers, refrigerators, freezers and all other similar types of materials
that are of recyclable value.
§ 128-2. Prohibited disposal of garbage and trash.
Public property. No person shall place, throw or deposit or cause to be placed, thrown or
deposited any garbage, refuse, papers, trash, hazardous waste and/or material or ashes upon any
sidewalk, street, alley, lane, gutter or any public ground in the Village or into any stream or upon
the banks of any stream running through or adjacent to said Village.
Private property. No person shall place, throw or deposit or cause to be placed, thrown or
deposited any garbage, refuse, papers, trash, hazardous waste and/or material or ashes upon the
private property of another person, except that ashes may be deposited thereon with the owner's
permission for the purpose of filling land so long as it is immediately covered with a suitable
material to prevent ashes from blowing into the air.
Burning or burying. No person shall bury or openly or cause to be buried or openly burned any
garbage, refuse, papers, trash, hazardous waste and/or materials within the Village limits.
Disposal of all solid wastes in accordance with this article. No person shall place, throw or deposit
or cause to be placed, thrown or deposited any garbage, refuse, papers, trash, ashes, white
goods, hazardous material or waste in the Village of Westfield except in conformance with this
article.
§ 128-3. Obligation to separate recyclables.
All persons residing within the corporate limits of the Village of Westfield shall separate all
nonrecyclable garbage and trash from recyclable trash.
§ 128-4. Restrictions on use of vehicles.
The collection, removal and carrying of garbage, refuse, trash, paper, hazardous waste and/or
materials and ashes on any highway, street, alley or lane of the Village must be done in covered,
watertight vehicles which shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
No garbage, papers, trash, refuse, hazardous waste and/or materials or ashes shall be spilled or
scattered along the streets or public places, and the vehicles used for the collection and transportation
of such material shall not be allowed to stand or tarry along the public streets for a longer time than
shall be reasonably necessary for the loading of the same.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 82/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
§ 128-5. Garbage and recyclables from outside the Village
prohibited.
It shall be a violation for nonresidents of the Village of Westfield to transport or cause to be transported
recyclable materials into the Village for disposal through a Village-operated recycling program.
§ 128-6. Permitting disposal of materials from outside the Village
prohibited.
It shall be a violation for any resident of the Village, owner, lessee or person in control of real property
within the Village to permit any person to bring in, place or deposit any refuse or recyclables originating
from outside the Village on any real property owned or leased by him or her or under his or her control
for the purpose of disposal under the Village-operated recycling program.
§ 128-7. Deposit of materials into trash receptacles located on
Village property restricted.
It shall be a violation to place any materials into a trash receptacle located on Village property unless
such waste was generated at that location, except that picnic wastes may be deposited in receptacles
designated for that purpose while lawfully picnicking at Ottaway Park or other authorized picnic areas.
§ 128-8. Reuse of distinctively labeled bags prohibited.
It shall be a violation to reuse, or permit to be reused, a distinctively labeled bag that has previously
been placed at the curb- or streetside for collection.
§ 128-9. Materials subject to mandatory recycling.
The official list of recyclable materials is:
Newspaper/newsprint.
Glass jars and containers (no ceramic, porcelain, Pyrex or window glass).
Metal cans, tin, aluminum or bimetal.
Soft plastic bottles.
Garden and yard waste.
[Added 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
For the purpose of being able to react promptly to recycling requirements of Chautauqua County
and the State of New York, the Board of Trustees is hereby empowered to attend the official list of
recyclable material by resolution following notice and publication. Failure to recycle materials on
this official list, except where otherwise excepted by this article or resolution(s) adopted pursuant
to this article, shall be a violation of this article.
§ 128-10. Recyclable and nonrecyclable material disposal.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 83/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
A.
(a)
(1)
B.
All persons residing in the Village of Westfield shall dispose of nonrecyclable materials as set out
below:
All nonrecyclable garbage and trash shall be placed sealed in a distinctively labeled bag sold
for this purpose by the Village of Westfield.
Distinctively labeled bags may be placed into a steel or plastic trash can to provide additional
protection from animals and the elements.
Each bag may not exceed a gross weight of more than 50 pounds.
Poisons, acids, caustics, explosives, ashes and all other hazardous waste, including medical
waste (such as syringes, body tissue, infectious substances, blood, drugs, etc.), will not be
accepted and cannot be disposed of through the Village-operated solid waste management
program.
Construction and demolition waste will not be accepted.
Storage of materials or trash, including empty trash cans, is not permitted at the curb or rightof-
way. Materials cannot be placed at the street for collection any earlier than 6:00 p.m. the
day prior to the scheduled collection date nor can anything remain at the street any later than
6:00 a.m. the day following the scheduled collection day.
The distinctively labeled bags, or trash cans containing these bags, shall be placed at the
curb or, where there is no curb, at the side of the street for collection and disposal by
collection personnel.
If collection cannot be made on a holiday that is observed by the Chautauqua County landfill,
the trash will be collected on the next weekday. No collections will be made on Saturday or
Sunday.
Collection days shall be every Monday.
Garbage and trash should be placed out for collection no later than 5:00 a.m. on the
scheduled collection day to ensure it being picked up. The time when the truck arrives at your
address can change due to truck breakdowns, weather conditions, route changes and other
factors. Return trips will not be made.
Nonrecyclable waste that is acceptable for disposal in the distinctively labeled bags includes:
garbage, both animal and vegetable; paper products like towels, letters, cereal boxes,
wrapping paper, glossy colored ads, paper plates, diapers, cardboard juice cans, ice cream
cartons and milk cartons; aerosol cans; toothpaste tubes, bottle tops and caps; hard plastics
like toys are made from; plastic bags; wrappers; styrofoam; clothing. Basically anything that is
not on the official recyclable list can be disposed of in the distinctively labeled bag, except
where otherwise noted.
All persons residing in the Village of Westfield shall dispose of recyclable materials as set out
below:
Except as otherwise stated, the contracted waste hauler shall pick up recyclable items placed
at the curbside on the Monday of each week of the month designated as a recycling pickup
week. Each designated recycling week shall be predetermined by the contracted waste hauler
and communicated to the residents and the Village of Westfield in advance of any given
recycling contract period.
[Amended 4-16-2001 by L.L. No. 2-2001]
The contracted waste hauler shall be solely responsible for communicating to the public
the type of recyclable item(s) (e.g., soft plastics, papers and cardboard, glass, and
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 84/277
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
tin/aluminum/other metals) that must be placed out to the curbside for each designated
recycling week.
The contracted waste hauler shall develop and mail to all residents a color-coded chart
that designates the specific recyclable item that can be set out at the curbside on the
Monday of each designated recycling pickup week. Each kind of recycling item shall be
assigned a color and when that color is listed on the chart for a specific recyclable item,
only that item may be taken to the curbside for pickup. The color-coded chart shall be
sent to the Village Offices at 23 Elm Street, Westfield, N.Y. and to all residents at least 14
days prior to the beginning of the recycling contract period.
Recyclable materials cannot be placed in the distinctively labeled bags for disposal.
Materials picked up at curbside for recycling can be placed in suitable boxes, bags or other
receptacles which must be retained by the individual for reuse or must be properly disposed
of. All recyclable materials shall be kept dry.
Newsprint shall be bundled and tied with twine only not weighing more than 35 pounds per
bundle. Material must be dry.
Glass jars and containers shall have lids removed (lids are not recyclable), shall be washed
clean and shall be separated by color. No plate glass or mirror glass or light bulbs shall be
accepted. Material must be dry.
Tin, aluminum and other metal cans should be washed clean and have labels removed. The
ends of the can may be cut out to facilitate flattening. The ends can be included with the can.
Cans may be mixed.
Soft plastic, such as milk jugs, shampoo bottles, ketchup bottles, detergent bottles, etc.,
should be washed clean and have caps removed (caps are not recyclable).
All persons residing in the Village of Westfield shall dispose of other waste materials as set out
below:
Grass, garden waste, weeds and leaves can be composted by the individual if desired.
Otherwise, leaves can be raked to the street daily during normal fall leaf collection.
Storm damaged limbs and branches shall be no longer than 10 feet in length and shall be
placed so that the butt-ends face toward the street. Pickup will be made after windstorms or
rainstorms and at designated spring cleanup dates. Materials shall not be placed out any
other time.
Tires must be disposed of through a private firm and will not be accepted by the Village.
For large quantities of trash and construction/demolition waste, please contact a private waste
disposal service or call the Village Street Department at 326-3477 for assistance.
Household furnishings such as carpet, furniture, bedding, televisions, etc., must be disposed
of through a private disposal firm.
§ 128-11. Authority to establish additional preparation
requirements.
The Board of Trustees is hereby empowered to establish by resolution, upon notice and publication,
the materials and preparation requirements as may be necessary to effectively and efficiently carry out
the solid waste management goals of this article. The provisions of this article shall incorporate by
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 85/277
[1]
reference any such resolution, and compliance with the provisions of this article shall also require
compliance with such resolutions as may be passed upon hereunder.
§ 128-12. Alternate disposal methods allowed.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any person from contracting with a private hauler for
removal of waste and recyclables. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any person from
disposing or causing to be disposed of waste and recyclables at a landfill or transfer station operated
by the County of Chautauqua or its duly designated representative or with a private firm properly,
lawfully authorized to dispose of these materials.
§ 128-13. Exceptions to recycling provisions.
[Amended 9-25-2000 by L.L. No. 2-2000]
All provisions for recycling waste as indicated herein shall be complied with without exception. All
persons, institutions, commercial entities and other organizations that produce recycling waste must
comply with the provisions of this article, including self-sorting/separation of recyclable material. In the
event that a person or entity becomes incapacitated due to physical disability, illness or any other
legitimate reason, the Village of Westfield will work with said person or entity to ensure that the
provisions of this article are complied with to the extent practicable.
§ 128-14. Use of distinctively labeled bags.
It shall be the responsibility of all persons residing within the Village to separate all nonrecyclable
garbage and trash from recyclables and to place and seal nonrecyclables in a distinctively labeled bag
sold by the Village of Westfield or its authorized agent. No person shall use any bag other than the
bags issued by the Village for disposal under the Village-operated solid waste program. No person
shall duplicate or imitate any distinctively labeled bag issued by the Village of Westfield. No person
shall give, sell or issue in any manner a duplicated or imitated distinctively labeled bag. Any prohibited
action of this section shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 128-15. Waste in nondistinctively labeled bags.
In the case where waste is deposited in bags or containers that are not the distinctively labeled bags, it
shall be presumed that such waste is the responsibility of the person, or persons, that may be
identifiable by inspection of the contents of the container or bag. In the event that identification cannot
be determined by said inspection, it will be presumed that the waste is the responsibility of the
occupant of single-family dwellings or the owner of all other buildings or real property where such
placement has been made.
§ 128-16. Fees.
The Board of Trustees shall establish by resolution the user collection fee which shall be applicable to
all users of the Village-operated solid waste management program. Fees may be imposed for both
recyclable as well as nonrecyclable materials but shall not be in excess of what is needed to operate
the waste management program. Said fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees upon notice and publication.
Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and can be examined there
during regular office hours.
§ 128-17. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 86/277
A.
[1]
B.
The provisions of this article or the resolutions duly adopted under the authority of this article shall
be enforceable by the Mayor, any member of the Board of Trustees, any peace officer, any police
officer, any code enforcement officer or any agent duly authorized by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment
not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995][1]
Editor's Note: Original Section 19, which immediately followed this section and which made
provisions for initial compliance, was deleted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995.
Chapter 132. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 146.
Zoning — See Ch. 155.
Article I. Notification of Defects
[Adopted 4-16-1957]
§ 132-1. Written notice of street or sidewalk defects required.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Incorporated Village of Westfield,
Chautauqua County, New York, for damage or injuries to persons or property sustained in
consequence of any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk being defective, out of
repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed or in consequence of the existence or accumulation of snow or
ice upon any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk, unless written notice of the
existence of such condition relating to the particular place had, prior to the happening of the event
causing damage or injury to the person or property, actually been given to the Village Clerk of the
Incorporated Village of Westfield, Chautauqua County, New York, and said Village had failed to cause
such condition to be corrected or such snow or ice to be removed or the place otherwise made
reasonably safe, within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 132-2. Scope of provisions.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or cause of action now barred by
any existing requirement or statute of limitations now applicable to any claim or cause of action against
the Incorporated Village of Westfield, Chautauqua County, New York.
Article II. Guarding of Excavations Adjacent to Streets or
Public Grounds
[Adopted 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Art. IV, of the 1961 Ordinances]
§ 132-3. Guarding of excavations required.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 87/277
Any person making, causing to be made or permitting to remain open any excavation immediately
adjacent to any street or public grounds in the Village shall erect and maintain, during the period such
excavation remains open, proper guardrails and, by night, proper lights around such excavations, to
prevent injury to travelers on said street or public grounds.
§ 132-4. Separate offenses.
Each twenty-four-hour noncompliance with the provisions of this article shall be deemed a separate
offense and punishable accordingly.
Article III. Permits for Excavations in Streets or Sidewalks
[Adopted 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Art. V, of the 1961 Ordinances]
§ 132-5. Permit required.
No excavation shall be made or caused to be made by any person in any street or sidewalk in the
Village for the purpose of putting in or taking out water, gas or sewer pipe or other articles or material
without a written permit from the Board of Public Utilities in the case of water and sewer pipes and from
the Board of Trustees in all other cases. The provisions of this article are in addition to the ordinances
of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ 132-6. Guarding of excavations.
All persons making or causing to be made any such excavation shall erect and maintain proper
guardrails and, by night, lights around such excavation during the period the same remains open and
around the materials or articles taken from or to be placed in such excavation, so as to prevent injury
to travelers on such street.
§ 132-7. Restoration of street surface and area.
Such excavation must be filled with dirt tamped in, wet down and thoroughly packed, so that the street
shall be level and smooth. All such materials and articles as may be about such excavation after the
same has been filled shall be removed immediately so that said street shall be left free and clear of
obstructions.
Article IV. Activities and Use
[Adopted 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Arts. II, III, IV, VI, VII, X and XI, of the 1961 Ordinances]
§ 132-8. Sound devices.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
No person shall use on the streets of the Village loudspeakers, sound amplifiers or other machines or
devices which emit sound without first obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk, which permit shall
specify the dates and hours that the use of such devices shall be permitted. A fee which shall be as
provided from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees shall be paid at the time of the
making of an application for a permit.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 88/277
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
§ 132-9. Ballplaying.
No person shall throw, pitch or bat a ball or in any manner play ball on or in any of the public streets.
§ 132-10. Deposit of building material.
The Mayor or Board of Trustees may issue a permit allowing building material to be deposited in any
street in the Village for the purpose of erecting and repairing any building upon any lot, provided that
such deposit shall leave adequate and safe passage for pedestrians and vehicles, and provided that
the person depositing or causing to be deposited such materials shall erect and maintain proper
guards and by night, lights around such material so as to prevent injury to travelers. Such permit shall
be subject to revocation at any time.
§ 132-11. Display of merchandise.
The owners or occupants of properties fronting on street sidewalks of the Village may place and
display merchandise in front of their property, such placing not to obstruct the sidewalk for a distance in
excess of three feet from the front wall of the building, and such placing shall leave at least five feet of
the sidewalk open and unobstructed. The curbstone shall be considered a part of the sidewalk for the
purpose of this article. No vehicle shall be left standing on a sidewalk or crosswalk except for the
purpose of immediate loading or discharging of load. No person shall ride or drive any animal or
vehicle upon any sidewalk in the Village except to cross at a crossing over such sidewalk.
§ 132-12. Awnings.
All awnings which are suspended over or near any sidewalk in the Village must be constructed,
installed and maintained in a safe and secure manner and leave a clearance of at least seven feet
above the sidewalk.[1]
Editor's Note: Original § 98-6, which immediately followed this section, regarding signs, was deleted 10-
30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995. See now Ch. 155, Zoning.
Article V. Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 11-1-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999[1]]
Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Art. V, Construction and Maintenance of Sidewalks,
adopted 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Art. IX, of the 1961 Ordinances, as amended. See also Art. VA, Sidewalk
Maintenance.
§ 132-13. Construction required; standards; notice; permit.
When the Village Board of Trustees deems that, in the interests of the general public, new
sidewalks must be constructed, the Superintendent of Public Works, or his/her agent, by written
notice, shall require the owner of any building, occupied lot or vacant lot within the limits of the
Village to construct said sidewalk in accordance with the standard specifications for installation of
public sidewalks. (The standard specifications can either be contained in a resolution adopted by
the governing body or the governing body can give the authority to develop specifications to an
officer or employee.)
Written notice shall be served upon the owner or his or her executor, legal representative or agent,
either personally or by first class prepaid mail, addressed to the last known address of the owner
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 89/277
C.
or other person mentioned herein as said address is shown on the records of the Assessor. If the
name of the owner or place of residence cannot be ascertained, notice shall be served by posting
in a conspicuous place upon the premises.
Prior to construction, the property owner and agent shall obtain a sidewalk construction permit
from the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 132-14. Costs of construction.
[Amended 4-15-2002 by L.L. No. 2-2002]
The cost of construction shall be paid in whole by the adjacent property owner. Upon completion of the
sidewalk to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works, the property owner will be entitled to
reimbursement in the amount of $2.25 for each square foot of replaced sidewalk or 50% of the cost of
construction of the sidewalk, whichever is less. Tax exempt entities will pay the full cost of construction.
§ 132-15. Performance of work; sharing of expenses by Village.
The property owner has the option of doing the work or hiring a contractor. The Village shall share the
verified expense; provided, however, that the Village shall in no event pay any amount greater than the
maximum rate established by the governing body, except for tax-exempt entities, who will pay the full
cost of such construction.
§ 132-15.1. Construction by Village; payment by owner.
If the owner or agent shall fail to construct such sidewalk within 30 days of service of the notice, the
Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her agent, shall cause the sidewalk to be constructed and
the owner shall pay 100% the expense incurred.
§ 132-15.2. Reimbursement to Village.
The Village shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed or services rendered as provided in
this article by assessment against and collection from the lots or parcels of land where such work was
performed or services rendered for so much of the actual and complete cost as incurred upon and from
each lot or lots, in the manner provided for the assessment of the cost of public improvements by
applicable law, together with appropriate interest.
Article VI. Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 11-1-1999 by L.L. No. 4-1999]
§ 132-15.3. Duty to repair sidewalks.
The owner of any premises shall keep the sidewalks on or running along the street row adjoining the
property in reasonably good and safe repair for users thereof; and shall be responsible for all
necessary preventive and corrective maintenance to accomplish such result.
§ 132-15.4. Conditions that may constitute defective sidewalks.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 90/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
A defective sidewalk that is not in accordance with the standards set forth in § 132-15.3 shall
mean any sidewalk which has any or all of the following conditions:
Unacceptable quality of sidewalk surface, including but not limited to holes, depressions,
breaks or projections.
Ridges or gaps between adjoining sidewalk blocks.
Differences in elevation of the surface or of adjoining sidewalk blocks.
Peeling or crumbling of the surface of the sidewalk.
Tilting of sidewalk or sidewalk blocks except in the case of handicap ramps, driveway
approaches or other similar situations.
Missing portions of surface.
The above shall be applicable regardless of the type of sidewalk that exists, whether or not
flagstone, brick, concrete, blacktop or any other material.
All defective sidewalks within the terms stated above are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 132-15.5. Notice requirements.
The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designated agent shall have jurisdiction for the
purpose of ordering the repair of a defective sidewalk and for taking remedial action towards
making the surface in good repair.
Upon receipt of information that a sidewalk may be defective, the Superintendent shall make an
inspection of the sidewalk and file a report in his or her office.
If the report shall confirm the existence of a defective sidewalk as defined in this article, the
Superintendent shall cause a notice to be served upon the owner or his or her executor, legal
representative or agent, either personally or by first class prepaid mail, addressed to the last
known address of the owner or other person mentioned herein as said address is shown on the
records of the Assessor. If the name of the owner or place of residence cannot be ascertained,
notice shall be served by posting in a conspicuous place upon the premises.
Contents of the notice. The notice shall contain the following:
Description of the premises upon which the sidewalk is located.
The statement of the particulars in which the sidewalk is defective.
A designation of the area in which repair or replacement is to be made.
An order that the repair or correction of the defective portion of the sidewalk shall commence
within 30 days of personal service or within 40 days of service by mailing.
A procedure to schedule a hearing before the Village Board if the owner does not agree with
the findings of the Superintendent of Public Works, which hearing shall be scheduled not less
than 20 business days from the date of service of the written notice.
A statement that in the event of neglect or refusal to comply with the order to repair or replace
the defective sidewalk, the Village Board is authorized to provide that the sidewalk be secured
and repaired and that all expenses thereof assessed against the land in which the sidewalk is
located, including related necessary or incidental expenses.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 91/277
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
G.
H.
The Superintendent may extend time requirements for cause and in writing and upon reasonable
time and conditions.
§ 132-15.6. Work and material requirements.
The property owner/contractor is responsible for the quality of the finished sidewalk. A
representative of the Department of Public Works will inspect the project from time to time and
may require the owner to remove and replace new construction that does not meet construction
standards as set forth below and as may be modified from time to time.
Before engaging upon sidewalk repair or construction, the contractor, on behalf of the owner, must
first obtain a permit from the Superintendent of Public Works or his designated agent. The
Superintendent shall furnish the applications.
Fees. At the time of making application to the Village for a permit to construct or repair a sidewalk,
the owner or contractor shall pay to the Village a permit fee in such amount as the Board of
Trustees may from time to time determine.
No permit shall be issued to a contractor until he has filed with the Village Clerk a certificate
showing that he carries workmen's compensation for all of his employees together with such other
insurance as the Superintendent may by rule or regulation require.
No person shall repair or reconstruct a sidewalk unless the same shall be in accordance with the
grade established and obtained from the Village Department of Public Works.
All replacement sidewalks shall be made of concrete.
All sidewalk repairs or construction is to performed in accordance with rules and regulations
established by the Superintendent of Public Works, who shall prepare the same and promptly file
them in the office of the Village Clerk as follows:
Minimum dimensions of width and depth of sidewalk blocks in residential and business areas.
Excavation and subbase requirement.
Forming and reinforcement.
Concrete mixture specifications.
Fine and coarse aggregate specifications.
Water quality.
Mixing of concrete ingredients.
Joints.
Finishing.
Protection of wet concrete.
Construction safeguards.
Any other matter or items that the Superintendent deems necessary, appropriate or desirable.
A copy of any permit issued in accordance with this article in the possession of the persons
actually doing the work shall be available for inspection by the Superintendent of Public Works or
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 92/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
his/her representatives.
§ 132-15.7. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not interested in the property affected by this article,
to hinder or obstruct the Department of Public Works or any person acting on its behalf and
including any contractor not performing the work in this article.
Sidewalk repair or replacement work performed by the Village because of the neglect, refusal or
failure of the owner to agree to the work shall make such work ineligible for any Village sidewalk
repair or construction reimbursement plan.
Any person or persons violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty, such
fine not to exceed $250 or a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 14 days or both such fine
and imprisonment. Such penalties may be in addition to any other remedies or actions that may be
taken by the Village either as provided herein or as may otherwise permit such penalties.
The Village shall be reimbursed for the cost of the work performed or services rendered as
provided in this article by assessment against and collection from the lots or parcels of land where
such work was performed or services rendered for so much of the actual and complete cost as
incurred upon and from each lot or lots, in the manner provided for the assessment of the cost of
public improvements by applicable law, together with appropriate interest.
Article VII. Specifications for Restoration of Streets After
Excavation
[Adopted 6-3-1968]
§ 132-16. General.
The success of any street resurfacing is, to a large extent, dependent upon proper backfilling. To
obtain maximum load-bearing capacities and to prevent settlement, it is necessary that the backfill be
made of good material, properly placed and completely compacted. In backfilling around and over a
structure, the loads of heavy compacting equipment may exceed those for which the structure was
designed. Therefore, it is always advisable that the structure be covered adequately before direct loads
are applied.
§ 132-17. Backfill material.
Selected, drainable backfill material is preferred, but most local fill material can be used, provided that
it is carefully placed and compacted. It should be free from large rocks and hard lumps or clods larger
than three inches in diameter. Do not use frozen fill, sod, cinders or earth containing a high percentage
of organic material. Granular material containing a small amount of silt or clay is ideal, since it makes a
dense, stable fill. In instances where the excavated material is unsuitable for backfill and the opening is
soon to be repaved, use sand for the backfill material.
§ 132-18. Backflow around structures.
Fill material under haunches and around the structure should be placed alternately in six-inch layers on
both sides of the pipe to permit thorough tamping. The fill is placed alternately to keep it at the same
elevation on both sides of the structure at all times. The fine material should be tamped in these
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 93/277
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
uniform layers with a small tamper under, around and over the structure to a depth of two feet above
the top. It should proceed evenly on each side of the structure so that injurious side pressures cannot
occur. Until two feet of fill has been placed, earth must be dropped very carefully into the opening.
§ 132-19. Consolidation of backfill material.
The backfilled material shall be consolidated by tamping or with water. Compaction of fills by
puddling or jetting of water is not recommended, except for cohesionless, sandy or sandy-gravel
material. The reason that water will not work satisfactorily in clayey soil is that it tends to produce
a permanently unstable condition.
The fill should be placed in twelve-inch layers across the opening and then tamped. Tamping can
be done with hand or mechanical equipment, depending on field conditions. The tamping should
proceed carefully and thoroughly to ensure a completely tamped backfill.
If the water method is used, the first flooding should be applied only after the first two feet of fill
above the structure has been placed and compacted by tamping, and the second flooding during
or after the subsequent filling of the opening. The method is to attach a piece of pipe to the water
hose and push it through the backfill until it touches the structure or previously flooded layers. The
water is then allowed to run until it reaches the surface. An excess of water should be avoided to
prevent disturbance of the earth under and around the structure and excess pressure upon it.
§ 132-20. Tamping equipment.
Hand equipment. For tamping under the haunches of a structure, a pole or two-by-four is generally
needed to work in the small areas. Hand tampers for compacting horizontal layers should weigh
not less than 20 pounds and have a tamping face not larger than six inches by six inches.
Ordinary sidewalk tampers are generally too light.
Mechanical tampers. Most types of power tampers are satisfactory and can be used in all except
the most confined areas. However, they must be used carefully and completely over the entire
area of each layer to obtain the desired compaction. Avoid striking the structure with power
tamping tools.
Vibrating compactors. Vibrating equipment can be used to compact granular backfills, but
generally is unsatisfactory for clay or other plastic soils.
§ 132-21. Repaving.
After the opening has been properly backfilled, repave the area to match the adjoining pavement
surface. If convenient, provide temporary paving over the opening with crushed stone bonded with
limestone screenings. After six months or within one year, place the permanent pavement.
If it is necessary or desirable to repave the area with a permanent surface immediately after
backfilling, use a one-to-fifteen cement mix in the top three to four feet of the excavation, being
careful to maintain one foot of fine material above the pipe.
Article VIII. Penalties for Offenses
[Adopted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 132-22. Penalties for offenses.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 94/277
[1]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 136. Subdivision of Land
[The Subdivision Regulations, adopted 10-21-2002 by L.L. No. 7-2002, are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk.]
Chapter 137. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield as indicated in article histories.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 10-18-1971; amended in its entirety 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
§ 137-1. Exemption granted.
A partial exemption from taxation to the extent of 50% of the assessed valuation of real property which
is owned by certain persons with limited income who are 65 years of age or older meeting the
requirements set forth in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law is hereby granted.
§ 137-2. Maximum income level.
[Amended 8-5-2002 by L.L. No. 5-2002]
The maximum income level for the fifty-percent exemption is established at $10,000.
Article II. Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 9-27-1984 by L.L. No. 1-1984]
§ 137-3. Exemption not granted.
No exemption pursuant to Chapter 525 of the Laws of 1984 shall be granted under § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law relating to Veterans' Real Property Tax Exemptions for the purposes of taxes levied
for the Village of Westfield.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section 2, which immediately followed this section, regarding referendum, was
deleted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995.
Article III. Assessments
[Adopted 8-6-1990 by L.L. No. 3-1990]
§ 137-4. Legislative intent.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 95/277
[1]
[1]
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield is to implement § 1402, Subdivision 3, of
the Real Property Tax Law providing for the voluntary termination of the Village's status as an
assessing unit, as provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also the intent of
this article to abolish the position of Assessor (or Board of Assessors) and to terminate any and all
responsibility as provided by law for the review of the assessments of real property located within the
Village of Westfield.
§ 137-5. Cessation of Village as assessing unit.
On or after the effective date of this article, the Village of Westfield shall cease to be an assessing unit.
§ 137-6. Position of Assessor abolished.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Westfield is hereby abolished.
§ 137-7. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment review in the Village of Westfield is hereby abolished.
§ 137-8. Taxes to be on town rolls.
On or after the effective date of this article, taxes in the Village of Westfield shall be levied on a copy of
the applicable part of the assessment roll of the Town of Westfield, with the taxable status date of such
town controlling for the Village purposes.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section 6, which immediately followed this section, regarding filing a copy of this
local law, was deleted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995.
Article IV. Tax on Utilities
[Adopted 4-20-1998 by L.L. No. 4-1998]
§ 137-9. Tax on furnishing of utility services.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State of New York, a tax equal to
1% of its gross income from and after the first day of June 1998 is hereby imposed upon every utility
with the exception of any Village-owned utility doing business in the Village of Westfield, New York,
which is subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public Service and which has a gross
income for 12 months ending May 31 in excess of $500, except motor carriers of brokers subject to
such supervision under Article 3-B of the Public Service Law,[1] and a tax equal to 1% of its gross
operating income from and after the first day of June 1998 is hereby imposed upon every other utility
doing business in the Village of Westfield, New York, which has a gross operating income for the 12
months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall have application only within the territorial
limits of the Village of Westfield, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with respect
to such transaction within such limits.
Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by L.1970, c. 267, § 5, effective March
1, 1971. Similar provisions are now located in § 240 et seq. of the Transportation Law.
§ 137-10. Definitions.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 96/277
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GROSS INCOME
Includes receipts received in or by reasons of any sale, conditional or otherwise (except sales
hereinafter referred to with respect to which it is provided that the profits from the sale shall be
included in gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the Village of Westfield, New York, including cash credits and property of any kind or
nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service is rendered for profit), without any
deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the properly sold, the cost of the materials used,
labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever; also
profits from the sale of real property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services or other
costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of real
property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also profit from the
sale of personal property (other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the
inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also
receipts from interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the Village of Westfield,
New York, other than such as are received from a corporation, a majority of whose voting stock is
owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever
incurred in connection with the receipt thereof; and also profits from any transaction (except sales
for resale and rentals) within the Village of Westfield, New York, whatsoever; provided, however,
that the words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged in selling telephone or
telephone service, only receipts from a local exchange service wholly consummated within the
Village of Westfield, New York, and in the case of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or
telegraph service, only receipts from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of
Westfield, New York.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME
Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate
consumption or use by the purchaser of gas, steam, water, refrigeration, telephone or telegraphy
or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, steam, water, refrigeration,
telephone or telegraph service in the Village of Westfield, New York, including cash, credits and
property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of materials
used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON
Persons, corporations. companies, associations, joint-stock associations, copartnerships, estates,
assignee of rents, any person acting in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their
assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by any other
means, except the state municipalities, political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality
and public districts.
UTILITY
Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State Department of Public Service, except
persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of
operating railroads other than street-surface, rapid-transit, subway and elevated railroads, and
also includes every person (whether or not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells
gas, steam, refrigeration, telephone or telegraphy delivered through mains, pipes or wires, or
furnishes gas, steam, refrigeration, telephone or telegraph service by means of mains, pipes or
wires, regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person or are only
incidental thereto or of whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 137-11. Records of utility.
Every utility subject to tax shall keep such records of its business and in such form as the Village
Treasurer may require or as the Village Board may require, and such records shall be preserved for a
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 97/277
A.
B.
period of three years, except that the Village Treasurer or the Village Board may consent to their
destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
§ 137-12. Filing by utility.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually on or before the 25th day of February a return
for the 12 calendar months ending the 31st day of December or, on or before the 25th day of March, a
return date of any portion thereof for which the tax imposed hereby is effective; provided, however, that
in lieu of the annual return required by the foregoing provisions, any utility may file quarterly on or
before September 1, December 1, March 1 and June 1 a return for the three calendar months
preceding each such return date and, in the case of the first such return, for all preceding calendar
months during which the tax imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the gross income
or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall be filed with the Village
Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him/her for such purpose and shall contain such other data,
information or matter as he/she may require to be included therein. The Village Treasurer, in order to
ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require a return at any time that may be specified by him/her,
and he/she may require any utility doing business in the Village of Westfield, New York, to file an
annual return, which shall contain any data specified by him/her, regardless of whether the utility is
subject to tax under this article. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the
utility making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the
corporation if such business is conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained
therein are true.
§ 137-13. Payment of tax.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall pay to the Village of Westfield
the tax imposed by this article for the period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and
payable at the time of filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the
return is required to be filed.
§ 137-14. Sufficiency of return.
In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory to the Village
Treasurer, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within 20 days after the same is
required by notice from him/her or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer shall
determine the amount of tax due from such information as he/she is able to obtain and, if
necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or otherwise. He/she shall give
notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and
irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within 30 days after
the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a hearing, or unless
the Village Treasurer, of his/her own motion, shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the Village
Treasurer shall give notice of his/her decision to the person liable for the tax.
Such decision may be reviewed by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Rules of the
State of New York if application therefor is made within 90 days after the giving of notice of such
decision. An order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax
sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the
Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him/her in such amount and with such sureties as
a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed
or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the
prosecution of such proceeding, or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking may be in a
sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the
applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to
the granting of such order.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 98/277
A.
B.
§ 137-15. Notice.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may be given by mailing the same
to the persons for whom it is intended, in a postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the
address given by him under this article or, if no return has been filed, then to such address as may be
obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the
person to whom it is addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the provisions of
this article by the giving of notice shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 137-16. Failure to file.
Any person failing to file a return or to pay any tax or any portion thereof, within the time required by
this article, shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of such tax for each month after such return was
required to be filed or such tax became due, but the Village Treasurer, for cause shown, and if satisfied
that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the penalty fixed by the foregoing
provisions of this section.
§ 137-17. Refund.
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof shall make application
for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or the court shall determine that such tax or penalty
or any portion thereof was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the
amount so determined.
For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the Village
Treasurer. However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination
if the Village Treasurer, as hereinbefore provided, or of his/her own motion, shall have reduced the
tax or penalty or if it shall have been established in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal.
All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund,
made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or
penalty complained of, and the Village Treasurer may receive additional evidence with respect
thereto. After making his determination, the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the
person interested, and he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said
Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York, subject to the provisions
hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such order.
§ 137-18. Tax not to be added to bill of customer.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and shall be paid by the utility and shall not be
added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others but shall constitute a
part of the operating costs of such utility.
§ 137-19. Failure to pay tax.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this article, the Village Attorney
shall, upon the request of the Village Board, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The
proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer. Each
such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the same, in the same
manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty imposed by § 186 of the Tax Law[1] is made a
lien.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 99/277
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
Editor's Note: Section 186 of the Tax Law was repealed by L.2000, c. 63, pt. Y, § 3, effective May 15,
2000.
§ 137-20. Rules and regulations of Treasurer.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have the power to make such
reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the exercise of
his/her powers and the performance of his/her duties and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and
other records relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony and proofs,
under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his/her official duty under this article and to
subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and
documents.
§ 137-21. Disclosure by Treasurer; penalties for offenses.
Disclosure prohibited; exceptions.
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be
unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Westfield to
divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income
or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this article. The officers charged
with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of
anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
Village of Westfield in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article, or on behalf
of the State Tax Commission in an action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law
of the State of New York, or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or proceeding
under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any
action or proceeding under the provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown
thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, and no more.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery, to a person or his duly authorized
representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics
so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof or the
publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their
taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this article, together with any relevant
information which, in the opinion of the Village Treasurer, may assist in the collection of such
delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the Village Attorney or other legal representative of the
Village of Westfield of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review
the tax based thereon or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both; and, if the offender be an officer, clerk
or employee of the Village of Westfield, he shall be dismissed from office and shall be incapable of
holding any office or employment for the Village of Westfield for a period of five years thereafter.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer may exchange with the chief
fiscal officer of any city or any other village in the State of New York information contained in
returns filed under this article, provided that such city or other village grants similar privileges to
the Village of Westfield and provided that such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and
the Village Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with any information
contained in such returns.
§ 137-22. Disposition of taxes and penalties.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 100/277
A.
B.
C.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article shall be paid into the
treasury of the Village of Westfield and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the
Village.
§ 137-23. Severability.
If any part or provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance be
adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part or provision or application directly involved in the controversy in which said
judgment shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of this
article or the application thereof to other persons or circumstances, and the Village of Westfield hereby
declares that it would have passed this article or the remainder thereof had such invalid application or
invalid provision been apparent.
§ 137-24. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the Secretary of State in accordance
with § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law.
Chapter 138. Taxicabs
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 4-18-1961 as Ch. 1, Art. XXV,
of the 1961 Ordinances. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 146.
§ 138-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
TAXICAB
A motor vehicle used in the transportation of passengers for hire, except buses operating by
authority of the Public Service Commission.
§ 138-2. License required; applications; fee; number of licenses;
tariff of rates.
No person or corporation shall engage in the taxicab business or permit to be operated a taxicab
in the Village of Westfield without first obtaining a business license therefor to be issued by the
Village.
Application for such license shall be made to the Mayor of the Village on a blank form to be
furnished by the Village. The applicant shall furnish all information required by such form, including
a tariff of the rates to be charged; also information showing the make, model, serial number, motor
number and New York motor vehicle license number of each vehicle to be so operated.
The fee for a taxicab business license shall be as provided from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees. The license shall expire at the end of the calendar year.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 101/277
D.
E.
In no event shall the Mayor issue licenses for taxicabs exceeding one taxicab for each 1,500, or
fraction thereof, of population as determined by the last preceding national census.
A tariff of the rates to be charged shall appear in each taxicab.
§ 138-3. Maintenance of taxicabs; inspections.
Holders of taxicab business licenses shall maintain their taxicabs in good and safe mechanical
operating condition and shall keep them clean and sanitary. Upon request by any member of the Police
Department of the Village of Westfield, said licensee shall permit inspection of any taxicab owned or
operated by him.
§ 138-4. Revocation of license.
Any taxicab business license may be revoked for cause after a hearing by the Mayor and Trustees of
the Village of Westfield, and, upon revocation, the license shall forthwith be surrendered by the
licensee.
§ 138-5. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995]
Any owner or driver who engages in the taxicab business without obtaining and maintaining in full force
and effect the permit required herein or who attempts to engage in such business or solicits
passengers without being duly licensed to conduct such taxicab business shall be guilty of an offense
and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or
both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 141. Trees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 4-18-1961 as Ch. I, Arts. VIII,
XII, XXI and XXII, of the 1961 Ordinances; amended in its entirety 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995.
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Definitions
§ 141-1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OWNER
Includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships and all
other entities of any kind capable of owning property or being subject to suit.
PROPERTY OWNER
Includes any person, or entity as is defined under "owner," and any person or entity, whether or
not under contract, that is renting a property within the Village and is responsible under their rental
for maintenance of the property.
Article II. Shade Trees or Shrubbery in or Near Streets
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 102/277
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
§ 141-2. Permit required to cut, prune or remove trees in public
streets; applications; issuance.
No person shall cut, prune, remove, destroy, deface, mutilate or injure any tree located between
the sidewalk line and street line, or their equivalents, in public streets of the Village except in
pursuance of a written permit from the Board of Trustees of the Village.
Application for such permit shall be made in writing and shall state the reasons for the requested
removal, treatment or pruning of the tree or trees.
Such application shall be granted whenever it shall appear that:
The pruning is required to give adequate clearance of utility wires or provide for adequate
passage on the streets of the Village.
The tree is in need of pruning or treatment requested.
The removal of the tree is required in the interest of public safety or reasonable access to
abutting premises.
Other good cause exists for the relief requested.
§ 141-3. Permit required to cut or remove trees on private
property which may affect public safety.
Whenever any tree on private lands or otherwise is so situate that the felling thereof may cause said
tree or any part thereof to come in contact with electric or telephone wires or obstruct the street or
sidewalk or endanger the users thereof, such owner must procure from the Board of Trustees of the
Village a permit authorizing such person to cut or remove said tree.
§ 141-4. Performance of work under permit.
Any work done under the written permits required under this article must be performed in strict
accordance with the terms thereof and under the supervision of the Board of Trustees or its authorized
representative.
Article III. Planting and Maintenance of Certain Trees
Prohibited
§ 141-5. Planting or maintenance of certain trees near sewer or
water lines prohibited; removal.
No person shall set out, plant or maintain any poplar, soft or silver maple, box elder, willow or
cottonwood tree within 100 feet of any private sewer, public sewer line or water main within the Village.
The owners or occupants of premises whose trees are standing in violation of the foregoing provision
must cut down, destroy and remove the same within 30 days after service upon such owner or
occupant of written demand from the Board of Trustees of the Village.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 103/277
A.
B.
§ 141-6. Removal of trees whose roots are obstructing sewer
lines.
Whenever the roots of any tree have broken into, clogged or obstructed any sewer or sewer mains in
the Village, the Board of Public Utilities shall ascertain the location and identity of the tree and report
the same to the Village Board of Trustees, who shall forthwith cause written demand to be served on
the owner or occupant of the premises where the tree is located requiring that such tree be cut down,
destroyed and removed within 30 days.
Article IV. Removal and Destruction of Diseased Trees
§ 141-7. Removal of trees infected with Dutch elm disease
required.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any land in the Village of Westfield to permit or maintain on any
such land any tree which becomes infected or infested with the disease commonly known as "Dutch
elm disease," and it shall be the duty of the owner of any land to destroy and remove by burning or
other effectual method all such infected trees.
§ 141-8. Notice to remove; noncompliance; removal by Village.
If a tree is found that is infected or infested, as set forth in § 141-7 above, the Clerk of the Village shall
serve or cause to be served a written notice by mail upon the owner of any such land requiring such
owner to comply with the provisions of this article. The person upon whom such notice is served shall
destroy or cause to be destroyed such infected tree within 10 days after service of such notice.
Article V. Weeds and Brush
§ 141-9. Cutting or trimming of weeds, brush and shrubbery
required.
All property owners whose lands adjoining a public sidewalk shall keep said lands free from weeds and
brush between the sidewalk and street and for the distance of at least 20 feet inside the walk opposite
from the street. All property owners shall keep their trees and ornamental shrubs trimmed so that the
same shall not obstruct or interfere with passage along public streets or walks.
§ 141-10. Removal of trees or shrubbery obstructing visibility at
intersections.
Whenever any shrubbery or trees on private lands shall limit or obstruct the range of visibility at or
near street intersections so as to constitute a traffic hazard at such intersection, the owner of the
premises shall remove said tree or shrubbery or maintain the same in such manner that the traffic
hazard is eliminated.
Whenever a property owner shall fail to cut, trim or remove any brush, tree, shrubbery, or
vegetation of any variety, as is required under this article, the Clerk of the Village shall serve or
cause to be served upon the owner of such property a written notice by mail requiring such owner
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 104/277
A.
to comply with the provisions of this article. The person upon whom such notice is served shall
have 10 days after service to comply.
Article VI. Penalties and Remedies
§ 141-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished, upon conviction, by a fine
not exceeding $250 or confinement to a maximum term of imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15
days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 141-12. Noncompliance by property owner; removal by Village.
If the owner or occupant of premises mentioned in the foregoing provisions shall fail to cut down,
destroy and remove a tree or remove, trim or cut back brush after having been given notice to do so as
provided by this chapter, the Village shall cause the necessary work to be done and is authorized and
empowered to enter upon the premises as is necessary to accomplish the work, and the actual cost
therefor and other additional cost in connection therewith shall be certified by the duly appointed officer
of the Village to the Board of Trustees of the Village, and such costs shall thereupon become and be a
lien upon the land on which such tree was located. Such cost shall be added to and become and form
a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such land. The assessment of the cost of the
work done by the Village against the property involved shall be in addition to penalties imposed herein
for any violation or noncompliance with any provisions of this chapter.
§ 141-13. Village not limited to undertake actions for public
safety.
Notwithstanding the notice provisions as set forth in the sections above, the Village is not hereby
limited to take any and all appropriate and necessary action for public safety and may enter upon the
property and trim or cut trees, shrubbery, brush or other vegetation as is found needed for the public
safety.
Chapter 146. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 5-3-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 69.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 132.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 138.
Article I. Operation of Vehicles
§ 146-1. Compliance required.
Every person shall obey the instructions of official traffic control device applicable thereto placed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
exceptions specified in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 105/277
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Every person shall obey any properly posted provision of this chapter applicable thereto in the
manner prescribed by this chapter when such obedience is not required by the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York.
§ 146-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HANDICAPPED PARKING
Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be those parking spaces accorded to a holder of a
handicapped parking permit provided in accordance with the New York State Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
PARK or PARKING
The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in unloading merchandise or passengers.
STAND or STANDING
The stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of
and while engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
STOP or STOPPING
When prohibited means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
§ 146-3. Traffic control devices.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield shall install and maintain traffic control devices when
and as required under the provisions of this chapter to make effective the provisions of said chapter
and may install and maintain such additional traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to
regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York subject to the
provisions of § 1682 (traffic control devices) of that law.
§ 146-4. Speed regulations.
Thirty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed
within the corporate limits of the Village on all streets except as follows:
Thirty-five miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may
proceed within the corporate limits of the Village on the following streets and portions of streets:
East Main Street: US Route 20, between its intersection with the easterly Village line and its
intersection with Persons Street.
West Main Street: US Route 20, between its intersection with the westerly Village line and the
westerly end of the bridge over Chautauqua Creek.
South Portage Street: NYS Route 394, between its intersection with the southerly Village line
and its intersection with Campbell Street.
Fifteen miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may
proceed within the corporate limits of the Village on the following streets and portions of streets:
[Added 2-2-1998 by L.L. No. 3-1998]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 106/277
(1)
(2)
(1)
C.
(1)
D.
Chase Street: beginning at its intersection with Route 394, also known as South Portage
Street, and ending at its intersection with Water Street.
Temple Street: beginning at its intersection with Chestnut Street, also known as Westfield-
Sherman Road, and ending as it does already as a dead end approximately 170 feet from its
intersection with Chestnut Street.
[Added 8-3-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
Fifteen miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may
proceed within the corporate limits of the Village on the following streets and portions of streets
and will be designated as a School Zone:
[Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Meyer Drive, between its intersection with US Route 20 (East Main Street) and its intersection
with Cass Street.
Forty miles per hour is hereby established as the maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed
within the corporate limits of the Village on the following streets and portions of streets:
[Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
North Portage Street, NYS Route 394, between its intersection with the northerly Village line
and its intersection with Jefferson Street.
§ 146-5. Winter parking.
Parking in the streets of the Village of Westfield is prohibited during the months of November,
December, January, February and March from the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., except Clinton
Street, subject to restrictions contained in §§ 146-9 and 146-10 herein.
§ 146-6. Through streets and stop intersections.
The following streets and highways are hereby designated as through streets and highways, and stop
signs will be placed on all streets and highways intersecting with these streets and highways. All
vehicles approaching any of these through streets and highways listed below shall come to a full and
complete stop before entering or turning into any of these streets or highways.
Academy Street
A. From East Main Street to Village line:
(1) Pleasant Avenue from the south.
(2) Cottage Street from the north.
(3) Grove Street from the north.
(4) Spring Street from the south.
Backman Avenue
A. From Kent Street to Third Street:
(1) Patterson Street from the east.
(2) Second Street from the east and west.
(3) Bell Parkway from the west.
Bliss Street
A. From South Portage Street to Union Street:
(1) Elm Street from the north.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 107/277
Bliss Street
B. From Union Street in an easterly direction:
(1) Walnut Street from the north.
(2) Spring Street from the north.
Bourne Street
A. From North Portage Street east to Persons Road:
(1) Bird Street from the north.
(2) Lake Street from the north.
Cass Street
A. From East Main Street in a northerly direction:
(1) Jefferson Street from the east and west.
(2) Clark Street from the west.
Chestnut Street
A. From West Main Street south to Village line:
(1) Temple Street from the east.
(2) Water Street from the east.
(3) South Gale Street from the east and west.
(4) West Campbell Street from the east.
(5) Fort Street from the west.
Clinton Street
A. From North Portage Street east to Pearl Street:
(1) Market Street from the south.
(2) Franklin Street from the north.
Cottage Street
A. From East Main Street south to Academy Street:
(1) Bank Street from the east.
Crandall Street
A. From Kent Street south to Third Street:
(1) Riley Street from the east.
(2) Patterson Street from the west.
(3) Jackson Street from the east.
(4) Second Street from the west.
(5) Billsboro Street from the east.
East Main Street
A. From North and South Portage Streets east:
(1) Elm Street from the south.
(2) Union Street from the south.
(3) Brewer Place from the south.
(4) Holt Street from the north.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 108/277
East Main Street
(5) Cottage Street from the south.
(6) Grove Street from the south.
(7) Cass Street from the north.
(8) Colburn Street from the north.
(9) Persons Street from the north.
(10) Watson Avenue from the south.
(11) Villa Drive from the south.
East Pearl Street
A. From Jefferson Street north:
(1) Clark Street from the east.
Elm Street
A. From East Main Street south to Third Street:
(1) McClurg Street from the east and west.
(2) First Street from the east and west.
(3) Second Street from the east and west.
English Street
A. From North Portage Street east:
(1) Franklin Street from the south.
(2) West Pearl Street from the south.
Franklin Street
A. From Clinton Street north to English Street:
(1) Washington Street from the east and west.
(2) Jefferson Street from the east and west.
Grove Street
A. From East Main Street south to Academy Street:
(1) Bank Street from the west and east.
Holt Street
A. From East Main Street north to Jefferson Street:
(1) Washington Street from the west.
Jackson Street
A. From Sprint Street west to Crandall Street:
(1) Ash Street from the north.
Jefferson Street
A. From Pearl Street east to Cass Street:
(1) Holt Street from the south.
Kent Street
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 109/277
Kent Street
A. From Union Street east to Pleasant Avenue:
(1) Beckman Avenue from the south.
(2) Crandall Street from the south.
Martin-Wright Road
A. From South Portage Street in an easterly direction:
(1) Allen Road from the north.
Nichols Avenue
A. From North Portage St. in an easterly direction:
(1) Bird Street from the South.
North Portage Street
A. From Main Street north to Village line:
(1) Clinton Street from the east.
(2) Washington Street from the east.
(3) Jefferson Street from the east.
(4) English Street from the east.
(5) Bourne Street from the east.
(6) Hawley Street from the west.
(7) Nichols Avenue from the east.
Oak Street
A. From West Main Street in a northerly direction:
(1) Terrace Street from the east.
Pearl Street
A. From East Main Street in a northerly direction:
(1) Clinton Street from the west.
(2) Washington Street from the west and east.
(3) Jefferson Street from the east and west.
(4) West Pearl Street from the northwest.
Pleasant Avenue
A. From Academy Street south to Riley Street:
(1) Kent Street from the west.
(2) Wells Street from the east.
South Gale Street
A. From Chestnut Street in an easterly direction:
(1) Campbell Street from the south.
South Portage Street
A. From Main Street south to Village line:
(1) McClurg Street from the east.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 110/277
South Portage Street
(2) First Street from the east.
(3) Chase Street from the west.
(4) Second Street from the east and west.
(5) Third Street from the east.
(6) Bliss Street from the east.
(7) Campbell Street from the west.
(8) Martin-Wright Road from the east.
(9) Old South Portage Street from the southwest.
Spring Street
A. From Academy Street south to Bliss Street:
(1) Jackson Street from the west.
(2) Billsboro Street from the west.
(3) Third Street from the west.
(4) Wood Street from the west.
Third Street
A. From Union Street east to Spring Street:
(1) Backman Avenue from the north.
(2) Crandall Street from the north.
Union Street
A. From East Main Street south to Third Street:
(1) Kent Street from the east.
(2) Bell Parkway from the east.
(3) McClurg Street from the west.
(4) First Street from the west.
(5) Second Street from the east and west.
B. From Third Street south to end of street:
(1) Wood Street from the east.
(2) Bliss Street from the east and west.
(3) Camelot Drive from the east.
Water Street
A. From Second Street north to the intersection with North Water Street and thence east to the end
of the street:
(1) Chase Street from the east.
(2) Lumber Street from the east and south.
(3) North Water Street from the north.
West Main Street
A. From North and South Portage Streets west:
(1) Chestnut Street from the south.
(2) Oak Street from the north.
(3) South Gale Street from the south.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 111/277
A.
B.
C.
(1)
A.
[1]
(1)
B.
(1)
C.
(1)
D.
A.
West Main Street
(4) North Gale Street from the north.
§ 146-7. Four-way traffic stop intersections.
The intersection of Union Street and Third Street is hereby designated a four-way stop
intersection. All vehicles approaching any of these intersections shall come to a full and complete
stop before entering or turning into any of these streets or highways.
The intersection of Elm Street and Third Street is hereby designated a four-way stop intersection.
All vehicles approaching any of these intersections shall come to a full and complete stop before
entering or turning into any of these streets or highways.
The intersection of Bliss Street and Union Street is hereby designated a four-way stop
intersection. All vehicles approaching any of these intersections shall come to a full and complete
stop before entering or turning into any of these streets or highways.
[Added 11-3-1997 by L.L. No. 5-1997]
§ 146-8. One-way streets.
The following streets are designated as one-way streets, traffic to go in a northerly direction only:
[Amended 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Maple Street.
The following street is designated as a one-way street, traffic to go in a westerly direction only:
Chase Street: from a point approximately 428 feet west of the intersection of South Portage
Street and Chase Street to the intersection of Chase Street and Water Street.[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, designating one-way streets with traffic going in a
southerly direction only, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-2-1998
by L.L. No. 3-1998.
A portion of the following street is designated as a one-way street, traffic to go in a northwesterly
direction only:
[Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Meyer Drive: from a point approximately 620 feet north of the intersection of East Main Street
and Meyer Drive to a point approximately 830 feet northwest.
A portion of the following street is designated as a one-way street, traffic to go in a northerly
direction only:
[Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Market Street from the northerly curbline of East Main Street to a point 100 feet north.
Article II. Parking
§ 146-9. Parking prohibited at all times.
The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby prohibited:
Academy Street
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 112/277
Academy Street
(1) Easterly and westerly sides between East Main Street and a point 321 feet south
therefrom.
Brewer Place
(1) Easterly and westerly side between East Main Street and a point 75 feet south
therefrom.
Cass Street
(1) Easterly and westerly sides between Clark Street and a point 60 feet south therefrom.
(2) Easterly and westerly sides between Clark Street and a point 60 feet north therefrom.
Clark Street
(1) Northerly and southerly sides between Cass Street and a point 90 feet west therefrom.
(2) Northerly side between East Pearl Street and a point 80 feet east therefrom.
Clinton Street
(1) Southerly side between North Portage Street and Market Street.
(2) Northerly side between Maple Street easterly to the easterly line of Market Street
extended northerly to the northerly side of Clinton Street.
Cottage Street
(1) Westerly side from a point approximately 412 feet south of the intersection of East Main
Street and Cottage Street to a point approximately 512 feet south from the intersection
of East Main Street and Cottage Street.
East Main Street
(1) Northerly side between North Portage Street and a point 20 feet east therefrom.
(2) Southerly side between South Portage Street to a point 22 feet east therefrom.
(3) Southerly side between Elm Street and a point 35 feet west therefrom.
(4) Southerly side between Elm Street and a point 28 feet east therefrom.
(5) Southerly side from a point 40 feet west of Brewer Place to Grove Street.
(6) Northerly side between Pearl Street and a point 56 feet west therefrom.
(7) Northerly side between a point 100 feet west of Pearl Street and a point 123 feet west
therefrom.
(8) Northerly side between Pearl Street and Holt Street.
(9) Northerly side between Persons Street and a point 675 feet west therefrom.
(10) Southerly side between a point opposite the west side of Persons Street and a point
675 feet west therefrom.
(11) Northerly side from Market Street to a point 11 feet west therefrom.
(12) Northerly side from Market Street to a point 36 feet east therefrom.
East Pearl Street
(1) Easterly side between Clark Street and a Point 35 feet north therefrom.
Elm Street
(1) Westerly side between East Main Street and a point 300 feet south therefrom.
(2) Easterly side between East Main Street and a point 25 feet south therefrom.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 113/277
Elm Street
(3) Easterly side between McClurg Street and the south line of Eason Hall property.
Franklin Street
(1) Easterly side between Jefferson Street and the Norfolk and Western Railroad.
Jefferson Street
(1) Southerly side between Franklin Street and a point 202 feet west therefrom.
(2) Southerly side from the extended curbline at the intersection of North Portage Street to
a point 200 feet in an easterly direction.
(3) Northerly side between Franklin Street and a point 35 feet west therefrom.
Maple Street
(1) Westerly side from the intersection with Clinton Street to a point 140 feet in a northerly
direction.
(2) Beginning at the intersection of Maple and Washington Streets on both the east and
west sides of Maple Street to a point approximately 150 feet from the above
intersection.
[Amended 6-7-2004 by L.L. No. 1-2004]
Market Street
(1) Westerly side between Clinton Street and a point 43 feet south therefrom.
(2) Easterly side between East Main Street and Clinton Street.
(3) Westerly side from a point 81 feet in a northerly direction from the northerly curbline of
East Main Street to a point 175 feet north therefrom.
McClurg Street
(1) Southerly side between South Portage Street and Elm Street.
Meyer Drive
[Added 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
(1) Westerly side from the northerly curbline of East Main Street to a point 830 feet north
therefrom.
(2) Southerly side from a point 830 feet in a westerly direction from the northerly point of
East Main Street to the intersection of Meyer Drive and Cass Street
(3) Easterly side from the northerly curbline of East Main Street to a point 830 feet north
therefrom.
(4) Northerly side from a point 830 feet in a westerly direction from the northerly point of
East Main Street to the intersection of Meyer Drive and Cass Street
North Portage Street
(1) Easterly side between East Main Street and a point 90 feet north therefrom.
(2) Westerly side from West Main Street north to the south bridge abutment.
(3) Easterly side between Clinton Street and a point 55 feet south therefrom.
(4) Easterly side between Clinton Street and a point 62 feet north therefrom.
Pearl Street
(1) Easterly and Westerly sides between East Main Street and Clinton Street.
(2) Westerly side between Clinton Street and Jefferson Street.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 114/277
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
South Gale Street
(1) No stopping, standing or parking of vehicles shall be permitted from the intersection of
West Main Street and South Gale Street along the easterly and westerly sides of South
Gale Street to a point approximately 876 feet in a southerly direction.
North Portage Street
(1) Westerly side between West Main Street and a point 152 feet south therefrom.
South Portage Street
(1) Westerly side from a point 416 feet southerly from the southwest corner of the
intersection of South Portage Street and West Main Street to the intersection of South
Portage Street and Second Street.
(2) Easterly side between East Main Street and a point 160 feet south therefrom.
(3) Easterly side between McClurg Street and a point 35 feet south therefrom.
Union Street
(1) Westerly side between East Main Street and McClurg Street.
(2) Easterly side between East Main Street and a point 260 feet south therefrom.
(3) Easterly side from the northerly curbline of Kent Street to a point 264 feet north
therefrom.
Washington Street
(1) Southerly side between Pearl Street and a point 35 feet east and west therefrom.
West Main Street
(1) Southerly side between westerly bridge abutment and Chestnut Street.
(2) Northerly side between westerly bridge abutment and North Gale Street.
Parking is prohibited within a distance of 30 feet from the extended curblines of all intersections
located within the Village unless a different distance is specifically indicated in some other part of
§ 146-10.
§ 146-10. Restricted parking.
The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby restricted to the loading and
unloading of vehicles:
North Portage Street: easterly side between a point 87 feet north of the intersection with East
Main Street and 110 feet north therefrom.
North Portage Street: westerly side between a point 115 feet north of the intersection with
West Main Street and a point 35 feet north therefrom.
East Main Street: northerly side between a point 568 feet west of the intersection with Pearl
Street and a point 622 feet westerly therefrom.
Academy Street: easterly side between a point 200 feet south of the intersection with East
Main Street and a point 321 feet south therefrom.
Franklin Street: westerly side between a point 30 feet north of the intersection with Jefferson
Street and 70 feet north therefrom, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
[Added 1-16-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 115/277
(1)
B.
(1)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
E.
The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby restricted to 15 minutes:
East Main Street: southerly side between a point 28 feet east of the intersection of Elm Street
and a point 47 feet easterly therefrom.
The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby restricted to a maximum of 30
minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except Sundays and holidays:
Market Street: westerly side between a point 20 feet north of East Main Street and a point 81
feet north therefrom.
The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby restricted to a maximum of 30
minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays:
South Portage Street: westerly side between a point 274 feet south of West Main Street and
the south line of the Patterson Library property.
Elm Street: easterly side from the north line of the Eason Hall property to the south line of
Eason Hall property.
McClurg Street: northerly side between a point 35 feet east of the intersection with South
Portage Street and a point 88 feet east therefrom.
East Main Street: northerly side between a point 56 feet west of the westerly curbline of Pearl
Street and a point 100 feet west therefrom.
The parking of vehicles in any of the following locations is hereby restricted to a maximum of two
hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays:
South Portage Street: westerly side between a point 47 feet south of West Main Street and a
point 245 feet south therefrom.
South Portage Street: easterly side between a point 100 feet south of East Main Street and a
point 35 feet north of McClurg Street, except on Sundays between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
The area 125 feet north of McClurg Street to a point 175 feet north of McClurg Street shall be
a no standing zone designated for the purposes of discharging passengers.
North Portage Street: easterly side between a point 110 feet north of East Main Street and a
point 55 feet south of Clinton Street.
East Main Street: southerly side between:
A point 22 feet east of South Portage Street to a point 35 feet west of Elm Street.
A point 90 feet east of Elm Street to a point 234 feet east of Elm Street and a point 115
feet west of Union Street to a point 35 feet west of Union Street.
A point 35 feet east of Union Street to a point 40 feet west of Brewer Place.
East Main Street: northerly side between:
A point 20 feet East of North Portage Street to a point 11 feet west of Market Street.
A point 35 feet east of Market Street to a point 140 feet east of Market Street.
A point 123 feet west of Pearl Street to a point 568 feet west of Pearl Street.
Elm Street: easterly side between a point 25 feet south of East Main Street to a point 93 feet
south therefrom.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 116/277
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(a)
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(a)
(1)
G.
McClurg Street: northerly side between a point 88 feet east of South Portage Street to a point
30 feet west of Elm Street.
Municipal parking lots: Municipal parking lots bounded by Market Street, Clinton Street, North
Portage Street and East Main Street:
Clinton Street Parking Lot: starting at a point at the southerly edge of the sidewalk on the
southerly side of Clinton Street thence continuing southerly 172 feet along the westerly
side of the center railing to the end point of said railing.
Market Street Parking Lot: starting at a point located on the southerly side of the center
railing approximately 27 feet west of the westerly edge of the sidewalk on the west side
of Market Street, thence continuing in a generally westerly direction along the southerly
side of the center railing to a point approximately 189 feet from point of beginning.
South Portage Street, easterly side:
A point 35 feet south of the intersection of McClurg Street to a point 35 feet north of the
intersection of First Street.
Municipal parking lots. With the exception of the Market Street and Clinton Street parking lots as
set out in Subsection E(8)(a) and (b) above, the overnight parking of vehicles in any municipally
owned parking lot (Market Street, Clinton Street and Elm Street) is hereby restricted to the
designated area marked as overnight parking. Overnight parking in any municipally owned parking
lot (Market Street, Clinton Street and Elm Street) will be considered as the hours between 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday, from November 1 to March 31. The designated area
marked as overnight parking will be as follows:
[Amended 3-4-2002 by L.L. No. 1-2002]
Clinton Street parking lot: starting at a point located on the easterly side of the center railing
approximately 10 feet north of the most southern end of the center rail, thence continuing in a
generally northerly direction along the easterly side of the center railing to a point
approximately 60 feet from point of beginning; this will be considered as six parking spaces
total.
Market Street parking lot: starting at a point located on the northerly side of the center railing
approximately 10 feet west of the westerly edge of the sidewalk on the west side of Market
Street, thence continuing in a generally westerly direction along the northerly side of the
center railing to a point approximately 60 feet from point of beginning; this will be considered
as six parking spaces.
Elm Street parking lot: starting at a point located on the southerly side of the center railing
approximately 10 feet east of the easterly edge of the sidewalk on the east side of Elm Street,
thence continuing in a generally easterly direction along the southerly side of the center railing
to a point approximately 30 feet from point of beginning; this will be considered as three
parking spaces.
The parking of vehicles in the following locations during the months of November, December,
January, February and March of each year is hereby restricted to the southerly side of each
designated location from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. local time on any even-numbered calendar day
and to the northerly side of each designated location from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. local time on any
odd-numbered calendar day:
Clinton Street:
As to the southerly side of Clinton Street from the intersection of the easterly line of
Market Street easterly to the westerly line of Pearl Street.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 117/277
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
H.
As to the northerly side of Clinton Street, from a point on the northerly side of Clinton
Street where the easterly line of Market Street extended northerly intersects said point,
then easterly to the westerly line of Pearl Street.
Handicapped parking. Stopping, standing or parking shall be prohibited in the following designated
locations except for vehicles registered pursuant to § 404-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law
(registration of motor vehicles of severely disabled persons) and for vehicles that comply with
§ 1203-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law (parking permits for handicapped persons):
East Main Street: on the southerly side of East Main Street between a point 176 feet east of
the east curbline of South Portage Street and a point 197 feet east of the curbline of South
Portage Street.
East Main Street: on the northerly side of East Main Street between a point 151 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Market Street and a point 172 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Market Street.
East Main Street: on the northerly side of east Main Street between a point 141 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Market Street.
East Main Street: on the southerly side of East Main Street between a point 34 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Union Street and a point 54 feet west of the westerly curbline of Union
Street.
[Amended 10-18-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993]
South Portage Street: on the westerly side of South Portage Street between a point 155 feet
south of the southerly curbline of West Main Street and a point 177 feet south of the southerly
curbline of West Main Street.
South Portage Street: on the westerly side of South Portage Street between a point 345 feet
south of the southerly curbline of West Main Street and a point 367 feet south of the southerly
curbline of West Main Street.
Elm Street: on the easterly side of Elm Street between a point 30 feet south of the southerly
curbline of East Main Street and a point 49 feet south of the southerly curbline of East Main
Street.
Elm Street Municipal Parking Lot: on the northwest corner of the parking lot, adjacent to Elm
Street, between a point starting at the west edge of the lot barricade and a point 27 feet east
of the west edge. The area between these points shall be designated as two handicapped
parking spots.
Market Street Municipal Parking Lot: on the northeast corner of the southern lot barricade,
adjacent to Market Street, between a point starting at the east edge of the lot barricade to a
point 27 feet west of the east edge. The area between these points shall be designated as
two handicapped parking spots.
Clinton Street Municipal Parking Lot: on the northeast corner of the parking lot, adjacent to
Clinton Street, between a point starting at the north edge of the lot barricade and a point 27
feet south of the north edge. The area between these points shall be designated as two
handicapped parking spots.
Market Street: on the westerly side of Market Street between a point 31 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Main Street and a point 53 feet north of the northerly curbline of Main
Street.
[Added 8-6-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 118/277
(12)
(1)
[1]
(2)
I.
A.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
East Pearl Street: on the westerly side of East Pearl Street between a point 353 feet north of
the northerly edge of Jefferson Street and a point 393 feet north of the northerly edge of
Jefferson Street. The area between these points should be designated as two handicapped
parking spots.
[Added 8-6-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
Alternate parking. The parking of vehicles in the following locations is hereby restricted to the
westerly side of each designated location from 10:00 a.m. local time on any even-numbered
calendar day to 10:00 a.m. local time of the next following day, and on the easterly side of each
designated location from 10:00 a.m. local time on any odd-numbered calendar day to 10:00 a.m.
local time of the next following day:
Union Street: from the intersection of McClurg Street, Bell Parkway and Union Street
southerly to the intersection of Second Street and Union Street.
Cottage Street: from the intersection of East Main Street and Cottage Street southerly to the
intersection of Bank Street and Cottage Street.[1]
Editor's Note: Original Section 10J, which immediately followed this subsection, regarding
additional parking restrictions, was deleted 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995.
§ 146-11. Angle parking.
Angle parking is hereby allowed at the following locations:
Kent Street: northerly side between a point 35 feet east of Union Street and a point 225 feet east
therefrom.
§ 146-12. Fire lanes.
The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in or on the following described alleys for the purpose of
providing lanes for the passage of fire equipment:
The east-west alley with a terminus at the east side of North Portage Street, which alley runs
generally east and west and parallel to Main Street and with another terminus at the west side of
Market Street.
The north-south alley with a terminus at the south side of Clinton Street, which alley runs generally
north and south and parallel to North Portage Street and with another terminus at the north side of
the previously described alleys.
Article III. Enforcement and Penalties
§ 146-13. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995; 5-19-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for violation of any of the following provisions shall be
subject to a fine of $25:
Section 146-9.
Section 146-10A.
Section 146-10G.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 119/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
D.
(1)
E.
F.
G.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for violation of any of the provisions of the following
shall be subject to a fine of $10 for each violation. It shall be considered a new violation at the end
of the specified time limit:
Section 146-10B.
Section 146-10C.
Section 146-10D.
Section 146-10E.
Section 146-10F.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for violations of any provisions of the following shall
be subject to a fine of $25:
Section 146-5.
Section 146-10I.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for violations of any of the provisions of the following
shall be subject to a fine of $50:
Section 146-10H.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for violation of any of the provisions of the following
shall be subject to a fine of $50. The person will also be liable for all towing costs if it becomes
necessary to move the vehicle:
Section 146-12.
Every person who fails to pay the parking ticket within 10 days from the date of issuance shall be
subject to an additional charge of $25.
Every person who fails to pay the above fine or fines within 30 days of the date of violation may
have his or her vehicle registration suspended or revoked and an additional fine of up to $100 in
addition to any other fines, or both.
§ 146-14. Police authority.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to have removed any vehicle which may be in violation of
this chapter or in violation of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York. The owner and/or
operator of any vehicle towed shall be liable for all costs incurred by the Village for the removal of said
vehicle and shall also be liable for damages caused as a result of a violation of this chapter or any
other law that may apply.
§ 146-15. Temporary suspension.
The Village Board may by resolution temporarily suspend any parking restrictions or add additional
parking restrictions for a period not to exceed 72 hours.
§ 146-16. Effect on previous laws.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 120/277
A.
B.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
A.
All previous ordinances or parts of ordinances or any local laws of this Village regulating traffic are
hereby repealed, except that this shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 146-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 10 days after posting and publishing of notice of adoption, except
those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and
§ 46 of the Highway Law of the State of New York.
Any part or parts of this chapter which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law and § 46 of the Highway Law of the State of New York shall take effect the day
following the day on which approval in writing was received from the New York State Department
of Transportation.
Chapter 150. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 1-15-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996.
[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 45.
Sewers — See Ch. 124.
Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former Ch. 150, Water, which provided that the Village's
provisions regarding water, as adopted 4-18-1961 as Ch. III of the 1961 Ordinances, were under review
and on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 150-1. Word usage.
In this chapter "shall" or "will" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 150-2. Authorities.
The authorities for this chapter shall be as follows:
Board of Public Utilities (BPU). The BPU is the Village water supplier and is authorized and
responsible to manage the Village water system and service.
Water supply. The State of New York Department of Conservation, Water Power and Control
Commission, Water Supply Application No. 979, approved September 30, 1935.
New York State Sanitary Regulations.
§ 150-3. Enforcement and penalties.
Violation notice. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except § 150-17,
shall be served by the Village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 121/277
B.
C.
A.
reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
Penalties for offenses. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in § 150-3A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the
amount not exceeding $5,000 for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
Damage to structures or equipment unlawful. Any person who shall break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, fence or equipment which is a part of
the water supply works shall be charged with an offense under Article 145 of the Penal Law and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to the fine and imprisonment, or both, for the particular offense
charged. Each day's commission of the offense shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 150-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BASE RATE
The rates prescribed for minimum water use and the first subsequent use block for each
category of water supply service.
BPU
Village of Westfield Board of Public Utilities, its employees or designees.
CONSECUTIVE WATER SYSTEM
A public water system with one or more successive public water systems which have been
approved by the state to be monitored for water quality as a single system under the State
Sanitary Code.
CURB VALVE
A water supply valve placed on or adjacent to a property to which the water service pipe for
the property is attached.
EMERGENCY REPAIR
Any broken water line, or system, or component thereof that serves as an immediate danger
to the life, safety, health or welfare of any person as a result of such breakage or deficient
component shall be deemed an emergency, and emergency repairs shall be hereby
authorized.
[Added 11-4-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
INDIVIDUAL CUSTOMER
One who does not own or operate a public water system serving others.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM
A water system which serves fewer than five structures containing a structure, or serving
fewer than 25 persons daily 60 or more days each year.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM SUPPLIER
The owner or operator of a water system which serves five or more structures containing a
multiple residence, or serving 25 or more persons daily 60 or more days each year.
SERVICE LINE
The piping or water service line for conducting water from a water main to the water
distribution system of the structure served.
STANDARD ENGINEERING PRACTICE
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 122/277
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Meeting or exceeding the applicable design, materials and construction standards in keeping
with government regulations, engineering association standards, general engineering practice
and industrial and trade standards.
STRUCTURE
Any building, premises or residence that is served by a municipal or private water system.
SUCCESSIVE PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM
A public water system supplied with water by the Village system.
SUPERINTENDENT
The Water and Sewer Superintendent of the Village of Westfield or his authorized deputy,
agent or representative.
WATER DEPARTMENT
The Village of Westfield Water and Sewer Department or any authorized employee or
contractor of the Village of Westfield Water and Sewer Department.
WATER MAIN or MAIN
A water main in a public street or right-of-way owned by a municipality or public organization
and supplying or capable of supplying water to more than one parcel of property.
WATER SYSTEM OPERATION
The operation of a public water system as prescribed by Part 5 of the New York State
Sanitary Code to include all responsibilities of a certified operator.
All other definitions of Part 5 of the New York State Sanitary Code are applicable to this
agreement.
Article II. Village Water Customers
§ 150-5. Sale of water; emergency shutoff; conservation.
Use of meters. The sale of water to customers shall be through a metered connection to the
Village system. No person shall take water or permit water to be taken from the Village's water
distribution system other than through a metered service or as permitted through a metered supply
point, except as authorized by the Village. No person shall accept water knowing that the water
consumption has not been properly registered on a meter.
Bulk sales. The BPU shall provide a metered water point for the filling of water transport vehicles.
Construction. When application is made for a water connection for construction purposes, the BPU
shall install an approved water meter for this purpose. The user will pay the Village fees for labor
and materials and water used.
Resale. Water supplied by the Village to any water system or structure is for use of such system or
structure by the owners or occupants thereof. Except as authorized by the BPU, the resale,
delivery, transmission or supplying of such water to other persons, structures, water services or
water systems is forbidden. In the case of noncompliance, the BPU is authorized to shut off the
system or structure from the Village water mains.
Emergencies. The Village may shut off the water supply through the water mains of the Village in
cases of water main breaks or due to operational requirements or emergencies. When practicable,
notice of a shutoff will be given in advance. However, even when notice is not given, neither the
Village nor its employees shall be liable for any damage that may occur as a result of a shutoff.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 123/277
F.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
Conservation. The BPU shall have the authority to promulgate rules restricting the use of Village
water in the case of a drought, water shortage or other water emergency. These water shortage
rules shall become effective through an emergency proclamation by the Mayor. It shall be the
responsibility of the customer to cooperate and comply with Village instructions.
§ 150-6. Access.
The officers of the BPU, agents and employees have the right to free access, at all reasonable hours,
to the structure where Village water is being used to inspect the adequacy of the system installation
and condition; to make tests of the pressure and quality of the water supply; to read, service, install
and remove water meters; to inspect for illegal connections and cross-connections; and to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 150-7. Metering.
Except as otherwise prescribed herein, consumption charges shall be based on metered
consumption, as determined by periodic meter readings taken by the Water Department. Meters
shall be read at least annually.
If a meter reader cannot gain access to the meter for a scheduled reading or reliable meter data is
otherwise unavailable, a calculated bill may be issued, based on past metered consumption.
Calculated bills may be escalated by up to 10% beyond past consumption to cover variations. The
account shall be adjusted in accordance with subsequent meter readings as necessary to more
accurately reflect actual consumption. No change shall be required if the calculated billing is
consistent with the average and variability of subsequent meter readings with seasonal
adjustments.
If a meter or meters shall fail to correctly register the quantities of water flowing through it, such
amount shall be determined by taking the average of the 12 preceding readings of such meter or
meters adjusted for seasonal variations. Where insufficient valid readings are available, such
estimate may be based on the largest possible number of valid readings taken preceding or
subsequent to such incorrect or stopped registration.
§ 150-8. Billing; rates.
The BPU shall issue periodic bills for water consumption on all active services. Bills may be
estimated when billing periods are scheduled more frequently than meter readings; however, a
billing shall coincide with scheduled meter readings and bills shall be adjusted to reflect actual
use.
Water rates. The BPU, subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, shall issue a water rate
schedule listing consumption charges, ready-to-serve charges (meter) and other charges
appropriate to provide funds for the operation, maintenance and capital expenses of the Water
Department. Within the practical limits of prudent system management, customer rates and
charges shall be related to the costs of the kinds and levels of services provided to them.
§ 150-9. Responsibility for payment.
The owners of all structures served by a single connection to a Village water supply pipe, either
individually or by an association representing them, shall agree to guarantee payment of all water
charges which accrue against all structures. Any delinquent charges shall be a lien on all
structures.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 124/277
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
Customer vacating structure. When a customer vacates a structure served by the Village water
system, the customer or owner shall give notice to the BPU specifying the date of such vacancy,
and the owner of the structure shall be liable for all water and service provided until such notice is
given.
§ 150-10. Appeal of bills.
Requests for adjustments. The BPU shall hear and consider complaints by any property owner or
occupant who desires to contest a water bill. The BPU shall determine whether an adjustment
shall be made in the bill.
Claims and allowances.
In all cases where any rebate or allowance is claimed, the claim therefor shall be made to the
BPU in writing.
The Village is prohibited by the Constitution of the State of New York from giving public funds
to private parties based upon the sense of justice or kindness of its officers and may only
settle, compromise and pay claims which are enforceable against it and are not the primary
liability of another party.
The Village is not an insurer and will not allow payment of claims by the Village unless
negligence of the Village is proved. Claims must be presented to the Village, in writing, within
90 days of the occurrence or within 30 days subsequent to the billing date.
Such claims shall be:
Reduced by any proportion that the negligence or actions of the claimant contributed to
the damage or loss.
Disallowed if it is covered by a contract of insurance.
Disallowed if it is not presented in writing within the period of time allowed by applicable
statutes.
No rebate will be granted for water lost on the customer's side of a meter.
No rebate for unoccupied structures will be allowed unless the water is shut off at the curb, by
a Village representative, and then only from the time the Village is notified.
No rebate will be made when the charge results from the failure on the part of the owner or
consumer to comply with the Village laws or BPU water supply policies or to promptly repair
any broken, frozen or defective building fixture or service pipe.
No rebate or allowance on any bill sent out by the BPU shall be made by the Village
Treasurer, except as approved by the BPU.
§ 150-11. Delinquent payment.
Each fee and user charge levied pursuant to this chapter is hereby made a lien on the structure and, if
the same is not paid within 30 days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be certified to the
Treasurer of the Village, who if still unpaid shall place the same on the real property tax bill for that
year with interest and penalties allowed by law, and shall be collected as other Village taxes are
collected.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 125/277
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
B.
§ 150-12. Discontinuance of service.
Those water customers who, 30 days after bills delivered for services rendered as prescribed
herein and at the rates concurrent with the services rendered, have not paid their bills shall be
deemed to be delinquent and the service to their structure may be discontinued after due notice to
the owner and residents. Such service shall not be restored until proper settlement of the
delinquent customer's account has been made, together with any additional costs which might
have been incurred by the Village in the discontinuing or restoring of the delinquent users service.
Shutoff notice.
A notice shall be mailed to the owner of the structure at the owner's last known address and
shall be posted in at least one conspicuous place on the structure.
Each shutoff notice shall state that service will be shut off unless all delinquent water and
sewer bills are paid and shall state that a hearing may be had by the owner or any tenant to
contest the validity of the sewer charges in question or to show an error in the statement of
the delinquency.
Such notice shall indicate the proposed date of the shutoff and also give the name and
address of the Village Clerk who may be contacted to request a hearing. The notice shall
state that unless a written request for a hearing is made within 10 days after the mailing and
posting of the notice, the hearing shall be deemed waived.
Shutoff hearing.
If no hearing is requested by the deadline stated in the notice, then the BPU may proceed to
terminate service.
If the termination of service will endanger the health and welfare of persons unable to care for
themselves, the matter will be referred to the appropriate public agency for resolution before
service is terminated.
If a hearing is requested on or before the deadline date by an owner or tenant of the structure,
a hearing shall be schedule before the EPU. The applicant may be accompanied by any other
persons and may present at the hearing any information, testimony or documentation by
which to support the claim.
Minutes shall be kept of the hearing. The BPU shall decide whether any error was made in
the water or sewer billing and whether service shall be discontinued. The BPU shall make a
report which substantiates its decision. A notice of the decision and the report shall be mailed
to the applicant. If the decision is to terminate service, the notice shall state the termination
date, which shall not be less than 10 days after the mailing of the decision notice.
§ 150-13. Resumption of service.
No service shall be commenced to a structure on which there are unpaid Village taxes, penalties
or assessments, nor to one which is owned by an individual or corporation with water, sewer or
other municipal charges outstanding.
If and when all delinquent bills are paid, the water service shall be turned back on by the BPU. A
service turn-on fee shall be charged.
Article III. Water Customers Outside the Village
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 126/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 150-14. Terms.
The Village as a water supplier is committed and bound by law to first supply water to the
structures and properties within its corporate limits.
Any person desiring water service outside the Village limits shall sign an agreement with the
Village which shall be a binding contract.
The Village shall have no responsibility for furnishing water to properties outside its corporate
limits, except where binding contracts for such services have been made with the Village. If the
Village determines that the supply of water shall be insufficient to meet the requirements within the
Village, the Village may curtail or suspend water sales beyond the corporate limits with due notice.
The cost of water to customers outside of the Village limits shall be determined by the BPU
subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees from time to time. It is understood and agreed that
the Village reserves the right at all times throughout the term of applicable contracts to increase or
decrease the rate charged to Village customers. When such changes become effective, the rates
paid by customers outside the Village shall be adjusted accordingly.
In the event that a bill remains unpaid for 30 days after its due date, water service shall be
discontinued until full payment is made, and a deposit to insure future payment shall be made at
the Treasurer's office.
Article IV. Westfield Public Water System
§ 150-15. Supply of water.
The Village shall provide, within capability, water meeting state and local standards of quality and
pressure at points of delivery from Village-operated water mains.
Water pressure. The Village will normally provide water to the customers serviced at a minimum of
20 pounds per square inch static pressure at the point of delivery to the water service of the
premises; however, the maintenance of pressure at all times cannot be guaranteed. In the event
that the pressure in any individual service is excessive or inadequate and the installation of a
pump or pressure regulator is necessary, appropriate equipment shall be installed, operated and
maintained by and at the expense of the property owner. Such equipment must be of a type and
quality approved by the Superintendent prior to installation.
At its own discretion, in coordination with public health agencies, the Village will adopt such health
measures and treatment processes for water, requiring the addition of such additives as chlorine,
fluoride and corrosion inhibitors, as shall be in the best interest of the consuming public.
Nontoxic impurities. The Village does not guarantee that water provided will be free of rust or other
nontoxic impurities at all times. Any property owner or occupant, either residential, commercial or
industrial, who requires water of higher purity than provided by the system is responsible for the
installation and expense of any necessary filters or treatment equipment.
Monitoring quality. The Village will monitor the quality of water delivered to customers within the
Village and at points of delivery to the customer in accordance with the State Sanitary Code. The
Village will monitor public water systems it supplies on a consecutive basis only by written
agreement and in accordance with the New York State Sanitary Code.
§ 150-16. Operation of the distribution system.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 127/277
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
No person except the BPU and its employees shall open or shut any supply valve or gate on the
street main, nor molest or interfere with the water works system. No person except the BPU, its
employees or duly authorized persons shall operate any curb valve. Persons authorized by the
Superintendent may operate a curb valve to accomplish work or test service lines, provided that
the curb valve is returned to its original position at the completion of work or test.
No fire hydrant shall be opened, closed or adjusted except by the BPU, its employees or duly
authorized members of the Fire Department.
§ 150-17. Tampering.
No unauthorized person shall alter, tamper with or damage any component, equipment or facility
of the Village water system. No unauthorized person shall interfere with the operation of any
facility or cause water loss, contamination or inadequate treatment in any part or process of the
Village water system.
All meters within the Village are and remain the property of the Village. No person shall illegally
retain possession of a meter that is the property of the Village.
No person shall remove or cause damage to the meter in a water service. After such meter is
attached, any damage which said meter may sustain resulting from frost or carelessness of said
owner, agent or tenant, or from neglect of any of them to properly secure and protect the same, as
well as any damage which may result from hot water or steam, shall be repaired at the owner's
expense, in default of which water will be shut off from the structure and connection will not be
restored until all charges are paid.
No unauthorized person shall remove a meter from a service where it is installed by the Village.
The property owner or tenant is responsible to see that the meter serving their structure is not
removed, moved from one service to another, illegally bypassed or tampered with. No bypass
valve shall be opened, and otherwise water shall not be delivered to any structure which does not
properly register on a meter except as authorized by the Water Department.
If a bypass valve has been opened, or if the meter has been removed or tampered with, or if some
other condition is found to exist in a water service which would permit the delivery of water to the
structure without the proper registry thereof on a meter, it shall be presumptive evidence that the
persons or person who accepted or received the use or benefit of the water did so with the
knowledge of the illegal condition.
Broken seals. If a seal or tamper protection on a valve, meter or other fitting is broken, it shall be
presumptive evidence that the water consumption has not been properly registered on the meter.
If a seal is broken, it shall be replaced by the Water Department, and the property owner shall be
charged a fee for sealing as established by the BPU. No fee shall be charged if the seal was
broken accidentally and the Water Department is notified promptly.
§ 150-18. Curb stop valves and pipes.
Responsibility. The installation and maintenance of all water pipes and accessories from the public
water main to and including the curb valve are the responsibility of the Department of Public
Works. No excavation or work on pipes shall be conducted in this area, unless under the
supervision of the Department of Public Works or its representative. All connections to, and
removal of, connections from curb stop valves will be made only under the supervision of the
Department of Public Works or its designated representative.
[Amended 11-4-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 128/277
B.
C.
A.
B.
Tapping of Village water mains may be done only by the BPU, its employees or persons
authorized by the Superintendent.
Formerly serviced properties. Properties that were formerly serviced by the Village water system
shall be reconnected to the system pursuant to conditions set by the BPU and the Village Board of
Trustees.
§ 150-19. Extensions of Village water mains.
Whenever the owner of a parcel on a dedicated Village street, avenue or road makes a written
application for water service to the BPU, the BPU will extend its water system so as to serve said
property under conditions specified by the BPU and the Village Board of Trustees.
Article V. Private Water Systems
§ 150-20. Permits.
The property owner or his agent must make application for the installation of a private water system,
and for any excavation or work in the area from the public water main to private connections, on forms
provided by the BPU. The application must be accompanied by plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the BPU. Permits are not required for replacement
or modification; however, all work must be inspected prior to covering any part.
§ 150-21. Responsibility of property owner.
[Amended 11-4-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
The cost and expense of a private water system or service pipe from the Village main shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. The property owner or a registered contractor on behalf of the
property owner shall obtain and maintain a permit under the conditions set forth in this chapter and
shall pay such tapping fee as may be established by the Village. The property owner's contractor shall
complete the installation from the public water main to and including the curb valve in accordance with
Village practice.
§ 150-22. Standards.
The pattern, materials and construction of all new or replacement private water systems must be
approved by the Water Superintendent as to pattern, material and workmanship. Specifications shall
be promulgated and published by the BPU.
§ 150-23. Inspection.
The property owner or his agent is responsible for obtaining the proper permit and requesting an
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to work being covered.
No part of a private water service system installation or replacement, or work connected with the
Village public water system, shall be covered, whether in trench or building, before it has been
inspected and approved by the Superintendent or his representative.
§ 150-24. Meters.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 129/277
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Requirement. Each separate structure on a parcel must be separately metered, except that
apartment houses and attached multiple-unit residential dwellings may have a single meter.
Responsibility. The property owner is responsible for seeing that a meter is installed in every
active water service providing Village water to the structure.
Location. Whenever a meter is required by the BPU, the owner of the structure shall provide a
suitable location for it. No change in the location of the meter shall be made on the structure
without a written request to the Water Department and Water Department approval. The relocation
shall be supervised by the Water Department.
Inside structure. The owner of a structure served with water shall provide a suitable place for
a meter, such that the meter, fittings and stop/waste valve are readily accessible to Village
personnel and not subject to frost. Owners or occupants are prohibited from placing
obstructions or interfering with the reading of the meter.
Meter pits. Where the Superintendent deems that a particular structure served is inadequate
for meter installation, he may require the meter to be installed in a pit or vault. Plans for
construction of a meter pit or vault shall be submitted to the Superintendent for his approval
prior to construction. Pits and vaults shall be constructed and maintained by and at the
expense of the property owner.
Meter installation. Meters used in water services supplying Village water to a structure shall be of
a type and size approved by the BPU. The installation of plumbing for a meter meeting Village
specifications is the responsibility of the property owner. No one other than the Water Department
or its approved agent shall install or remove a meter which measures water delivered from the
Village system.
Meter maintenance. Meters shall be maintained by the Water Department. Meters may be
removed or replaced at the discretion of the Water Department in order to perform necessary
maintenance or testing.
Meter testing. Upon the request of a property owner, or at the Water Superintendent's discretion,
meters may be tested by the Water Department. The property owner may witness the test. The
test results shall be presumptive evidence of whether the meter has been functioning properly. If
the test was done solely at the request of the owner and the results indicate accuracy within the
current American Water Works Association limits, the owner may be charged a fee for the test as
established by the BPU. If the test results do not meet acceptable accuracy limits, the meter shall
be replaced at no charge to the owner, there shall be no charge for the test, and the most current
water bill shall be adjusted as necessary to compensate for meter error.
§ 150-25. Operation.
The operation of a private water system including water service systems is the responsibility of the
property owner at the owner's expense. The system shall be operated in accordance with state
and local laws, including the State Sanitary Code.
A private water system served by the Village shall not use a source of water other than the Village
in its water system. No cross-connections will be allowed.
The operator of a private water system supplied by the Village shall notify the Water
Superintendent or the Chairman of the BPU as promptly as possible of all emergency conditions
which may directly or indirectly affect quality or loss of water received.
Curb valve operation. Workmen authorized by the Water Superintendent may operate a curb stop
valve to accomplish work or test service lines, provided that the curb stop valve is returned to its
original position at the completion of work or test.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 130/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 150-26. Maintenance.
The owner of a water system or service is responsible for all maintenance and repair of the
facilities at the owner's cost, including the cost of any necessary sidewalk restoration. The Village
will not construct, modify, operate or maintain a water system which it does not own without
compensation.
A problem of inadequate flow or pressure in a defective service is not the responsibility of the
Village to correct.
The Water Superintendent may, by written notification, require a property owner to make
necessary repairs to a leaky or defective service. The Village may terminate service to private
water systems which are improperly maintained resulting in water loss or presenting a
contamination hazard.
For work which is the responsibility of the property owner, the owner shall arrange for work to be
accomplished by qualified persons in accordance with the procedures and standards of the
Superintendent. The owner shall see that all necessary permits are obtained and all necessary
fees paid.
The Superintendent may temporarily terminate service to private systems until repairs are made
when damage or loss may result. The property owner may be billed for the costs incurred for such
work.
§ 150-27. Water service systems.
Each and every single structure must have a separate service pipe connection with a curb valve.
Each structure of a multiple residence or use building must have a separate service pipe
connection to a curb valve provided for it. Apartment houses may be served by a single water
service pipe and meter.
The owner of a parcel of property or structure is responsible for the installation, and any necessary
replacement, of the entire service pipe supplying water to that parcel or structure, from the
connection with a Village curb valve to the point of use. The owner is responsible for all costs
including payment of a tapping fee determined by the BPU, for which the Village shall provide a
curb valve and all work and devices necessary to supply water to it from the Village main.
Supply and waste valves shall be placed in every service pipe immediately inside the cellar or
basement wall, below the action of the frost. They shall be situated so that the water can be
completely shut off and drained with one supply and waste valve. Supply and waste valves must
be placed at foot of the riser or some other appropriate point(s) to drain the structure's water
distribution system. A structure intended to be occupied by more than one establishment, firm,
family or office must be provided with independent supply and waste valves conveniently located
for each such apartment into which water is introduced so that any portion of the same may be
shut off without interfering with the supply of water to other occupants.
No interconnections between the Village water system and a private water system shall be made.
Existing interconnections shall be reported to the Water Superintendent where found and shall be
removed.
A BPU approved backflow preventer will be installed on the supply side of the meter on all new or
replacement water services. Backflow prevention shall be provided where the public water system
is connected to a structure or equipment likely to have cross-connection or backflow hazards,
including, but not limited to, auxiliary water systems such as wells, beverage bottling plants,
canneries, food processing facilities, hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues and
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 131/277
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
mortuaries, laundries and dye works, metal manufacturing, cleaning and fabricating plants,
chemical plants, plating facilities, film laboratories, sewage and storm drain facilities, and irrigation
systems. Such backflow prevention shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
regulations of the New York State Department of Health and must be approved by the Water
Superintendent prior to installation. All costs of installation and maintenance shall be borne by the
property owner.
The Water Department may at any reasonable time inspect any structure in order to determine if a
hazard exists due to an actual or potential cross-connection between the water system and any
potential source of contamination. In any case where the Water Superintendent deems a hazard
of contamination to exist, he may require the property owner to install a backflow preventer.
If a required backflow preventer is not installed within the period of time set by the Water
Superintendent, the supply of water to the structure may be shut off by the Water Department until
the installation is completed. The property owner shall be required to have all backflow prevention
devices inspected annually and submit annual inspection reports to the Superintendent.
§ 150-28. Multiple structures.
The Water Superintendent may, at his discretion, permit multiple structures to be connected to a single
curb stop valve, when geographic locations make separate service connections impractical. However,
when a single connection to a Village main serves five or more structures containing a dwelling
structure, or 25 or more persons 60 or more days a year, it is a public water system and is subject to all
applicable requirements.
Article VI. Successive Public Water Systems
§ 150-29. Village as supplier.
The Village will become the supplier to a private public water system supplier only as agreed
under the provisions of a completed contract between the Village and public system supplier.
Compliance and liability. All agreements for the Village to supply water shall be in compliance with
federal, state and local laws. The Village shall not be responsible for damages in any failure to
supply water or for interruption of supply. The customer agrees to save and hold harmless the
Village from all damages to real and personal property occasioned or caused by the making of any
water connections, or caused by the furnishing of water under the agreement, and shall also keep
and save the Village harmless from all damage of any kind, nature and description which may
arise from the making of an agreement.
The Village shall bear no liability for defects in the water service prior to or resulting from its
freezing, unless the defects were caused directly by the actions of the Water Department.
Water service shall not be provided to successive public water systems outside the Village unless
those systems meet Village specifications and all requirements of the New York State Sanitary
Code and are properly maintained.
Article VII. System Connection and Contractor Standards
[Added 11-4-1996 by L.L. No. 9-1996]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 132/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
§ 150-30. Water connection permit required; building water
installation and maintenance.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public water system or appurtenance thereof without first submitting a permit
application obtainable at the office of the Village Clerk or the Department of Public Works to
include a drawing or sketch of the intended work and a ten-dollar nonrefundable permit application
fee to be charged at the time of submission of the said application. The application and associated
documents submitted will be compared to the water service requirements passed by the Village
Board on December 15, 1997, by an authorized representative of the Department of Public Works.
Upon approval of the permit application by an authorized representative of the Department of
Public Works, the applicant shall receive a numbered permit from the office of the Village Clerk.
Installing and maintaining water lines shall be the responsibility of the Village.
[Amended 2-2-1998 by L.L. No. 2-1998]
All construction, alteration and repair work performed on private property between the curb valve
and water meter shall be done under the supervision of the Department of Public Works or its
designated agent. All work not performed by a homeowner on his property shall be performed only
by authorized contractors registered with the Village of Westfield, and at the expense of the
property owner.
Every person desiring water service via the public water system, or desiring to make alterations or
engage in repair work to existing water systems upon his or her own property shall first make
application to the Department of Public Works or its designated agent on forms approved by the
Village Board. Such application shall be signed by the owners of the property or their designated
agents and the registered contractor who shall perform the work. Any required fees shall be paid
upon submission of the application.
All applications, site plans, materials and specifications shall be approved in writing by the
Department of Public Works or its designated agent prior to commencement of any excavation,
installation, alteration or repair of any water or sewer line, component, or any part of such water or
sewer system. All applications shall be reviewed and processed within 30 days. Prior to
commencement of construction work, all applicants shall call the Underground Facilities Protective
Organization. In the case of a rejected application, the applicant shall be notified in writing as to
the reasons for rejection, and such notification shall be made within three business days after the
application has been determined incomplete or invalid in any way.
§ 150-31. Emergency repairs.
In the case of any emergency repair, as defined in this chapter, the property owner or his designated
agent shall be responsible for obtaining the proper permits within 72 hours after the commencement of
such repairs. In all cases the owner or his designated agent shall make every possible attempt to
contact the Department of Public Works or its designated agent prior to engaging in such repairs.
§ 150-32. Registration of contractors.
All work on water lines connected to the public water supply, including but not limited to obtaining
water service via the principal water mains, alterations or repair work to existing water systems
within the Village shall be performed only by or under the direct supervision of a contractor
registered with the Village of Westfield other than a homeowner working on his own property. For
a contractor to be eligible for certification he shall either be a plumber or other contractor with
similar experience in the installation, maintenance or repair of water or sewer lines. The contractor
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 133/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
H.
shall be considered an agent of the property owner and shall be responsible for compliance with
this Code even though he does not personally perform the work.
Application to register as a contractor shall be made at the Village of Westfield Clerk's office. No
fee shall be charged for the application or the filing thereof. Applications shall contain the following
information:
Applicant's full name, street address and applicable mailing address.
Social security number and driver's license number.
Business and home telephone numbers.
Number of employees, if any.
Company name and street address.
Type of work performed by the applicant and his company.
Proof of liability insurance certificate. Contractors shall be required to carry a minimum of
$300,000 in bodily injury liability and $50,000 property damage protection, and the policy shall
also provide coverage against collapse, explosion and damage to underground utilities. The
Village of Westfield shall be named as an additional insured under the above policies.
Any other information which may be required by the Village of Westfield Department of Public
Works.
Upon approval of the contractor's application, the contractor shall be issued a registration card or
certificate. This registration card or certificate shall be displayed to the appropriate Village officials
upon demand.
After the application to register as a contractor has been approved and proper permits have been
issued and notification has been given to the Department of Public Works at least 24 hours in
advance of commencing the work, the contractor may commence work.
All registration cards or certificates issued by the Village shall expire three years from the date of
issuance. All contractors seeking to continue installing or maintaining water lines shall apply for a
new registration card or certificate every three years.
All contractors shall provide the Village with an updated certificate of insurance as required in this
chapter within five days of its expiration. Failure to supply the updated certificate of insurance shall
be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall require the contractor's registration to be
immediately revoked by the Village.
The Village Clerk shall maintain a log of all registered contractors and shall furnish copies of the
same to the Code Enforcement Officer and the Department of Public Works.
Suspension or revocation of registration.
Any registered contractor who shall neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this
article or the rules and regulations established by the Village; or with conditions under which
any permit shall be issued, or who shall falsify any statements in his application for
registration; or who shall violate any provisions of the Code of the Village of Westfield; or who
shall violate any provisions of the laws of this state, shall be subject to suspension or
revocation of registration. Any registration certificate authorized to be issued may be
suspended by the Village Clerk as set forth below. If such certificate is suspended, the
certificate and all evidence thereof shall be surrendered by the registrant and shall be held by
the Village Clerk until the final disposition of such suspension.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 134/277
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
I.
It shall be unlawful for the suspended contractor or anyone working on his behalf to do any
work in the Village of Westfield water supply system while suspension is in force.
In connection with the notice of suspension, a statement in writing shall be prepared by the
Village Clerk suspending the certificate and setting forth specifically the charges or grounds
for which the certificate was suspended and the facts on which suspension is based, and
such statement shall be served personally or by first-class mail to the address of the
registrant listed in the contractor's application to the Village.
Upon such suspension the Village Clerk shall give a notice in writing to the contractor or to
any person in charge of the contractor's business at the address designated in the certificate
that a hearing will be held before a hearing officer appointed by the Mayor at such time and
place stated in the notice, not less than three days and not more than 30 days from the date
of such suspension, at which time the question of such suspension shall be heard by the
hearing officer to determine if the basis for the suspension exists. If the hearing officer finds
that the basis of suspension is substantiated by the facts, the certificate shall be revoked
forthwith, but if the basis of suspension is not established by the evidence submitted, the
certificate shall be reinstated.
In the event that the certificate issued under the Code is revoked, such person and all
persons officially connected with such certificate shall be ineligible to obtain another certificate
in the Village for a period of three months from the date of such revocation.
Work performed by unregistered contractors.
Whenever the Director of Public Works has reasonable grounds to believe that any work
within the scope of this chapter is being performed by an unregistered contractor, he shall
notify the owner of the property or the owner's agent and the contractor to suspend all work,
and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work and suspend all activities until the stop
order has been rescinded. Such order and notices shall be in writing, shall state conditions
under which the work may be resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is
directed either by delivering it personally to him or by posting the same upon a conspicuous
portion of the building where the work is being performed.
The stop order issued pursuant to Subsection I(1) above may be rescinded by the Village
Clerk if the contractor registers with the Village as required by this chapter within five days of
the issuance of the stop order and files the required certificate of insurance.
Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $250 or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both. Each day's
continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
An action or proceeding in the name of the Village of Westfield may be commenced in any
court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain by injunction the violation
of any provision of this chapter, rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. Such
remedy shall be in addition to penalties otherwise prescribed by law.
In any action or proceeding commenced pursuant to this chapter, the performance of any
work by an unregistered contractor shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this
chapter.
Chapter 155. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Westfield 10-18-1993 by L.L. No. 3-
1993. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 135/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Fire prevention and building construction — See Ch. 85.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 88.
Attachment 1 - Zoning Map
Article I. Authority, Purpose and Applicability
§ 155-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority conferred by § 7-700 of the Village Law of the State of New York, the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Westfield, New York, hereby adopts and enacts as follows.
§ 155-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and shall be cited as the "Village of Westfield Zoning Law."
§ 155-3. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the Village of Westfield. These regulations are intended to
achieve the following purposes:
To encourage the most appropriate use of the land.
To balance the rights of the public-at-large, private landowners and other various interest groups.
To encourage the beneficial shaping of the future and long-range advantages associated with
zoning laws.
To secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers by the controlling of building heights and
separation of structures and through other beneficial regulations.
To provide adequate light, air and privacy.
To facilitate the adequate provisions for public utilities and facilities.
To prevent the overcrowding and undue concentration of people.
To regulate the location, use and occupancy of buildings and the use of land for trade, industry,
residence and other uses.
To maintain the character of residential neighborhoods so as to promote residential family life
through the appropriate designation of uses within zoning districts.
To optimally utilize existing roadways and discourage the construction of new roads, except as
needed.
To regulate and determine the physical dimensions of buildings and other structures.
To regulate and determine the area of yards and other open spaces.
To encourage the retention of prime agricultural, commercial and residential properties in those
uses to which they are best suited.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 136/277
N.
O.
P.
A.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
To protect property values and individual investment by encouraging development appropriate to
each zoning district type.
To protect the aesthetic nature of property.
To provide for the enforcement and administration of this chapter and penalties for the violation of
its provisions.
§ 155-4. Compliance required; application of regulations.
Compliance responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of all property owners, developers, lessors
or others involved with the temporary or permanent use of land or structures to comply with this
chapter.
The following regulations shall, as applicable, be complied with prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or, where specifically stated, prior to issuance of a zoning permit:
State and existing local subdivision laws must be complied with in addition to this chapter.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a zoning permit to ensure that the national
flood insurance regulations shall be complied with for those parcels located within the
floodplain, as illustrated on official Flood Insurance Administration maps, in addition to the
requirements of this chapter.
Any development requiring a permit, as well as amendments to this chapter, shall be subject
to an environmental assessment in accordance with the New York State Environmental
Quality Review Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
In areas not served by municipal sewer or water systems, the regulations of the state, county
and local health departments, with respect to water supply and sewage disposal facilities,
shall apply. The applicant for a zoning permit must obtain approval from the Chautauqua
County Department of Health for attachment to the application before the granting of a
certificate of occupancy.
No structure shall be erected, altered or used unless it also complies, where applicable, with
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to seek review and approval from the Fire and Building Code Enforcement
Officers.
Article II. Word Usage and Definitions
§ 155-5. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words herein shall be defined or understood as
follows:
The singular includes the plural.
The word "person" includes a corporation in addition to a natural person.
The word "lot" encompasses the words "plot" and "parcel."
The term "shall" includes the term "will" and is always mandatory.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 137/277
E. The words "used" and "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include
the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
§ 155-6. Definitions.
Certain words and terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT
A secondary apartment developed in an existing single-family dwelling which meets the following
conditions: no more than one unit shall be created per dwelling unit in districts where multiple units
are allowed, the apartment shall be between 600 and 800 square feet in floor space with the
resultant primary dwelling meeting all area requirements such as minimum floor space, sufficient
off-street parking shall be provided and no visible signs of an apartment shall be present.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE
One which is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use, is subordinate in area,
extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served, contributes to the comfort,
convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served and is
located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served but is not allowed to be
located in the front yard.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
See "temporary dwelling unit, mobile."
ACCESSORY GARAGE
See "accessory building or use."
ADULT HOME (PROPRIETARY or VOLUNTARY)
State-licensed home which provides meals, supervision and some personal care assistance to
persons who do not qualify for nursing home level of care. Residents must be able to get
themselves to meals, feed themselves and not require skilled nursing. Registered nurses or
licensed practical nurses may not be employed here.
AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURE
Any structure used primarily and directly for agricultural activities and including, but not limited to,
barns, silos, storage sheds, corn cribs, milk houses and similar structures.
AGRICULTURE
The raising of crops, animals or animal products; the selling of products grown on the premises;
and other commonly accepted agricultural operations. Incidental mechanical processing and sale
of products grown on the premises are included in the definition.
AGRICULTURE, LIMITED
The production of crops, plants, vines and trees, provided that no substantial odor or dust is
produced within 100 feet of any building on adjacent property.
AIRPORT
Any land or water space frequently used for the landing and takeoff of any aircraft, including
helicopters. All airports must comply with federal and state regulations and be approved by the
New York State Commissioner of Transportation.
ALTERATION
As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the
exit facilities or an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or increasing in height, or moving
from one location or position to another; the term "alter" in its various modes and tenses and its
particular form shall refer to the making of an alteration.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 138/277
ALTERNATE PLANNING BOARD MEMBER
An individual appointed by the Village Board of Trustees when a regular member is unable to
participate on an application or other matter before the respective board, as provided herein.
[Added 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
ANIMAL FARM
Any animal other than pigs or fur-bearing animals which is customarily raised for profit on farms
and has the potential for causing a nuisance if not properly maintained and cared for.
APARTMENT HOUSE
A building arrangement, intended or designed to be occupied by four or more families living
independently of each other. Condominiums and townhouses of the size specified in this definition
shall be considered to be apartment houses for the purpose of zoning district regulations.
Compare with "duplex" and "triplex."
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE
A prominent or characteristic part of a building. The following are examples of architectural
features: windows, columns, awnings, marquees and fascias.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
AREA VARIANCE
See "zoning variance."
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE
Any pennant, streamer, spinner, light, balloon or similar device or ornamentation used for
purposes of attracting attention.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
AUTO BODY SHOP
The use of a parcel of land or portion of any lot or plot, whether inside or outside a building, for the
replacement, repair or painting of all or portion of an auto body or bodies.
AWNING
A roof-like mechanism, retractable in operation, which projects from the wall of a building.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008; amended 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
BASE FLOOD
This designated flood standard has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT
That space of a building that is partly below grade which has more than 1/2 of its height,
measured from floor to ceiling, below the average established curb level or finished grade of the
ground adjoining the building. "Cellars" are included in this definition.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
A one-family residential dwelling in which the resident owner makes available between one and
three rooms as sleeping units for overnight accommodations to transient, paying guests, with or
without inclusion of one daily morning meal per paying guest as part of the accommodation
provided.
BILLBOARD
A sign larger than 15 square feet advertising a business, product or service that is not available at
the site where said sign is located.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 139/277
[Amended 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
BOARDINGHOUSE
Any dwelling in which persons are housed or lodged for payment of rent on an extended basis. A
house or furnished rooming house shall be deemed a boardinghouse if more than one room within
it is available to rent on an extended basis to nontransient persons. A boardinghouse also
furnishes meals in addition to lodging.
BUFFER
A strip of land, fence or border of trees, etc., between one use and another, which may or may not
have trees and shrubs planted for screening purposes, designed to set apart one use from
another. An appropriate buffer may vary depending on uses, districts, size, etc., and shall be
determined by the permitting Board.
BUILDING
Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by four walls and intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING AREA
The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and
all accessory buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces or steps. All dimensions shall be
measured between the exterior faces of walls.
BUILDING COVERAGE
See "lot coverage."
BUILDING FRONTAGE
The width of a building facing a street or public parking lot; in the case of a corner lot, it may be
either frontage at the option of the applicant. Where a mall exists, “building frontage” shall mean
that portion of the building perimeter facing a street or designated parking area; in the case of two
such perimeters, it may be either frontage at the option of the applicant.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF
The vertical distance from the mean finished grade to the uppermost roofline of the building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF, IN STORIES
The sum of the stories and half-stories, as defined in this definitions section, contained within a
building.
BUILDING IDENTIFICATION SIGN
A sign which identifies the name of the building and does not identify any individual business
activity.
[Added 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
BUILDING LINE
A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane of average grade level and a vertical plane
that coincides with the exterior surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered
section of a building or projected roof or porch, the vertical plane will coincide with the most
projected surface. All yard requirements are measured to the building line.
BUILDING PERMIT
See "zoning permit."
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
An established line within a property defining the minimum required distance between the face of
any structure to be erected and the edge of the road of an adjacent highway. See also "street
line."
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 140/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
BY RIGHT
Uses requiring a permit but with no public hearing required, to be so construed throughout this
chapter.
CANOPY
A roof structure constructed of fabric or other material, placed so as to extend outward from a
building, providing a protective shield for doors, windows, and other openings, supported by the
building and supports extended to the ground directly under the canopy or cantilevered from the
building.
[Added 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
CAR LOT
A parcel of land for the public selling or offering for sale of two or more vehicles at any one time.
CAR WASH
An establishment for the washing of motor vehicles as a principal use.
CELLAR
See "basement."
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER
A facility:
[Amended 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Licensed by the state, if applicable;
Providing care for children who do not reside in the facility, are present primarily during
daytime hours, and do not regularly stay overnight;
Which may include some instruction; and
Which is not located within a dwelling unit.
CLUB
A nonprofit or social organization which is not adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a
public tavern, cafe or other public place.
CLUSTER RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
A residential development of five acres or more where a developer may elect, after Board
approval, to cluster or group his residential development in return of the permanent creation of
common areas. The density development shall be approximately equal to that specified in the
district area requirements.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
See "Zoning Officer."
COMMERCIAL USE
Business use intended for the sale of goods or personal services, i.e., department stores,
restaurants and taverns, but excluding gas stations, garages, car washes, utility, agricultural,
warehouse and all other uses defined separately within this section.
COMMON AREA
A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of land and water designed and
intended for combined private or public use or enjoyment of the space. Common areas may
contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for
the benefit and enjoyment of the space.
COMMUNITY CENTERS
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 141/277
A public or private building or structure for community use with no commercial activities being
conducted therein.
COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN
The officially adopted Comprehensive Master Plan for the Village of Westfield.
CONDOMINIUM
Individual ownership of a dwelling unit in a multiunit structure; also a unit so owned.
COUNTRY INN
A building or group of buildings offering overnight accommodations to transients and the service of
meals, in which the service of alcoholic beverages, if any, is incidental to providing sleeping
accommodations and the service of meals.
[Added 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
CUSTOM WORKSHOP
A manufactory for the production or finishing of custom or hand-made commodities in small
quantities, using techniques which do not involve mass production.
[Added 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
DECK
An unroofed open structure projecting from an outside wall of a structure without any form of
enclosure other than a safety or decorative railing.
DEVELOPER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all land proposed to be included in a planned
development.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
dedication of land to a use, construction of buildings, reconstruction of buildings, dredging, filling,
grading, construction of tanks or other storage facilities, pumps, pumping stations, waste
treatment facilities, commercial excavation, dumping or landfill operation.
DISTRICT
See "zoning district."
DOG KENNEL
See "kennel."
DOMESTIC ANIMAL
Includes cats and dogs only.
DOUBLE-WIDE
A mobile home consisting of two sections intended to be joined during final assembly on a site;
also known as a "two-section home" or a "double-section home." See definition for "mobile home."
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS
Business designed to either wholly or in part provide services or products to customers who are in
their vehicles parked on the premises. Examples include, but are not limited to, film shops, drive-in
theaters and fast-food restaurants equipped with "drive-through" counters.
DUMPSTER
Any container designed for the temporary storage of refuse, debris, and garbage that has or
exceeds a volume of two cubic yards.
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
DUMPSTER, TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 142/277
A dumpster used to store refuse, debris, and garbage produced by and during construction, repair,
or renovation, and similar temporary uses performed on a structure on the property on which the
dumpster is located.
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
DUPLEX
A dwelling arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by two families living independently of
each other.
DWELLING UNIT
A building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for one family, including
living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities. Dwelling units do not include "mobile homes" and
"temporary dwelling units, mobile."
EATING AND DRINKING FACILITIES
Places where food and/or beverages are prepared and/or sold for consumption on or off the
premises, including restaurants, tearooms, cafeterias, bars, taverns and lunchrooms.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Zoning Officer of the Village of Westfield.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT FORM (EAF)
A form used in the state environmental quality review process to assist in determining the
environmental significance or nonsignificance of an action or project.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS)
A written document required for each Type I and unlisted action which the applicable Board
determines may have a significant effect upon the environment.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES
The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies of gas, electrical, steam, water, sewage and communication systems and
facilities. Railroad trackage and facilities and bus shelters shall also be considered as providing an
essential service.
EXTERIOR ENTRANCE
A direct entrance from a public way to a habitable or tenantable space.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
FAMILY
One or more persons, related by birth, marriage or other domestic bond, occupying a dwelling unit
and living as single, nonprofit housekeeping unit.
FARM
Any parcel of land which is at least 10 acres and used principally for the raising of agricultural
products or the keeping of poultry, fowl, livestock or domestic animals, including necessary farm
structures and the storage of farm equipment. The term excludes the raising of fur-bearing
animals, riding academies, stables, feed lots and dog kennels.
FARMING USES
Any activity customarily carried on upon a farm, such as cultivation of land and animal husbandry.
FENCE
Any artificially constructed barrier with the purpose or intent of preventing passage and affording
privacy.
[Amended 4-15-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
FENCE, BARRIER
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 143/277
Any fence which is located near the perimeter of the property of which it is intended to provide
privacy.
FENCE, FARM
Any fence, whether located on a farm or not, which has as its primary purpose the control of
nondomestic animals.
FENCE, NONBARRIER
Any fence located a distance from the property line which provides privacy to a portion of land
such as a patio or swimming pool.
FIRE RESISTANT
Any material(s) which possesses the properties, construction or assembly qualities, which, under
fire conditions, prevent or retard the passage of excessive heat, gasses or flames, and thus is not
easily ignited.
FLAG
Any state, municipal, county or national flag, open-for-business flag, or flag signifying a holiday or
special event.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
FLAMMABLE
Capable of igniting within five seconds when exposed to flame and continuing to burn after such
exposure.
FLEA MARKET, GROUP SALES OF WARES AND AUCTIONS
A temporary-seasonal event where individual stands or spaces are provided to two or more
persons for the purpose of selling, buying or exchanging goods and/or wares and where all
required on-premises parking is designated and provides for the safe loading, unloading and
movement of people. Upon issuance of a special use permit, collection, storage or display
activities shall be permitted for one day before the day of the auction or sale and shall be removed
immediately from the premises at the close of business on the last day.
[Added 6-4-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
FLOATING DISTRICT
Any zoning district for which district regulations are included in this chapter and for which no land
has initially been designated on the Zoning Map to be included in said district. Such a district may
become a reality through the amendment of the Zoning Map in accordance with the amendment
procedures of this chapter. The initiation of the creation of said district may come from Village
residents, the Village Planning Board, a developer or the Village Board itself, while the decision
whether to activate said district shall be made based upon the need for such a district.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)
The official map issued by the Federal Insurance Administration where the areas of special flood
hazard have been designated Zone A.
FLOOD or FLOODING
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or
surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to partial
or complete inundation or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or
surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN ELEVATION
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 144/277
The level and elevation above which a particular use will be considered safe from flooding. Such
estimates are updated with the one-hundred-year flood evaluation. Such elevations will be
designated at various appropriate points on the Official Map.
FLOODWAY
The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge waters of a given magnitude.
FLOODWAY FRINGE AREA
The designated area of a floodplain adjacent to the floodway within the one-hundred-year special
flood area.
FLOOR SPACE
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor or floors of a building which are enclosed and
usable for human occupancy or the conduct of business. Said areas shall be measured between
the outside face of exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two uses. Said areas
shall not include areas below the average level of the adjoining ground, garage space or
accessory building space.
FOUNDATION
The whole masonry substructure of a building or the supporting part or member of a wall or
structure, including the base course or footing courses in a frame house, the whole structure being
of masonry, i.e., stone, poured concrete, concrete block.
FRONT YARD DEPTH
The distance between the front lot line and the front line of a principal building.
FT.
Foot, feet, ft.
FUNERAL HOME/PARLOR
A building used for preparation and ceremonies connected with the burial and/or cremation of the
dead.
GARAGE, PRIVATE
A secondary building or accession to a building used in conjunction with a primary building which
primarily provides for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no occupation, business or
services for profit are carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC
Any garage other than a private garage, operated for profit, available on a rental basis for the
storage of motor vehicles, including the supply of gasoline and oil.
GARBAGE
See "trash."
GAS STATION
See "motor vehicle service station."
GENERAL RETAIL BUSINESS
See "retail business."
GENERAL SERVICE BUSINESS
See "service business."
GENERAL WHOLESALE BUSINESS
See "wholesale business."
GRADE, MEAN FINISHED
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 145/277
The average grade level of the ground measured at the front wall of the building.
GRAVEL PIT, QUARRY or SAND PIT
A lot of land or part thereof used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel or topsoil for
sale as an industrial operation and exclusive of the process of grading a lot preparatory to the
construction of a building for which application for a zoning permit(s) has been made.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Those wastes listed in 6 NYCRR 370 through 373.
HEAVY VEHICLES
Licensed or unlicensed automobile wreckers, commercial trailers, semi-trailers, tractor-trailers,
tractors (a truck with a cab and chassis only that may be used to haul detachable trailers),
backhoes, front loaders, loaders, bulldozers, dozers or any other large vehicle or truck or piece of
equipment that is in excess of 13,500 pounds GVW (gross vehicle weight).[1]
[Amended 7-10-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
HEIGHT
The vertical distance from the highest point on a structure (excepting chimneys and other items
listed in Article V, § 155-24, Height) to the average ground level of the grade where the wall or
other structural elements intersect the ground.
HIGHWAY
See "street."
HOME FOR AGED
See "housing, elderly."
HOME OCCUPATION
An occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which is clearly secondary to
the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not substantially change the character of
the dwelling or neighborhoods. Home occupations shall meet all conditions specified in the section
on home occupations.[2]
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION
Property owners who agree by contract to provide regulations for the operation and maintenance
of commonly owned facilities or open space.
HORTICULTURE, PRIVATE
The growing of fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental plants for personal pleasure or use; also
referred to as a "private garden."
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL
A facility for the diagnosis and medical care of sick or injured animals.
HOTEL (also MOTEL, INN, MOTOR LODGE)
A building or any portion thereof which contains living and sleeping accommodations for transient
occupancy and may have a common exterior entrance or entrances and which may also include
dining rooms, kitchens, serving rooms, ballrooms and other facilities and services intended
primarily for the accommodation of the personal need of its occupants.
HOUSEHOLD SALE
Includes lawn sales, patio sales, garage sales, basement sales, flea markets, bazaars or other
similar types of sales. A household sale shall be distinguished from a business in that it involves
the infrequent sale of used merchandise which, for private sales, was not obtained outside the
household. Nonprofit or fraternal organizations may obtain their sale items from donations
received from members or other sources.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 146/277
HOUSING, ELDERLY
Apartments containing eating, sleeping and living space and designed for fully independent elderly
residents. Generally, these apartments container smaller than normal floor space, require less
parking and less active recreation area. Common eating areas may be provided.
INCIDENTAL OFFICE
A professional office (defined below) located within a residential dwelling.
INDUSTRY, GENERAL
The manufacture, preparation, processing, milling or repair of any article, substance or commodity.
INN
See "hotel."
JUNK VEHICLE
A motor vehicle (excluding farm vehicles) which is not intended for, or in condition for, legal use on
public highways and/or is in the process of being dismantled.
JUNKYARD
See "scrap yard" and "vehicle dismantling yard."
KENNEL
Any premises upon which five or more dogs or cats over six months old are housed, groomed,
boarded, trained or sold.
LANDSCAPING
Changing or enhancing the natural features of a plot of ground, usually a building, so as to make it
more attractive, as by adding lawns, trees, shrubs, bushes, etc.
LARGE GROUP GATHERING
Any gathering of 500 or more people, occurring on a nonregular basis and involving either the
charging of a fee, request for a donation or sale of goods and services. See § 155-64 of this
chapter for exceptions from this definition.
LAUNDROMAT
A business premises equipped with individual clothes washing and drying and/or cleaning
machines for the use of retail customers.
LIVING AREA
That area comprised of the enclosed occupied living accommodations within a residence,
exclusive of unfinished basements, garages and open porches.
LOADING SPACE
An off-street space area or berth with an appropriate means of access to a street or way, intended
for the temporary parking of a vehicle(s) while loading or unloading merchandise and materials.
LOCAL LAW
A law adopted and enacted by the Village of Westfield, unless otherwise noted.
LODGING/BOARDING HOUSE
A building arranged or used for lodging for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied
as a single-family unit.
[Added 5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
LOT
Any land for which a deed has been or may be filed in the Chautauqua County Clerk's office. This
land shall have at least sufficient size to meet minimum requirements for use, coverage and area
and to provide such yards and other spaces as are required by this chapter.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 147/277
LOT COVERAGE
That percentage of the lot which is devoted to building area.
LOT DEPTH
The horizontal distance from the street line of the lot to its opposite rear line measured along the
median between the two side lot lines.
LOT LINE
The established division line or boundary line between different parcels of property.
LOT LINE, FRONT
The lot line which abuts upon the median of a street or highway right-of-way boundary.
LOT LINE, REAR
The line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING
Any lot which does not conform to the minimum area and/or dimensions required in the district in
which it is situated and/or does not have its principal frontage on a public street or an officially
approved place.
LOT, SIZE
An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot lines bounding that area and expressed
in terms of square feet or acres.
LOT WIDTH
The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to its depth at the
building line.
MINING
The removal or extraction of topsoil, sand, gravel or minerals, such as ores or rock, whether by
drilling, tunneling or open pit methods.
MOBILE DWELLING UNIT
See "mobile home."
MOBILE HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet
or more in width and 40 body feet in length, containing 400 or more square feet of interior space
when erected on a site. A mobile home is built on a permanent chassis [meaning the steel
understructure remains with the unit when placed on a site, with or without the wheels utilized in
transportation, the permanent chassis being a design feature allowing the future removal of the
unit(s) from a site]. The removal of wheels or the anchoring of a mobile home to a permanent
foundation shall not remove it from this definition. A mobile home is designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities and
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. Under
the definition of "mobile home" are included the following terms: single-wide or single-section
home; double-wide or double-section home; and triple-wide or multisection home or triple-section
home. Every mobile home shall have a manufacturer's label which certifies that, to the best of his
knowledge and belief, the home is in compliance with all applicable federal construction and safety
standards. Every mobile home shall bear a data plate, affixed in the manufacturing facility, bearing
not less than the following information: the statement "this mobile home is designed to comply with
the federal mobile home construction and safety standards in force at the time of manufacture"
and reference to the structural zone and wind zone for which the home is designed.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 148/277
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel of land upon which two or more mobile homes are set up for living purposes.
MODULAR DWELLING UNIT
See "dwelling unit."
MORTUARY PARLOR
See "funeral home/parlor."
MOTEL
See "hotel."
MOTOR HOME
A self-propelled, relatively small, temporary living quarters generally used as a motor vacation
home. Motor homes generally have self-contained, independent utility systems.
MOTOR LODGE
See "hotel."
MOTOR VEHICLE
NOTE: "Junk vehicles" and "heavy vehicles" are defined individually elsewhere in this section.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION
Any area of land, including structures thereon, which is used for the retail sale of fuel and related
oil products and may contain facilities for the sale of motor vehicle accessories and which may or
may not include facilities for lubricating, washing or otherwise performing both routine and major
service upon motor vehicles, but does not include the painting thereof by any means, body or
fender work or the long-term dismantling or replacing of engines. See "gas station."
MUNICIPALITY
The Village of Westfield, unless otherwise noted.
NONCONFORMING USE
That use of a building, structure or land legally existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or
amendment thereto and which is not a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is situated at
the time of enactment of this chapter or amendments thereto.[3]
NUISANCE
A violation of this chapter caused by a use which produces effects of such nature or degree that
they are detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare by resulting in harm or injury to
adjacent or nearby property and populace. Common examples include excessive odors, noise,
smoke, vibrations, light, runoff, traffic, development density, electronic interference, etc.
NURSERY, CHILDREN
See "day-care center."
NURSING HOME
A proprietary facility, licensed or regulated by New York State, for the accommodations of
convalescents or other persons who are not acutely ill and not in need of hospital care, but who
require skilled nursing and related medical services which are prescribed by or performed under
the direction of a person or persons licensed to provide such care or services in accordance with
the State of New York.
OFFICE
A place which is used to conduct a business or profession other than manufacturing or mercantile
where merchandise is on display and offered for sale and is occupied by a physician, surgeon,
dentist, attorney, accountant, engineer or person providing similar professional services or in
whose office the functions of consulting, recordkeeping and clerical work are performed.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 149/277
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
The waters of a flood that on average is likely to occur once per 100 years.
OPEN SPACE
Common public or private greens, parks or recreation areas, including playgrounds, woodland
conservation areas, walkways, trails, stream crossings and drainage control areas, golf courses,
swimming pools, tennis courts, ice-skating rinks and other similar nonoffensive recreation uses,
but which shall not include any uses or activities which produce noise, fire hazards or other safety
hazards or any use or activity which is operated for a profit or other uses detrimental to existing or
proposed adjacent structures or to the existing or proposed development of the neighborhood.
PARCEL
See "lot."
PARKING LOT
Any space used for the storage of more than three vehicles on a continuing basis, such space
either being for hire or accessory to an existing building or use of land.
PARKING SPACE
An off-street area or berth, with an appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or drive,
intended for the temporary storage of vehicles. See Article VI, Supplemental Regulations.
PATIO
A recreation/relaxation outdoor area that adjoins a dwelling, is often paved, brick, etc., and is
adapted especially to outdoor activity.
PETROLEUM
Oil of any kind, including but not limited to refined or unrefined oil, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene,
fuel oil, waste oil, oil refuse and oil mixed with other than dredged spoil.
PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board of the Village of Westfield unless otherwise noted.
PLANNING BOARD MEMBER
An individual appointed by the Village Board of Trustees to serve on the Village Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of local law or ordinance which first established such Planning Board.
[Added 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002]
PLAT
See "site plan."
PLOT
See "lot."
PORCH
A roofed, open structure projecting from an outside wall of a structure, exclusive of stairs or steps,
without enclosure, with the exception of hand and decorative railing.
PREEXISTING USE
Any use, either conforming or nonconforming with this chapter, that is legally existing at the
enactment date of this chapter.
PREFABRICATED DWELLING UNIT
See "dwelling unit."
PRINCIPAL USE
The primary use of land or buildings, as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 150/277
PRIVATE CAMP
A parcel of land on which a travel trailer, tent, cabin or other structure is present for use on a
seasonal basis for leisure or recreation purposes.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL
A pool constructed on a lot designed to be used by the occupants of the lot, excluding private or
club use.
PROFESSIONAL
A person or persons engaged in a professional occupation licensed by the state or federal
government or regulated by professional associations. Included are doctor, attorney, architect,
engineer, public accountant, dentist, surveyor, podiatrist, real estate broker, insurance agent,
chiropractor, physical therapist, planner or veterinarian (except when the veterinarian boards or
houses animals overnight).
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
See "office."
PUBLIC
Owned, operated or controlled by a governmental agency (federal, state or local), including a
corporation created by law for the performance of certain specialized governmental functions, a
public school district or service district.
PUBLIC SIGN
See "sign, public."
PUBLIC UTILITY USE
A building, structure or lot used for or in connection with the transmission, distribution or relation of
water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone or other public utility service.
PUBLIC WAY
Any passageway, highway, street or waterway used by members of the public. This shall include
any parking lot to which members of the public are invited, as customers or otherwise.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
REAR YARD DEPTH
The distance between the rear lot line and nearest point of a building.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, travel or camping use,
which either is self-propelled or towed by another vehicle. Examples include travel trailers, pickup
camper, self-propelled recreational vehicle, converted bus, etc.
RECREATION AREAS
Land or structures designed for recreation for any age group.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL
Recreational facilities operated as a business and open to the general public for a fee. This
definition includes only those facilities which can confine noise, lights and other potential
nuisances to their own premises. Recreational facilities shall include but not be limited to golf
courses, ice-skating rinks and swimming pools.[4]
REGULAR FLOOD INSURANCE or REGULAR PROGRAM
The permanent program which is entered into only after detailed flood information is provided by
the Federal Insurance Administration (e.g., floodway, floodway fringe area, Flood Insurance Rate
Map).
REPAIR SHOP
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 151/277
An establishment primarily providing household appliance repair, furniture repair, office machine
repair, bicycle repair and similar services within a fully enclosed building. This does not include the
maintenance and repair of lawnmowers, snowmobiles, motor vehicles, motorcycles, boats and
similar items.
[Added 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
RESIDENCE, MULTIFAMILY
See "apartment house."
RESIDENCE, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED
A detached building designed to contain one dwelling unit.
RESIDENCE, TWO-FAMILY
Either a building having two side yards and accommodating only two dwelling units or a detached
building containing two dwelling units separated by a party wall, each having one side yard.
Compare with "duplex."
RESIDENTIAL CONVERSIONS
The creation of one or more additional dwelling units within an existing residential structure in
accordance with conditions set forth in this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE
Any single-family or multifamily residence as defined.
RESTAURANT
A building wherein food or beverages are available for on-site consumption, including drive-in food
service.
REST HOME
See "adult home."
RETAIL BUSINESS, GENERAL
A business whose purpose is the sales of one or more articles of merchandise or one or more
services at retail. Retail outlets in which very minor manufacture or processing are incidental to the
sale of goods or services in the same premises are included in this definition. Any retail business
which has a minimal negative impact and can meet the regulations as specified in this chapter
shall be allowed in addition to the specifically enumerated retail uses listed in the zoning district
regulations sections.
RIDING ACADEMY
Land and the buildings upon it that are used for the teaching of horseback riding and/or used for
the rental of horses for trail riding.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, HIGHWAY
That line which measures the right-of-way of any road and which is established by the village,
town, county or state having jurisdiction over the road.
ROAD
See "street."
ROADSIDE STAND
A structure, either enclosed or open, a booth or a transportation vehicle, the purpose of which is
the sale of produce and other farm products to the general public. "Roadside stands" are located
along a roadway in such a manner as to provide safe and convenient off-street parking. All
applicable conditions in this chapter must be met.
ROADSIDE STAND, GENERAL
Produce sold but not necessarily grown on premises where the stand is located.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 152/277
A.
B.
ROADSIDE STAND, LIMITED
All produce grown on the premises (lots) where the stand is located and sold only by the owner(s)
of said premises.
SAWMILL
Commercial facility containing sawing and planing equipment utilized for the preparation of
dimensional lumber used for construction. No on-premises sale to the general public takes place.
SCRAP YARD
Any place of storage or deposit of more than 100 square feet, usually of a commercial nature,
wherein metals, glass, rags, etc., are held for the purposes of disposal, reclamation, recycling or
resale, including establishments having facilities for the processing iron, steel and nonferrous
scrap for remelting purposes.
SCREENING
Fencing, bushes or trees or other natural and/or artificial materials which obscure the visual
character of any given building or land use.
SECTION
Unless otherwise noted, "section," the symbol "§ " and section numbers shall refer to sections
within this chapter.
SEMIPUBLIC
Places of worship, institutions for the aged and for children, day-care centers and nonprofit
institutions, including colleges, hospitals, libraries, cemeteries and philanthropic institutions; also,
open space.
SERVICE BUSINESS, GENERAL
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever a general service business is listed as an allowed use,
it shall signify that any service business which has a minimal negative impact and can meet the
conditions specified in this chapter shall be allowed, in addition to the specific service uses listed
as allowed.
SETBACK
The distance measured from the street edge to the structure, sign, etc.
SEWAGE
Any liquid or solid waste matter from a domestic, commercial, private or industrial establishment
which is normally or should be carried off in sewers or waste pipes.
SHOOTING RANGE, COMMERCIAL
The parcel(s) of land used for the discharging of firearms with the intent to hit any object (moving
or stationary) other than live game, by any person who pays a fee (e.g., membership fees,
shooting fees, etc.) to use said facilities. Commercial shooting ranges include but are not limited to
nonprofit clubs (skeet clubs, etc.) and for-profit businesses.
SHOPPING CENTER
[Amended 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE CENTER
A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity
with customer and employee and employee parking provided onsite. A neighborhood
convenience center generally sells goods necessary to meet daily needs and has up to
50,000 square feet of commercial floor space.
COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER
A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity
with customer and employee and employee parking provided onsite. Such centers typically
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 153/277
range in size from 50,000 square feet to 450,000 square feet.
SIDE YARD WIDTH
The distance between the side lot line and the nearest point of a building on said lot.
SIGN
Any name, identification, description, display, illustration or device which is affixed to or
represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure or land visible from a public way. (See
other headings in § 155-53.)
[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, ADVERTISING
A sign unrelated to a business or a profession conducted or to a commodity or service offered
upon the premises where such sign is located. The words "advertising sign" include the word
"billboard." Neither directional warning nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of
their official duty shall be construed as advertising signs.
SIGN AREA
The entire area within a perimeter defined by a continuous line composed of right angles which
enclose the extreme limits of lettering, logo, trademark, or other graphic representation, together
with any frame or structural trim forming an integral part of the display used to differentiate the
sign from the background against which it is placed. (See graphical illustration below.)
[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008; 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
SIGN, AWNING
Any visual message incorporated into an awning or a marquee.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, BILLBOARD
A sign larger than 15 square feet advertising a business, product or service that is not available at
the site where said sign is located.[5]
[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, BUILDING IDENTIFICATION
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 154/277
A sign which identifies the name of the building and does not identify any individual business
activity.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, BUSINESS
A sign for the permitted use(s) conducted on the premises which shall identify the written name
and/or type of business and/or any trademark of an article for sale or rent on the premises or
otherwise call attention to a use conducted on the premises.[6]
SIGN, DIGITAL
A changeable-copy sign that uses a matrix of illumination elements, such as light-emitting diodes
(LED), liquid crystal display (LCD), plasma display, individual light bulbs, or other digital or analog
electronic media to display or project copy which can be modified by electronic processes.
[Added 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL
A sign limited to providing information on the location of an activity, business or event and assists
the traveler in finding said use (e.g., mileage, route numbers, etc.).
SIGN, DIRECTORY
A listing of two or more business enterprises, consisting of a matrix and sign components.
SIGN, FREESTANDING
A single or multifaced sign affixed to a supporting structure or embedded in and extending from
the ground or detached from the building. Any support structure shall be included in sign area to
the extent that it is larger than that necessary to support the sign.
[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION
A sign for the permitted use(s) conducted on the premises, for articles sold or distributed by that
use or a display of the name of the premises.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED
Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other artificial light, including reflective or
phosphorescent light.
[Amended 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL
A sign conveying instructions with respect to the use of the premises or a portion of the premises
on which it is maintained or a use or practice being conducted on the premises.[7]
SIGN, MONUMENT
A freestanding sign either affixed to a base on the ground or mounted on short poles no greater
than two feet high.
[Added 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
SIGN, NAMEPLATE
Any sign attached directly to the wall of a building which identifies the name, occupation and/or
address of the person who occupies the premises. A nameplate shall not exceed two square feet
in area.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES
Signs for products or services not available at the location of the sign.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN PERMIT
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 155/277
A permit issued by the Village Code Enforcement Officer providing documentation of the specific
sign(s) that have been approved pursuant to these regulations.[8]
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, PROJECTING
Any sign attached to a building and extending in whole or in part more than six inches beyond the
building exterior.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, PUBLIC
Those signs erected to direct flow, speed and direction of traffic, effect general public safety or
name streets and buildings.
SIGN, QUASI-PUBLIC
A sign indicating the presence and located upon the premises of a church, school, library, hospital,
nursing home or like religious, educational, health or community facility.[9]
SIGN STRUCTURE
The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for a sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY
A sign which offers premises for sale, rent or development or announces special events or calls
attention to new construction or alteration or offers for sale seasonal garden produce, identifies
garage, household or porch sales or the like or political signs. Temporary sign status shall expire
after six months of continuous appearance in the public eye.[10]
SIGN, TRAFFIC
See "sign, public."[11]
SIGN, WINDOW
A sign affixed on or located with respect to a window fronting a public way that is visible from the
public way.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
SIGN, WINDOW, INTERIOR (OF)
A sign visible from a sidewalk, street or other public space, painted or affixed on glass or other
window material or located inside within four feet of the window, but not including graphics in
connection with the customary window display of products.
SITE PLAN
The design of a proposed development, including but not limited to a plat of subdivision, all
covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of development, private streets, ways and parking facilities and whatever additional
information is deemed necessary by the appropriate boards exercising jurisdiction over said plan.
The phrase "provisions of the plan" when used in these regulations shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY
See "nursing home."
SOLAR ENERGY
Radiant energy (direct, diffuse and reflected) received from the sun.
SOLAR STRUCTURE OR SYSTEM
A structure or arrangement and combination of components designed to provide heating, cooling,
hot water or electricity through the process of collecting, converting, storing, protecting against
unnecessary dissipation and the distributing of solar energy.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 156/277
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
The area subject to flooding (i.e., the land that has a one-percent chance of being flooded each
year; the land flooded during a one-hundred-year flood).
SPECIAL USE PERMIT
A special use permit concerns the special permission, granted only by the permitting Board after a
public hearing, to use or occupy land for specific purposes where such use is not permitted by
right, but is listed as permitted by special use permit. Refer to the appropriate district regulations.
SQ. FT.
Square foot, square feet.
STABLES
A building or structure in which space is rented for the boarding of two or more livestock animals.
[12]
STORAGE STRUCTURE
Any constructed combination of materials located or attached to the ground utilized for
noninhabited storage purposes. Used trucks and similar motor vehicles shall not be utilized as
storage structures.
STOREFRONT AREA
That area of the front of a building associated with the first floor only. For businesses located
above the first floor, the storefront areas shall be calculated based on the ground floor entrance
only.
STORY
That portion of a building excluding attics and cellars included between the surface of any floor
and the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between any floor and the
ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF
A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite
exterior walls, are not more than two feet above the floor of such story.
STREET
Any public way dedicated to public vehicular travel. "Street" shall be taken as synonymous with
road or highway.
STREET, CENTER LINE
The line determined by connecting the midpoints of the surfaced portion of any street, road or
highway.
STREET LINE
The dividing line between a public or private street and a lot, commonly known as the "curbline."
STRUCTURE
A building constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something
having a fixed location on the ground. Mobile homes are not considered structures for the
purposes of this chapter. (A mobile home is considered to be a structure under the Flood
Insurance Program.)
SUBSECTION
A reference to an identified provision(s) of this chapter wholly contained within a single section of
this chapter.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 157/277
Any repair, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, the market value before the
damaged occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specification which are necessary solely to
assure safe living conditions or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
SWIMMING POOL
Any man-made receptacle for water (excepting farm ponds) used or intended to be used for
swimming and constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground and having a depth at
any point greater than two feet.
TELEVISION DISH ANTENNA
Any concave, circular or dish-shaped device, together with its associated supporting structures,
designed for receiving communications or television signals from a satellite.
TEMPORARY DWELLING UNIT, MOBILE
Dwellings intended for temporary occupancy, and including but not limited to travel trailers, motor
homes, truck campers and tents. Persons residing in a temporary dwelling unit, mobile, do not
include those residing in the primary dwelling unit located on the same parcel.
TEMPORARY USE
An activity conducted within a structure or on a tract of land for a specific limited period of time
which may not otherwise be permitted by the provisions of this chapter. For example, a building
used in conjunction with new construction would be removed upon completion of the work.[13]
TOWNHOUSE
A dwelling unit designed to be occupied as a residence for a single family and is one of a group of
three or more attached dwellings, placed side by side, separated by party walls, each unit
containing one or two stories and each having separate front and rear or side and rear or front and
side entrances from the outside. Contrasts with "apartment house."
TOXIC SUBSTANCE
Any toxic substance as so defined by Subdivision 2 of § 4801 of the Public Health Law.
TRACT
A large piece of land under single ownership.
TRASH
Consists of glass, scrap wood, scrap metals, salvaged metals, rags, refuse, garbage, wastepaper,
salvaged machines, appliances or similar materials which are prepared for disposal as waste.
TRAVEL TRAILER CAMP/COMMERCIAL CAMPGROUND
A parcel of land used or intended to be used, let or rented, usually on a seasonal basis for
occupancy by campers or for occupancy by or of travel trailers, motor homes, tents or movable or
temporary dwellings, rooms or sleeping quarters of any kind.
TRAVEL TRAILER/CAMPER
Any portable vehicle which is designed to be transported on its own wheels and which is legally
capable of being towed by a passenger car, station wagon or pickup truck. Travel trailers are not
designed as permanent living quarters and generally are used on a seasonal basis. See also
"accessory dwelling unit."
TREATMENT WORKS
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 158/277
Any treatment plant, sewerage, disposal field, lagoon, pumping station, septic system installed for
the purpose of treating, neutralizing, stabilizing or disposing of sewage.
TRIPLE-WIDE
A mobile home consisting of three sections intended to be joined during final assembly on a site;
also known as a "multisection home" or "triple-section home." See definition of "mobile home."
TRIPLEX
A dwelling arranged, intended and designed to be occupied by three families living independently
of each other.
USE
Any purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may
be occupied and maintained.
USE VARIANCE
See "variance."
VARIANCE
Refer to § 7-712 of the New York State Village Law and to the applicable sections of this chapter.
VEHICLE DISMANTLING YARD
Any place or storage or deposit where two or more unregistered, old or secondhand vehicles, no
longer intended for or in condition for legal use on public highways are held, whether for resale of
parts or materials or used parts and waste materials, which when taken together equal in bulk two
or more vehicles. This definition excludes farm vehicles.
VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP
A commercial business operated for profit which repairs or services motor vehicles.
VILLAGE BOARD
The Board of the Village of Westfield, unless otherwise noted.
VILLAGE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
A member of the Village staff appointed by resolution of the Village Board to administer and
enforce § 155-53.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
VILLAGE LAW
The New York State Village Law.
WALL
See "fence."
WAREHOUSE
A building or portion thereof designed or used for the storage of merchandise, supplies or other
commodities.
WHOLESALE
A business establishment engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers, rather than consumers, in
wholesale lots.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS, GENERAL
For the purposes of this chapter, whenever a general wholesale business is listed as an allowed
use, it shall signify that any wholesale business which has a minimum negative impact and can
meet the conditions specified in this chapter shall be allowed, in addition to the specific wholesale
uses listed as allowed.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 159/277
A.
B.
[1]
[2]
WHOLESALE, LIMITED
A wholesale business with a maximum of three employees, no more than 4,000 square feet of
floor space and no outside storage.[14]
YARD
An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, excepted as otherwise provided herein.
YARD, FRONT
The area extending across the entire width of the lot between the building line and the front edge
of the road into which space there shall be no extension of building partitions or accessory
structures.
YARD FRONTAGE
The width of a lot measured along the street line from side lot line to side lot line.
YARD, REAR
The area extending across the entire width of the lot between the rear wall of the principal building
and the rear line of the lot and unoccupied except for parking, loading and unloading space and
garages or carports.
YARD, SIDE
The open area of a lot situated between the side lines of the building and the adjacent side lines of
the lot.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Westfield.
ZONING DISTRICT
An area described and/or set forth on the Official Zoning Map of the Village of Westfield
contained within defined boundary lines and labeled by a zoning district symbol (two- or threeletter
abbreviation, in capitals as set forth in Article IV of this chapter) contained in this
chapter. All such zoning districts shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter pertaining
to the zoning district for which the label pertains and to all regulations generally or specifically
applicable to the district as provided in this chapter.
The classification of lands as established in Chapter 155 of the Code of the Village of
Westfield.
[Added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008]
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
See "Zoning Officer."
ZONING OFFICER
The Westfield Police Chief, the Village Clerk and/or the Fire and Building Code Inspector as
designated by the Village Board of Trustees.
ZONING PERMIT
Written permission issued by the appropriate municipal board/officer authorizing the use of land,
lots, building(s) or structure(s). Zoning permits are issued for uses which are permitted by this
chapter where all conditions required by the law can be met for the district where the lot/structure
is located. The relocation, enlargement, alteration or other change of use shall require the
issuance of a zoning permit. Zoning permits may be issued by right or issued by special use
permit or variance after a public hearing.
Editor's Note: The definition of “hedge,” which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-15-
1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996.
Editor's Note: See § 155-41, Home occupations.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 160/277
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
Editor's Note: The former definition of “notice of violation,” which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “reflective surface,” which immediately followed this definition,
added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “sign, building directory,” which immediately followed this
definition, added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “sign, certificate of compliance,” which immediately followed this
definition, added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “sign, municipal,” which immediately followed this definition,
added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “sign, portable,” which immediately followed this definition, added
7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “sign site plan,” which immediately followed this definition, added
7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “sign, temporary business,” which immediately followed this
definition, added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “sign, wall,” which immediately followed this definition, added 7-
21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The former definition of “stop-work order,” which immediately followed this definition,
added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, was repealed 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
Editor's Note: The definition of "tower," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-3-
2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001. See now § 155-55.1.
Editor's Note: The former definitions of “window sign, temporary” and “window space,” which
immediately followed this definition, added 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008, were repealed 3-17-2014 by
L.L. No. 1-2014.
Article III. Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 155-7. Creation and enumeration of districts.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002; 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008; 2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Village of Westfield is hereby divided into zoning districts as
follows:
Single-Family Residential R-1
Residential R-2
Multiple Residential R-3
Light Industrial I-2
Agricultural-Residential 1 AR-1
Retail Business B-1
Transitional Business B-1A
Highway Business B-2
Village Mixed-Use District MU
Industrial I-1
Service Industrial SI-1
Flood Damage Prevention FP
§ 155-8. Zoning Map.
[Amended 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 161/277
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
The boundaries of the zoning districts enumerated in § 155-7 of this chapter are hereby established as
shown on the map entitled “Zoning District Map of the Village of Westfield, dated April 3, 2008,” which,
with all explanatory matters thereon, is made a part of this chapter.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-9. Interpretation of zoning district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as shown on the Village of
Westfield Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets and
highways, the street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
Where district boundaries are indicated as following enumerated lot lines, such lot lines shall
constitute said boundaries.
Where district boundaries are so indicated as to approximately parallel the center lines or street
lines of streets or the center lines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall
be construed as being parallel thereto, and at such distances as are indicated upon the Village of
Westfield Zoning Map or as shall be determined by use of the scale supplied upon the map.
Where the district boundary follows a stream, lake or other body of water, said boundary line shall
be deemed at the limit the jurisdiction of the municipality, unless otherwise indicated.
Any flood boundary shown upon the Zoning Map indicates general location only. The precise
location of floodplain boundaries shall be established by the Enforcement Officer after reference to
Floodplain Zoning Maps and consultation with the Chautauqua County Planning Division for its
proper interpretation.
Where uncertainty exists in determining the precise location of any district boundary line, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the intent and purpose of the Zoning Map.
§ 155-10. Lots in more than one zoning district.
When a district boundary line divides a lot, the regulations for either district may apply not more than
25 feet beyond the boundary line of the district upon approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Article IV. District Regulations
§ 155-11. Single-Family (R-1) Districts.
Purpose. The purpose of the Single-Family (R-1) Zoning District is to:
Encourage the construction of and the continuous use of the existing large lot sizes and
encourage the development of religious and educational facilities required for and compatible
with a balanced single-family residential neighborhood.
Discourage all business, commercial and industrial development of the land, multiple-family
units, cluster residential developments, mobile homes or mobile home parks and to prohibit
any other use which would substantially interfere with or be deleterious to the development or
continuation of single-family dwellings in this residential unit.
Discourage all land uses which would generate traffic on residential streets, apart from normal
traffic associated with the residences on those streets.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 162/277
B.
C.
D.
Uses by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Accessory uses customary in a restricted single-family district
Church rectory
Demolition of structures
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Garage, accessory
Household goods sales in accordance with § 155-44
Open porch/patio
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Single-family detached dwelling
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Swimming pools, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tower, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Bed-and-breakfast establishments in accordance with § 155-74
Churches
Cluster residential development in accordance with § 155-37
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Farm animals, noncommercial, in accordance with § 155-65
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Model home sales office
Public park
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Schools
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57B
Television dish antenna in accordance with § 155-56
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tennis courts, private
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Windmill, private, in accordance with § 155-55
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Horticulture, private
Outdoor storage of a trailer or boat in accordance with § 155-68
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Utilities
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 163/277
E.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
Area Standards
R-1 District
Detached Single-Family Units
Primary Use Secondary Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 12,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot area) 40 20
Minimum front yard (feet from street edge) 30 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 4
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4
Maximum height (stories) 2.5 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 750
§ 155-12. Residential (R-2) Districts.
Purpose. The purpose of the Residential (R-2) Zoning District is to:
Preserve established neighborhoods within the Village of Westfield from adverse change
which would result from the insertion of incompatible housing types or changes in density.
Single-family detached dwellings, duplexes and triplex apartments with their related facilities
are allowed while larger apartment buildings are prohibited. Residential (R-2) Districts are
generally expected to contain a minimum number of undeveloped lots.
Discourage the development of land uses and facilities that are incompatible with one- and
two-family residential development.
Uses by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Church rectory
Customary accessory uses
Demolition of structure
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Duplex, attached
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Garage, accessory
Household goods sales in accordance with § 155-44
Limited agricultural
Open porch/patio
Public park
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Single-family detached dwelling
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 164/277
C.
D.
E.
Swimming pools, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Temporary dwelling units in accordance with § 155-67
Tower, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Accessory apartment
Agricultural structures
Bed-and-breakfast establishment in accordance with § 155-74
Churches
Cluster residential development in accordance with § 155-37
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Farm animals, noncommercial, in accordance with § 155-65
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Funeral home in accordance with § 155-36
Home occupations, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Homes for the aged/rest home
Residential conversions in accordance with § 155-40
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Schools
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57B
Television dish antenna in accordance with § 155-56
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tennis court, private
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Triplex, attached
Windmill, private, in accordance with § 155-55
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Horticulture, private
Outdoor storage of a recreational vehicle in accordance with § 155-68
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Utilities
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
Area Standards
R-2 District
Detached
Single-Family Units Nonresidential Uses
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 165/277
A.
B.
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Area Standards
R-2 District
Detached
Single-Family Units Nonresidential Uses
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 7,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 70
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot
area)
40 20 40 20
Minimum front yard (feet) 30 30 30 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 4 20 10
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4 30 10
Maximum height (stories) 2.5 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 750 600
Attached
Multiple-Family Units
Primary Use Secondary Use
Minimum lot size (square feet per unit) 6,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 70
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot area) 30 20
Minimum front yard (feet from street edge) 30 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 20 4
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4
Maximum height (stories) 3 2.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 650
§ 155-13. Multifamily (R-3) Districts.
Purpose. Multifamily (R-3) Districts are intended to enhance and protect the older residential areas
while encouraging compatible new development on large vacant lots and permitting conversions
of older homes into apartments where the location and lot size makes conversions compatible with
the character of the neighborhood. Development density is strictly controlled for apartments, with
distinctions being made between elderly and standard housing.
Uses by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Church rectory
Customary accessory uses
Demolition of structure
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Duplex, attached
Fabric store
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 166/277
C.
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Garage, accessory
Household goods sales in accordance with § 155-44
Limited agricultural
Municipal offices
Open porch/patio
Public park
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Single-family detached dwelling
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Swimming pools, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Temporary dwelling units in accordance with § 155-67
Tower, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Accessory apartment
Agricultural structures
Attached apartment/condo/townhouse
Bed-and-breakfast establishment in accordance with § 155-74
Boarding homes
Child day-care center in accordance with § 155-41.1.
[Added 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Churches
Cluster residential development in accordance with § 155-37
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Elderly housing, apartments
Emergency medical heliport in accordance with § 155-73
Farm animals, noncommercial, in accordance with § 155-65
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Fraternal meeting facilities
Funeral home in accordance with § 155-36
Home occupations, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Homes for the aged/rest home
Libraries/museums/galleries
Nursing homes
Residential conversions in accordance with § 155-40
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Schools
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57B
Television dish antenna in accordance with § 155-56
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 167/277
D.
E.
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tennis court, private
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Triplex, attached
Windmill, private, in accordance with § 155-55
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Horticulture, private
Outdoor storage of a recreational vehicle in accordance with § 155-68
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
Area Standards
R-3 District
Detached
Single-Family Units Nonresidential Uses
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 7,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 70
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot
area)
40 20 40 20
Minimum front yard (feet) 30 30 30 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 4 20 10
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4 30 10
Maximum height (stories) 2.5 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 750 600
Attached
Multiple-Family Units
Standard Elderly
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 5,000 3,600
Minimum lot width (base + feet per
unit)
100 + 5 100 + 4
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot
area)
30 20 40 20
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 168/277
A.
B.
C.
Attached
Multiple-Family Units
Standard Elderly
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum front yard (feet from street
edge)
30 30 30 30
Minimum side yard (base + feet per
unit)
20 + 2 20 + 2
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4 30 10
Maximum height (stories) 3 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 650 600
§ 155-14. Light Industrial (I-2) District.
[Added 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002[1]]
Purpose. The purpose of the Light Industrial (I-2) District is to provide space for new and
expanding clean industries in such a way as to minimize adverse impacts on nearby residential
holdings within the district. Underdeveloped land may, in the interim, be utilized for agricultural
purposes, but new residential uses are prohibited with the exception of mobile home parks.
Uses permitted by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Agricultural structures
Customary accessory uses
Demolition of structures
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54*
Garage, accessory
Household goods sales in accordance with § 155-44
Limited agriculture
Open porch/patio
Playground
Public park
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53*
Solar system, private, in accordance with § 155-57A*
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Swimming pool, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Television dish/antenna in accordance with § 155-56
Temporary dwelling units in accordance with § 155-67*
Tower, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55*
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 169/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
E.
Administrative support services
Apparel manufacturing
Business day-care center, children
Computer and electronic products
Distribution center
Electric equipment, appliances, components
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54*
Furniture and related products
Heavy vehicle parking in accordance with § 155-63
Home occupations, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Information services
Leather and allied products
Loading/unloading facility, commercial, in accordance with § 155-52
Machinery manufacturing
Miscellaneous manufacturing
Mobile home park in accordance with § 155-66
Nondurable goods, wholesale
Plastic products
Printing and related
Research lab, commercial
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53*
Solar system, private, in accordance with § 155-57B*
Telecommunication towers, in accordance with § 155-55.1
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67*
Tennis court, private
Textiles
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55*
Transportation equipment manufacturing
Transportation warehousing
Windmills, private, in accordance with § 155-55
Wholesale business
Uses requiring site plan review. All of the following uses are allowed subject to site plan review by
the Village Planning Board:
Industrial, commercial, and manufacturing uses.
Public and semipublic uses.
Mobile home park.
Uses for which performance standards apply. All of the following uses are allowed by right or
special use permit but shall be subject to meeting and adhering to performance standards as
specified in Article XV, Performance Standards.
All industrial, manufacturing, and commercial uses listed as allowable by special use in this
section. All commercial uses may be exempted from these requirements by permitting board.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 170/277
F.
G.
[1]
A.
B.
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Agriculture
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54*
Horticulture, private
Outdoor storage of a trailer or boat
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Signs in accordance with § 155-53*
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities, public
*NOTE: All uses marked with an* are allowed by two or more types of permit processes (by right,
special use, or no permit) and the supplemental section referred to should be consulted in each
case to fully understand which permit process applies.
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
Area Standards
I-2 District
Detached
Single-Family Units Nonresidential Uses
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Secondary
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 6,000 25,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 60 100
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot
area) 40 20 50 10
Minimum front yard (feet) 30 30 50 50
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 4 30 30
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4 30 30
Maximum height (stories) 2.5 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 750 None
Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former § 155-14, High Density Residential (R4) Districts.
§ 155-15. Agricultural-Residential (AR-1) Districts.
Purpose. Agricultural-Residential (AR-1) Districts are established to provide for a compatible mix
of agricultural and residential uses along with a limited number of business uses. The intent is to
protect and provide agricultural uses and preserve the rural character of the neighborhood, as well
as provide for natural buffers.
Uses by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Accessory apartment
Agricultural structures
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 171/277
C.
Church rectory
Customary accessory uses
Demolition of structure
Duplex, attached
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Garage, accessory
Household goods sales in accordance with § 155-44
Municipal offices
Nursery/greenhouses
Open porch/patio
Public park
Residential conversions in accordance with § 155-40
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Single-family detached dwelling
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Swimming pools, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Television dish antenna in accordance with § 155-56
Temporary dwelling units in accordance with § 155-67
Tennis court, private
Tower, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Winery
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Animal farms (mink, etc.)
Animal hospital (small animals)
Antiques shop
Apartments/condo/townhouses (attached) in accordance with § 155-39
Bed-and-breakfast establishment in accordance with § 155-74
Blacksmith shop
Boarding homes
Carnivals/circuses (temporary)
Cemeteries
Churches
Cluster residential development in accordance with § 155-37
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Farm machinery/implements store
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Florist shops (accessory to commercial greenhouse only)
Fruit processing plant
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 172/277
D.
Funeral home
Gas/oil wells
Gas station (routine service) in accordance with § 155-48
Gift/novelty shop
Golf courses, private/public
Home occupations, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Homes for the aged/rest homes
Large group gatherings in accordance with § 155-64
Libraries/museums/galleries
Mobile home park in accordance with § 155-66
Nursing homes
Parking lot, commercial, in accordance with § 155-51
Photography studio
Professional or business office in accordance with § 155-42
Realty office
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Schools
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57
Swimming pools, public, in accordance with § 155-49
Television/radio towers, commercial, in accordance with § 155-55
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tennis courts, public
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Triplex (attached) in accordance with § 155-39
Wholesale business
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Agriculture
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Farm animals (noncommercial) in accordance with § 155-65
Forestry/lumbering/reforestation
Game farms/fish hatcheries/preserves
Horticulture, private
Junk vehicles, on private property, in accordance with § 155-60
Outdoor storage of a recreational vehicle in accordance with § 155-68
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Riding academy/stable
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities
Wildlife habitat
Windmill, private, in accordance with § 155-55
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 173/277
E.
A.
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
Area Standards
AR-1 District
Detached
Single-Family Units Nonresidential Uses
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 12,000 12,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100 100
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot
area)
40 20 30 20
Minimum front yard (feet) 30 30 50 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 4 10 4
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4 30 4
Maximum height (stories) 2.5 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 750 None
Attached
Multiple-Family Units
Standard Elderly
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 8,000 5,000
Minimum lot width (base + feet per
unit)
100 + 20 100 + 5
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot
area)
30 20 40 20
Minimum front yard (feet from street
edge)
30 30 30 30
Minimum side yard (base + feet per
unit)
20 + 2 10 20 + 2 10
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 10 30 10
Maximum height (stories) 3 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) 650 600
§ 155-16. Retail Business (B-1) District.
[Amended 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Purpose. The purpose of the Retail Business (B-1) District and any design standards applicable
therein is to protect and enhance the existing commercial core of the Village and enable it to better
meet the needs of residents and visitors by ensuring that the development and redevelopment of
land within the district is appropriate and compatible with the development of surrounding land and
historical nature of the district, by preserving a typical "Main Street" aesthetic, and by promoting a
pedestrian-oriented commercial area. It is not intended to prohibit development that is otherwise
permitted under the applicable zoning regulations; rather, it is intended to improve the function,
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 174/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
C.
design, aesthetics and safety of that development and to provide a context for diverse yet
harmonious architectural and landscape design.
Design standards application and procedure.
Application. The following actions in the B-1 District shall be subject to and comply with the
Village of Westfield's "B-1 District Design Guidelines":
Any action that requires a building permit and involves changes to the front, rear, or,
where visible, the side facade of a building;
Any action that involves the alteration of a parking lot; and
Any action that requires site plan review under § 155-103.
Procedure.
Where the action requires a special use permit or is subject to site plan review under
Article XII or architectural plan review under Article XVI, the Planning Board shall make a
finding as to compliance with the applicable design guidelines during the special use, site
plan, or architectural plan review process, as the case may be.
[Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Where the action requires a building permit, or for any other application subject to the
design guidelines, the Village Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as the case may be,
shall refer the application to the Planning Board pursuant to § 155-98, and a final
decision on the application shall not be rendered until the Planning Board has made a
finding that the proposed action complies with the applicable design guidelines.
Uses by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Antique shop
Bakery, retail
Banks
Barbershop/beauty shop
Catalog store
Corner grocery store
Department/variety store
Drugstore/pharmacy
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Florist shop
Food supermarket
Furniture/appliance store
Gift/novelty shop
Hardware/glass/paint store
Health club
Household sale, in accordance with § 155-44
Laundry/dry cleaning/laundromat
Liquor store
Locksmith shop
Municipal office
Open porch/patio
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 175/277
D.
E.
Photography studio
Professional/business office
Public park
Retail business, general
Realty office
Restaurant
Sign, in accordance with § 155-53
Solar system, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Tower, not freestanding and noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Upholstery shop
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Accessory apartment
Bar
Carnival/circus (temporary)
Condominium
Custom workshop
Demolition of structures
Electronic game room
Fence/wall in accordance with § 155-54, but without regard to size
Garage, accessory
Home occupation, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Hotel/inn/country inn
Library/museum/gallery
Load/unload facility, commercial, in accordance with § 155-52
Mixed apartment/business in accordance with § 155-38
Nursery for children
Parking lot, commercial, in accordance with § 155-51
Pet store
Plumbing/heating shop
Rental store
Repair shop
Residential conversion
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
School
Shopping center/mall
Solar system, private, in accordance with § 155-57B
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Theater
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 176/277
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
(6)
G.
H.
A.
Horticulture, private
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities
Building permits. Applicants are cautioned to be aware that the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code may contain additional requirements for their proposed use or
development, and that zoning approval does not necessarily confer approval under the Building
Code. Applicants are strongly encouraged to confer with the Code Enforcement Officer about their
project in advance and to plan to comply with both the Zoning and Building Codes.
Area standards. Area standards shall be in accordance with the following:
Minimum lot size: 2,000 square feet.
Minimum street frontage: 20 feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 100%.
Setback regulations:
Front. None required, but new buildings or alterations to existing structures in this district
shall conform within a ten-percent range to the average front setback for buildings within
40 feet on either side of the subject site, in order to maintain a strong sense of
streetscape.
Rear. None required, but if a yard is required it shall be not less than 10 feet wide.
Side. If the yard abuts a residential district, 20 feet. For all others, none is required, but if
one is provided it shall be not less than 10 feet wide.
Buildings shall be a maximum of three stories above grade with a maximum height of 40 feet.
Parking. No off-street parking space shall be required for any use on a lot that has an area of
10,000 square feet or less, provided that such lot is within 300 feet of a municipally operated
off-street parking facility that has adequate capacity for the parking of passenger vehicles
required for the proposed use.
Facade changes. All other terms of this Code notwithstanding, where changes are proposed to the
facade of an existing building in the B-1 District that do not alter the footprint of the building and
are for either maintenance and repair purposes or to improve the aesthetic appeal of the facade,
no site plan review under Article XII is required, but the action shall be subject to architectural plan
review under Article XVI.
[Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 155-16.1. Transitional Business (B-1A) Zoning District.
[Added 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Purpose. The purpose of the Transitional Business (B-1A) District and the design guidelines
applicable therein is to allow a range of commercial businesses that are appropriate for a
pedestrian-oriented downtown, by providing a transition and buffer area between the main
commercial core and the residential areas, consistent with the present land use pattern of the
district. The goal is to preserve and wisely develop the transitional areas leading into Westfield's
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 177/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
main downtown area while simultaneously maintaining and buffering the adjacent residential
zones.
Design standards application and procedure.
Application. The following actions in the B-1A District shall be subject to and comply with the
Village of Westfield's "B-1A District Design Guidelines":[1]
Any action that requires a building permit and involves changes to the front, rear, or,
where visible, the side facade of a building;
Any action that involves the alteration of a parking lot; and
Any action that requires site plan review under § 155-103.
Editor's Note: The B1-A District Design Guidelines are on file in the Village offices.
Procedure.
Where the action requires a special use permit or is subject to site plan review under
Article XII or architectural plan review under Article XVI, the Planning Board shall make a
finding as to compliance with the applicable design guidelines during the special use, site
plan, or architectural plan review process as the case may be.
[Amended 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Where the action requires a building permit, or for any other application subject to the
design guidelines, the Village Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as the case may be,
shall refer the application to the Planning Board pursuant to § 155-98, and a final
decision on the application shall not be rendered until the Planning Board has made a
finding that the proposed action complies with the applicable design guidelines.
Building Code. Applicants are cautioned to be aware that the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code may contain additional requirements for their proposed use or
development, and that zoning approval does not necessarily confer approval under the Building
Code. Applicants are strongly encouraged to confer with the Code Enforcement Officer about their
project in advance and to plan to comply with both the Zoning and Building Codes.
Uses by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Antique shop
Bakery, retail
Banks in accordance with § 155-46 if drive through
Barbershops/beauty shops
Catalog stores
Corner grocery store
Demolition of structures
Department/variety stores
Drugstores/pharmacies
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fence/wall, in accordance with § 155-54
Florist shops
Food supermarket
Furniture/appliance store
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 178/277
E.
Gift/novelty shop
Hardware/glass/paint store
Health club
Household sale, in accordance with § 155-44
Laundry/dry cleaning/laundromat
Liquor store
Locksmith shop
Photography studio
Professional/business offices
Realty offices
Restaurant
Retail business, general
Sign, in accordance with § 155-53
Single-family detached dwelling
[Added 5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
Solar system, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Tower, not freestanding, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Upholstery shop
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Accessory apartment
Bars
Bed-and-breakfast establishment in accordance with § 155-74
Car wash
Commercial recreation (e.g., bowling alley, archery pro shop, golf pro shop)
Condominium
Convenience store with gas station (routine service) in accordance with § 155-48
Custom workshop
Drive-in through business (food, etc.) in accordance with § 155-46
Electronic game room
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Fraternal meeting facilities
Garage, accessory
Home occupations, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Hotel/inn/country inn
Load/unload facility, commercial, in accordance with § 155-52
Mixed apartment/business in accordance with § 155-38
Nursery and/or preschool for children
Open porch/patio
Pet store
Parking lot, commercial, in accordance with § 155-51
Public and/or not-for-profit library/museum/gallery
Rental store
Repair shop
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 179/277
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
Shopping center
Solar system, private, in accordance with § 155-57B
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Swimming pool
Theater
Tower, not freestanding, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Horticulture, private
Outdoor storage of a recreational vehicle in accordance with § 155-68
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Trash, only in dumpsters or other similar storage devices on private property, in accordance with
§ 155-62
Utilities
Area standards.
Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be determined by adding 20% to the land area
needed for the structure, on-lot parking, ingress/egress, and any on-site infrastructure that is
required. The additional 20% shall constitute setbacks and landscaped buffers. In no case
shall any lot be less than 8,000 square feet in size.
Minimum street frontage. The minimum street frontage is 60 feet.
Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage allowed for the structure, on-lot parking,
ingress/egress, and any on-site infrastructure that is required is 80% of the lot size.
Setback regulations.
Front. New buildings or alterations to existing structures in this district shall conform to a
range of minimum/maximum front setbacks in order to maintain a strong sense of
streetscape.
Minimum. The minimum front setback shall be four feet.
Maximum. The maximum front setback shall be 40 feet.
Rear. The minimum rear setback shall be 20 feet of buffering (greenspace, trees etc).
Side. The minimum side setback shall be eight feet. Minimum side setbacks may be
reduced to five feet in areas adjacent to on-lot parking or ingress/egress areas when
other snow storage areas have been provided.
Buildings shall be a maximum of two stories above grade, with a maximum height of 40 feet.
Building site and design.
New buildings may be either traditional in their architectural character or be a contemporary
expression of traditional styles and forms, respecting the scale, proportion, character and
materials and respecting the traditional character of the Village.
Site design should enhance the rhythm, fabric, and form of the streetscape and landscape for
pedestrians and motorists alike.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 180/277
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
[2]
(5)
(6)
I.
Buildings are encouraged to be designed to have pitched roofs with overhanging eaves.
Exterior wall materials and facing may include wood clapboard (including vinyl and aluminum
imitation clapboard siding), or brick (brick color and design must generally conform to the
"historic nature" of the district) and shall be subject to site plan review. Specifically prohibited
shall be split-face aggregate block, T-111 plywood, concrete block, stucco, and metal siding.
Buildings shall complement landscape design to effectively screen parking wherever possible.
Parking lot design.
Parking lots shall be screened from the road and adjoining residential uses as feasible. A mix
of plantings shall be used to provide an appropriate mix of summer shade and year-round
screening.
Any off-street parking space or parking lot that abuts a street right-of-way shall be buffered by
a landscaped area to include a mix of low-lying shrubs and shade trees.
Vehicular access to parking areas shall be provided from the rear and/or sides whenever
possible. In cases where vehicular access to a parking area must occur from the front of the
lot, the following shall apply:
Driveways serving such parking areas shall be in conformance with Chapter 132, Streets
and Sidewalks, of the Village of Westfield Code and/or upon the written approval of the
Village Public Works Superintendent.
The location of any entrance or exit of a driveway, access lane or parking area where it
enters the public right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Village Superintendent
of Highways or the New York State Department of Transportation, and a permit for the
same shall be obtained prior to construction when required.
All access points or aprons shall be paved for vehicular and pedestrian safety, drainage
and ease of access.
Driveways shall be at least 50 feet from the curbline of an intersecting street, unless
physically impossible and approved by the appropriate highway agency.
Exterior pedestrian access aisles shall be provided from parking areas to the front of the main
structure. Such aisles shall be a minimum of five feet in width unless a public walkway is
provided.
Lighting of parking areas shall be in accordance with Page 10, Section 8, Outdoor Lighting of
the Village of Westfield B1-A District Design Guidelines.[2]
Editor's Note: The B1-A District Design Guidelines are on file in the Village offices.
Number of off-street parking spaces.
Use Requirement
Professional office One per 400 square feet of commercial floor
area
Professional and personal services One per 400 square feet of commercial floor
area
Retail One per 400 square feet of commercial floor
area
Others Subject to site plan review
NOTES:
1
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 181/277
J.
[3]
K.
(1)
[4]
(2)
L.
M.
A.
B.
NOTES:
Or fraction thereof.
Signage. See § 155-53, Signs.
Landscaping. All applicants shall refer to the B1-A District Design Guidelines[3] to address
landscaping requirements for plans in this zoning district.
Editor's Note: The B1-A District Design Guidelines are on file in the Village offices.
Additional standards.
The conversion of an existing building or structure to another use shall be permitted only if offstreet
parking can be provided to meet the requirements of § 155-51 and of Subsection I of
this section.
The enlargement of an existing building or structure shall be permitted if it meets all the
requirements of this section including the B1-A District Design Guidelines.[4]
Editor's Note: The B1-A District Design Guidelines are on file in the Village offices.
Facade changes. All other terms of this Code notwithstanding, where changes are proposed to the
facade of an existing building in the B-1A District that do not alter the footprint of the building and
are for either maintenance and repair purposes or to improve the aesthetic appeal of the facade,
no site plan review under Article XII is required, but the action shall be subject to architectural plan
review under Article XVI.
[Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 155-17. Highway Business (B-2) District.
Purpose. The purpose of the Highway Business (B-2) District is to promote retail and service uses
which are vehicle-oriented for the use of residents and visitors. At the same time, a major goal is
to protect and enhance the major entrance to the Village by encouraging aesthetically pleasing
businesses with safe ingress and egress and prohibiting chaotic strip development.
Uses permitted by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Agricultural structures
Antique stores
Blacksmith
Church rectory
Customary accessory uses
Demolition of structure
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fabric store
Feed/seed shops
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Garage, accessory
Household goods sales in accordance with § 155-44
Monument sales
Municipal offices
Open porch/patio
1
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 182/277
C.
Public park
Rental stores
Restaurants
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Swimming pools, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tower, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Accessory apartment
Ambulance service
[Added 10-21-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013]
Animal hospital (small animals)
Apartments/condo/townhouses (attached)
Bars
Bed-and-breakfast establishments in accordance with § 155-74
Boarding homes
Building contractor
Churches
Commercial recreation
Drive-in business (food, etc.) in accordance with § 155-46
Duplex, attached
Elderly housing (apartments)
Electronic game room
Farm animals (noncommercial) in accordance with § 155-65
Farm machinery/implements store
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Food supermarket
Fraternal meeting facilities
Fruit processing plant
Gas station (routine service) in accordance with § 155-48
Gas/oil wells
Hardware/glass/paint store
Health club
Home occupations, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Homes for the aged/rest homes
Hotels/motels
Large group gatherings in accordance with § 155-64
Laundry/dry cleaning/laundromat
Load/unload facility, commercial, in accordance with § 155-53
Locksmith shop
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 183/277
D.
E.
Mixed residential/business in accordance with § 155-38
Mobile homes/trailer sales
Nurseries/greenhouses
Nursing homes
Parking lot, commercial, in accordance with § 155-51
Realty office
Residential conversions
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Schools
Self-storage units, provided such use is located on a lot comprising at least 1.5 acres, undergoes
site plan review in accordance with § 155-103 et seq., and comports with the design guidelines
for such units, as adopted and amended from time to time by the Village of Westfield
[Added 12-22-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2015; amended 2-17-2015 by L.L. No. 2-2015]
Shopping center/mall
Single-family detached dwelling
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57B
Swimming pools, public, in accordance with § 155-49
Television dish antenna in accordance with § 155-56
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tennis courts, private
Tennis courts, public
Theaters
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Triplex (attached)
Upholstery shop
Used automobile sales
Vehicle repair shop in accordance with § 155-47
Windmill, private, in accordance with § 155-55
Winery
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Agriculture
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Horticulture, private
Outdoor storage of a recreational vehicle in accordance with § 155-68
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 184/277
A.
B.
Area Standards
B-2 District
Detached
Single-Family Units Nonresidential Uses
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 8,000 8,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 80 80
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot
area)
40 20 40 20
Minimum front yard (feet) 40 30 40 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 4 20 4
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 4 30 10
Maximum height (stories) 2.5 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square
feet)
750 450
Attached
Multiple-Family Units
Standard Elderly
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Primary
Use
Accessory
Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 5,000 3,600
Minimum lot width (base + feet
per unit)
100 + 5 100 + 4
Maximum lot coverage (% of
lot area)
30 20 40 20
Minimum front yard (feet from
street edge)
40 40 40 40
Minimum side yard (base +
feet per unit)
20 + 2 10 30 10
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30 10 30 10
Maximum height (stories) 3 1.5 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square
feet)
650 600
§ 155-18. Industrial (I-1) District.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial (I-1) District is to provide space for new and expanding
industry in such a way as to minimize impact on nearby residential holdings within the Village.
Uses permitted by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Agricultural structures
Customary accessory uses
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 185/277
C.
Demolition of structures
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54*
Garage/accessory
Household good sales, in accordance with § 155-44
Laboratory/commercial research
Nursery/greenhouse
Open porch patio
Public park
Signs in accordance with § 155-53*
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57A*
Swimming pools, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Storage structure (over 120 square feet), in accordance with § 155-50
Television dish antenna in accordance with § 155-56
Temporary dwelling units in accordance with § 155-67*
Tower, noncommercial (50 feet or less), in accordance with § 155-55*
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Administrative support services
Adult uses, in accordance with § 155-75.1.
[Added 5-15-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006[1]]
Apparel manufacturing
Autobody repair shop in accordance with § 155-47
Building contractor business
Building materials store/home improvement center
Carnival/circus — temporary
Computer/electronic products
Distribution center
Electric equipment, appliances, components
Fabricated metal
Farm animals, in accordance with § 155-65
Fence/walls in accordance with § 155-54*
Flea market, group sales of wares and auctions, as defined in Article II of this chapter.
[Added 6-4-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007]
Food and beverage manufacturing
Fruit processing plant
Furniture and related products
Gas compressor
Home occupation, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Information services
Large group gatherings in accordance with § 155-64
Leather/allied products
Loading/unloading facility, commercial, in accordance with § 155-52
Machinery manufacturing
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 186/277
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
E.
F.
Miscellaneous manufacturing
Nondurable goods — wholesale
Nonmetallic mineral products
Paper manufacturing
Parking, commercial, in accordance with § 155-51
Plastic products
Printing and related
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53*
Solar system, private, in accordance with § 155-57B*
Swimming pools, public, in accordance with § 155-49
Telecommunication tower, commercial, in accordance with § 155-55.1
Television/radio towers, commercial, in accordance with § 155-55
Temporary dwelling units in accordance with § 155-67*
Tennis court, public
Tennis court, private
Textiles
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55*
Transportation equipment manufacturing
Transportation warehousing
Waste management
Wholesale business
Winery
Wood products
*NOTE: All uses marked with an * are allowed by two or more types of permit processes (by
right, special use, or no permit) and the supplemental section referred to should be consulted in
each case to fully understand which permit process applies.
Editor's Note: This local law also deleted the use "Adult entertainment."
Uses requiring site plan review. The Village Planning Board allows all of the following uses subject
to site plan review.
Industrial uses, including, but not limited to, manufacturing, commercial facilities, public
utilities stations, offices and warehouses.
Accessory uses, including enterprises primarily engaged in providing services to permitted
principal uses, or customary on-site employee services.
Public and semipublic uses.
Uses for which performance standards apply. All of the following uses are allowed by right or
special use permit but shall be subject to meeting and adhering to performance standards as
specified in Article XV, Performance Standards.
All industrial, manufacturing and commercial uses listed as allowable in this section by special
use permit. All commercial uses may be exempted from these requirements by permitting
board.
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 187/277
G.
A.
B.
C.
Agricultural
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54*
Forestry, lumbering, reforestation
Heavy vehicle parking in accordance with § 155-63
Horticulture, private
Junk cars, private
Outdoor storage and recreational
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53*
Storage structure (120 square feet or less), in accordance with § 155-50
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities, public
Wildlife habitat
Windmills, private in accordance with § 155-55
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
Area Standards
I-1 District
Nonresidential Uses
Primary Use Secondary Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 25,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot area) 70 20
Minimum front yard (feet) 50 50
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 10
Minimum rear yard (feet) 10 10
Maximum height (stories) 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) None
§ 155-19. Service Industrial (SI-1) District.
Purpose. The purpose of the Service Industrial (SI-1) District is to promote commercial service
uses, such as lumberyards or auto repair shops, as well as warehousing. Another important
purpose of the SI-1 District is to provide a buffer between residential and industrial districts.
New residential uses are prohibited within the SI-1 District.
Uses permitted by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
[Amended 6-16-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
Demolition of structures
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 188/277
D.
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Garage, accessory
Household goods sales in accordance with § 155-44
Municipal offices
Open porch/patio in accordance to § 155-29
Public park
Roadside stand, limited, in accordance with § 155-45
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57A
Storage structure, accessory, in accordance with § 155-50
Swimming pools, private, in accordance with § 155-49
Television dish antenna in accordance with § 155-56
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Tower, noncommercial, (50 feet or less) in accordance with § 155-55
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
[Amended 6-16-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
Animal hospital
Antique shop
Art gallery/studio
[Added 2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013[1]]
Auto body repair in accordance with § 155-54
Bed-and-breakfast establishment in accordance with § 155-74
Building contractor
Building material manufacturer
Building materials store
Carnivals/circuses (temporary)
Car wash
Commercial recreation
Customary accessory uses
Custom workshop
Drive-in business (food, etc.) in accordance with § 155-46
Electronic/small parts manufacturing
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Fraternal meeting facilities
Fruit processing plant
General industry
Health club
Home occupations, general, in accordance with § 155-41
Large group gatherings in accordance with § 155-64
Laundry/dry cleaning/laundromat
Load/unload facility, commercial, in accordance with § 155-52
Locksmith shop
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 189/277
[1]
E.
F.
Lumberyards
Machine shops
Parking, commercial, in accordance with § 155-51
Realty office
Rental stores
Restaurant
Roadside stand, general, in accordance with § 155-45
Schools
Shopping center/mall
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Solar systems, private, in accordance with § 155-57B
Swimming pools, public, in accordance with § 155-49
Temporary dwelling unit in accordance with § 155-67
Temporary toxic waste storage in accordance with § 155-58
Tennis courts, private
Tennis courts, public
Theaters
Tower, noncommercial, (above 50 feet) in accordance with § 155-55
Truck terminals
Television/radio towers, commercial, in accordance with § 155-55
Vehicle repair in accordance with § 155-47
Warehouse
Wholesale business
Windmill, private, in accordance with § 155-55
Winery
Editor's Note: This local law also deleted agricultural structures, gas/oil wells and mobile
home/trailer sales from this subsection.
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Agriculture
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Forestry/lumbering/reforestation
Horticulture, private
Junk vehicles, on private property, in accordance with § 155-60
Outdoor storage of a recreational vehicle in accordance with § 155-68
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities
Wildlife habitat
Area standards shall be in accordance with the following table. See Article V, General
Regulations, for substandard lots.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 190/277
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
B.
Area Standards
SI-1 District
Nonresidential Uses
Primary Use Secondary Use
Minimum lot size (square feet) 25,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Maximum lot coverage (% of lot area) 70 20
Minimum front yard (feet from street edge) 10 30
Minimum side yard (feet) 10 10
Minimum rear yard (feet) 10 10
Maximum height (stories) 3 1.5
Minimum floor space (square feet) None
Site plan review. Site plan review shall be required of all development within the SI-1 District that
modifies or expands an existing use or creates a new use and to new construction, to include
additions and enlargements. In completing the site plan review process, the Planning Board and
others shall give special consideration to mitigating negative impacts between districts as
described in § 155-35 of the Code.
[Amended 6-16-2003 by L.L. No. 2003]
§ 155-20. Flood Damage Prevention District.
Purpose. Flood districts overlap other zoning districts and thus the regulations which apply to
floodplain areas supplement the regulations of the zoning district (e.g., residential, agricultural,
etc.) in which the land is located. It is the purpose of the flood damage regulations to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private loss due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions created:
To protect human life and health.
To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public.
To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard.
To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas
of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for
their actions.
Flood district boundary. The flood damage regulations which follow apply to the areas of special
flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration on its Flood Boundary Map
(FHBM), No. H01-02 dated May 17, 1974, and any revisions thereto, or any subsequent flood
boundary maps issued by the Federal Insurance Administration to supplant, replace or modify
FHBM No. H01-02, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FHBM
is on file at the municipal offices.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 191/277
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(7)
C. Provisions for flood hazard reduction. The following standards shall apply to special flood hazard
areas:
Anchoring.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement by providing an anchoring system designed to withstand a wind
force of 90 miles per hour.
Construction materials and method.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials
and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage.
Utilities.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
New and replacement sanitary sewer systems will be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltrations of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into the
floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment or contamination
during flooding.
Subdivision proposals.
All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage.
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
Encroachments. Any proposed development shall be analyzed to determine effects upon the
flood-carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard.
Residential construction (where other base elevation data is available). New construction and
substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
Nonresidential construction (where other base elevation data is available). New construction
and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 192/277
(b)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic loads and the effects of
buoyancy.
§ 155-20.1. Village Mixed-Use Zoning District.
[Added 9-7-2004 by L.L. No. 3-2004]
Purpose. The purpose of the Village Mixed-Use District is to allow a range of small businesses
and housing types. The Village Mixed-Use area will allow the development of residential and
limited commercial uses consistent with the existing land use pattern of the area. Basic design
standards related to architecture, parking, and landscaping are incorporated into this section to aid
with the development of the Village Mixed-Use District. The principle reason for these is to
promote a "Village" feel rather than a strip-mall type of environment as an entrance to the
community. Such standards will also help prevent potential conflicts among adjacent uses.
Uses by right for which a permit is required are as follows:
Dumpster, temporary construction, in accordance with § 155-62
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Uses by special use permit for which a hearing is required are as follows:
Accessory apartments
Antique stores
Art and craft studios
Bed-and-breakfast establishments in accordance with § 155-74
Bookstores
Boutiques
Child day-care center in accordance with § 155-41.1
[Added 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Clock repair shops
Fences/walls in accordance with § 155-54
Furniture shops (small)
Gift shops
Home occupations in accordance with § 155-41
Lamp shops
Lodging/boarding house
[Added 5-20-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
Multifamily residences
Museums
Professional offices
Professional and personal services
Signs in accordance with § 155-53
Single-family residences
Uses for which a permit is not required are as follows:
Dumpster, if meeting one of the exceptions listed in § 155-62
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 193/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
[Added 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Parking, private, in accordance with § 155-51
Trash, temporary storage of, in accordance with § 155-62
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Utilities
Area standards.
Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be determined by adding 20% to the land area
needed for the structure, on-lot parking, ingress/egress, and any on-site infrastructure that is
required. The additional 20% shall constitute setbacks and landscaped buffers. In no case
shall any lot be less than 8,000 square feet in size.
Minimum street frontage. The minimum street frontage is 45 feet.
Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage allowed for the structure, on-lot parking,
ingress/egress, and any on-site infrastructure that is required is 80% of the lot size.
Setback regulations.
Front. New buildings or alterations to existing structures in this district shall conform to a
range of minimum/maximum front setbacks in order to maintain a strong sense of
streetscape.
Minimum. The minimum front setback shall be 15 feet.
Maximum. The maximum front setback shall be 25 feet.
Rear. The minimum rear setback shall be 20 feet.
Side. The minimum side setback shall be 10 feet. Minimum side setbacks may be
reduced to five feet in areas adjacent to on-lot parking or ingress/egress areas when
other snow storage areas have been provided.
Minimum and maximum height. Buildings shall he between 1 1/2 and 2 1/2 stories above
grade as seen from their front sides, with a maximum height of 35 feet.
Maximum building size. One-and-one-half-story buildings shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.
Two-and-one-half-story buildings shall not exceed 3,500 square feet.
Building site and design.
New buildings may be either traditional in their architectural character or be a contemporary
expression of traditional styles and forms, respecting the scale, proportion, character and
materials of buildings within the general area.
Site design should enhance the rhythm, fabric, and form of the streetscape and landscape for
pedestrians and motorists alike.
Buildings shall be topped with pitched roofs with overhanging eaves.
Exterior wall materials may include stucco, wood clapboard (including vinyl and aluminum
imitation clapboard siding), or brick (brick color and design must generally conform to the
"residential nature" of the district) and shall be subject to site plan review. Specifically
prohibited shall be split-face aggregate block, T-111 plywood, unfinished concrete block, and
metal siding.
Buildings shall compliment landscape design to hide parking wherever possible.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 194/277
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
G.
Building shall attempt to maintain a primarily residential character in design, siting and
landscape design.
All off-street parking shall be located behind or along side buildings and shall be screened
from public streets or ways. All off-street parking in this district shall conform to the guidelines
in § 155-19.1G.
Parking lot design.
Parking lots shall be screened from the road and adjoining residential uses. A mix of
deciduous and coniferous plantings shall be used, to provide an appropriate mix of summer
shade and year round screening.
Any off-street parking space or parking lot that abuts a street right-of-way shall be buffered by
a landscaped area no less than 20 feet deep in which is located a continuous row of shrubs
no less than 3.5 feet high in addition to required shade trees.
No off-street parking shall be permitted in the front yards of buildings, nor shall off-street
parking be permitted on corner lots except when screened from the street.
Parking lots larger than eight spaces and/or 3,500 square feet in size shall be provided with at
least one shade tree for every additional four parking spaces or portion thereof.
Vehicular access to parking areas shall be provided from the rear when possible (off of Maple
Street). In cases where vehicular access to a parking area must occur from the front of the lot
the following shall apply:
Driveways serving such parking areas containing four or fewer parking spaces shall be a
minimum of 12 feet in width while those serving five or more parking spaces shall be a
minimum of 18 feet in width.
The location of any entrance or exit of a driveway, access lane or parking area where it
enters the public right-of-way shall he subject to approval by the Village Superintendent
of Highways or the New York State Department of Transportation, and a permit for the
same shall he obtained prior to construction when required.
All access points or aprons shall be paved for vehicular and pedestrian safety, drainage
and ease of access.
Driveways shall be at least 50 feet from the curbline of an intersecting street, unless
physically impossible and approved by the appropriate highway agency.
Exterior pedestrian access aisles shall be provided from parking areas to the front of the main
structure. Such aisles shall be a minimum of four feet in width.
Lighting of parking areas shall be directed downward and well-shielded, and glare shall not be
cast onto neighboring properties. Maximum height of poles and fixtures shall be five feet, and
maximum illumination shall be 100 watts of incandescent light, or equivalent, per fixture.
Number of off-street parking spaces.
Use Requirement
Bed-and-Breakfast In accordance with § 155-74
Child care One per employee and one per six children
Dwellings One per unit
Home occupation In accordance with § 155-41A(6)
Professional office One per 800 square feet of gross floor area
1
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 195/277
H.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(2)
I.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
J.
Use Requirement
Professional and personal services One per 800 square feet of gross floor area
Retail One per 800 square feet of sales area
NOTES:
Or fraction thereof.
Signage. See § 155-53, Signs (District R-3, on premise) (three square feet maximum).
Landscaping.
Shade trees shall be planted in front yard areas, as part of the condition for approval, at
intervals no greater than 40 feet. Each lot shall have a minimum of one shade tree in this
area. In locations where healthy and mature shade trees currently exist, the requirements for
new trees may be waived.
Species shall be selected according to the following criteria:
Trees shall be at least two inches to 2.5 inches in diameter, measured at chest height,
when planted;
Cast moderate to dense shade in summer;
Survive more than 60 years;
Mature height of at least 50 feet;
Tolerant of pollution and direct or reflected heat;
Require little maintenance by being mechanically strong (not brittle) and insect and
disease resistant;
Be able to survive two years with no irrigation after establishment; and
Be of native origin, provided they meet the above criteria.
Additional standards.
The conversion of an existing building or structure to another use shall be permitted only if offstreet
parking can be provided to meet the requirements of § 155-51 and of Subsection G of
this section.
The enlargement of an existing building or structure shall only be permitted if off-street
parking can be provided to meet the requirements of § 155-51 and of Subsection G of this
section.
Shared parking facilities.
Parking spaces for one use shall not be counted for any other use. However, the Village
Board may allow the parking required for two or more buildings or uses to be combined
on the same or adjoining lots, if parking demand occurs at different times, and if the
applicants demonstrate that such parking will remain available for all associated buildings
or uses. Adjoining lots must share a common boundary of at least 25 feet in length in
order to qualify for shared parking.
Shared parking agreements shall be legally binding upon affected properties and
property owners, and permits granted under such agreements shall be conditional upon
recording of said agreements with the Village Clerk. A copy of said agreement, and proof
1
1
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 196/277
A.
B.
of recording with the Village Clerk, shall be furnished to the Code Enforcement Officer
prior to the occupancy or use of the affected properties and structures.
Article V. General Regulations
§ 155-21. Access to public street.
Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, every building shall be constructed or erected upon a
lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public street unless a permanent public easement of access to
a public street was of record prior to the adoption of this chapter. However, this shall not preclude the
creation of a private road on a fifty-foot right-of-way which connects to a public road and serves one or
more subdivided lots which has been or is specifically approved by the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Westfield. Upon request from a developer, landowner(s), etc., the Municipal Board shall consider the
takeover of a private roadway upon receiving commitments by all involved parties that the roadway will
be constructed to standards specified by the municipality. This provision shall not obligate the
municipality in any way to take over any road, even if said road meets specified road construction
standards.
§ 155-22. Contiguous parcels.
When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a
permitted use under the requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and
are held, or were held upon adoption of this chapter, in common ownership, they shall be used as one
lot for such use.
§ 155-23. Corner lots.
Both street sides of a corner lot shall be treated as front yards in the application of bulk, area and
parking requirements.
§ 155-24. Height.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, silos,
penthouses and domes not used for human occupancy nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights,
windmills, water tanks, bulkheads, similar features and necessary mechanical appurtenances
usually carried above the roof level. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height
as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are intended to serve and shall not exceed in
cross-sectional area 20% of the ground floor area of the building.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the erection above the building height limit
of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament (and without windows) extending above such height limit
not more than five feet.
§ 155-25. Existing substandard-sized lots.
The minimum area requirements specified for each type of allowed use shall not prevent the
construction of an allowable use on a substandard sized lot which existed and was officially recorded
at the time of enactment of the first zoning law of the Village of Westfield establishing such minimum
size lots and setbacks, if the following conditions are met:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 197/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
At the time of the enactment of the first zoning law, the substandard lot was not contiguous with
another lot in the same ownership. (See section on contiguous parcels in Article V.)
The substandard lot is not less than 75% of all applicable standards.
The County Health Department approves the lot where there are no municipal utilities.
If Subsection B cannot be met but Subsection C has been accomplished, then the applicant can
request an area variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 155-26. Visibility at intersections.
[Amended 11-15-2010 by L.L. No. 7-2010]
For the purpose of maintaining sight lines and promoting traffic safety, on any corner lot in any
district no fence, wall, or other structure more than three feet in height shall be erected or placed
within the triangular areas formed by the intersecting street edge lines and the imaginary straight
line between the points 25 feet from the intersecting street edge lines along the street edge lines.
Any tree, hedge, or other planting within the area described by the preceding subsection shall be
located and maintained in compliance with §§ 141-9 and 141-10 of the Village of Westfield Code.
§ 155-27. Interpretation of permitted uses.
When a use is not specifically listed as a "use by right" or a "use by special use permit" within any
zoning district, it shall be assumed to be a prohibited use. Nothing herein contained shall limit an
applicant from bringing matters specifically authorized before the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the standards and procedures specified for the Zoning Board of Appeals in Article IX
of this chapter.
§ 155-28. Topsoil excavation.
During the construction of a foundation, general landscaping or any other extensive excavating project,
a person, firm, corporation, etc., shall not strip, excavate or otherwise remove soil/gravel unless the
following conditions are met:
Topsoil. Topsoil is replenished or left with sufficient amounts to support future development needs.
Groundwater runoff. Runoff will not be caused to flow into neighboring properties, to pool or to
cause erosion.
Time requirement.
A certificate of occupancy cannot be granted until the above requirements have been met.
All of the above conditions shall be met within one year from the time the project started.
However, the Municipal Board shall have the power to grant extensions for just cause after
receiving a written request which includes the reasons for the request.
§ 155-29. Preserving yards, courts and open space.
Preservation of yards, courts and open space. Rear yards, courts and other open spaces shall be
kept undeveloped in order to meet setback and coverage requirements of this chapter, except as
specified in Subsection B below.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 198/277
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
B.
[1]
Permitted obstructions. The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in
the preserved yards, courts and open space:
Open terraces, decks, patios, open porches, awnings and canopies, chimneys, trellises,
flagpoles, open fire escapes, balconies and other similar uses which do not extend more than
40% of the required setback nor come closer to a lot boundary line by more than 40% of the
required setback.
Bay windows, steps, chimneys, overhanging eaves and gutters and other similar uses shall
not extend more than three feet from the principal structure nor come within two feet of any
property line.
Location. All yards, courts and open space shall be located on the same lot as the structure for
which the setback and area requirements are required.
§ 155-30. Established front yards.
In an existing neighborhood where structures are not set back from the edge of the road by the
distance specified by this chapter, the required setback shall be noted in the zoning permit at a
distance which blends with existing adjacent structures and best preserves the aesthetics of the
neighborhood. The varied setback may be based on the average of the setbacks of the two adjacent
structures minus up to five feet. Any variation requested which is in greater variation than that
authorized shall require an area variance.
§ 155-31. Number of residential dwellings per lot (lot divisions).
Number of residential dwellings per lot. No more than one principal detached residential dwelling
shall be constructed on a lot.
Division of lots. No lot improved with a building or buildings shall hereafter be divided into two or
more zoning lots and no portion of any zoning lot which is improved with a building or buildings
shall be sold, unless all zoning lots resulting from each such division or sale and improved with a
building or buildings shall not be less conforming to all the bulk regulations of the zoning district in
which the property is located. However, any portion of a parcel may be removed if it is to be used
with an adjacent parcel and the original parcel continues to conform to the bulk regulations.
§ 155-32. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former § 155-32, Lots in two districts, was repealed 1-18-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016.
§ 155-33. Driveways within rights-of-way.
When property to be developed fronts upon a highway and access to the highway is desired, an
approved permit from the applicable agency for the development of such highway access shall be
presented. The Highway/Street Superintendent may require the installation of appropriately sized
sluice pipe where it is likely that drainage problems exist or will be created by the presence of a
driveway on a public right-of-way.
§ 155-34. Agricultural preservation.
In order to promote, preserve and protect agricultural business, any portion of this chapter that would
reduce operation capability of a preexisting agricultural business shall be waived in that instance.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 199/277
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
B.
However, where a documented health or safety problem exists or would be created if sections of this
chapter were not adhered to, then these sections shall be enforced, but only to minimum necessary.
Determinations or interpretations shall be made by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 155-35. Transition between districts.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote harmonious use of land located at district
boundaries.
Conditions. Where the permitting Board determines there is a need to protect a residential
neighborhood located in a residential district from a permitted use in an adjacent district, the board
may:
Require an artificial or natural buffer, such as a hedge, fence, wall etc., which shields the
residential units from the business use.
Require the doubling of the yard setback requirements to protect the neighborhood.
Control the positioning of signs, lights, parking, mechanical equipment and any other feature
so as to reduce the potential nuisance.
Impose other appropriate requirements.
Preexisting uses. This section shall only apply to new construction to include additions and
enlargements.
Article VI. Supplemental Regulations
§ 155-36. Development conditions for granting of use/area
variances and special use permits.
Purposes. Development conditions shall be attached to zoning variances or special use permits
when necessary or advisable to reduce or eliminate conflicts between uses or to protect the
health, safety and general welfare.
Areas of concern. The following checklist shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
its consideration of requests for use/area zoning variances and by the Village Board in its review
of requests for the granting of special use permits, in addition to the specific areas of consideration
listed in Articles IX and XI of this chapter, respectively. The checklist is not intended to be allinclusive
and does not limit areas of concern over which conditions may be imposed. Similarly, not
all factors listed in the checklist may apply in all cases of zoning variance or special use permit
review. Nothing herein contained is intended to supersede, replace, supplant or otherwise modify
in any manner the provisions of § 7-712 of the New York State Village Law nor any other section
or provision thereof.
Traffic.
Safety of ingress/egress from roadway.
Intersection visibility.
Level of anticipated new traffic generation in relation to existing road capacity and traffic.
Adequacy of off-street parking and loading.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 200/277
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
Pedestrian safety.
Circulation drives.
Location of structures in relation to Subsection B(1)(a) through (f) above.
Safety.
Trash disposal.
Steep slopes.
Open pits.
Flammable fluids.
Health.
Sewers/water.
Sunlight.
Air movement.
Junk vehicles.
Trash storage.
Character of neighborhood.
Development density.
Traffic volume.
Lot sizes.
Compatible uses.
Existence/need for buffers.
Public costs.
Road damage.
Need for new roads.
Need for new utilities.
Environmental protection.
Floodplain.
Wetlands.
Surface runoff and capacity of ditch/creek to accept additional runoff.
Natural features.
Nuisances.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 201/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(9)
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Noise.
Odors.
Dust.
Lights.
Hours of operation.
Lot size.
Need for buffers.
Location/proximity of nuisance.
Land use preservation.
Agriculture.
Open space.
Aesthetics.
Restoration.
Appearance.
Scenic views.
Buffers.
Failure to comply. Applicants who have received variances or special use permits with conditions
attached shall be responsible for continuous compliance with the specified conditions.
Noncompliance with any condition shall result in the revocation of the variance/special use permit
and continuation of the use shall only be allowed after reapplication for the variance/special use
permit.
§ 155-37. Cluster residential development.
Purpose. Cluster residential provisions are intended to allow limited flexibility where desirable in
order to permit and encourage superior development of relatively large undeveloped sites;
development aims may include the preservation of views or natural features, provision of
amenities for common use, including recreational facilities not feasible on individual lots, and
innovative groups of dwellings which will provide desirable variety in the municipal housing stock.
To carry out these purposes, standards for individual lot area and dimensions may be reduced
from the standards of the district in which the cluster is located, if compensating permanent
common area ancillary to the dwelling unit is provided in accordance with § 155-37B(5).
Standards for development.
A cluster residential development shall not be less than five acres of contiguous undeveloped
area under single ownership.
Uses permitted shall be limited to residential uses permitted in the district in which it is
located, except that no home occupation shall be permitted.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 202/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
C.
Maximum permitted reductions in individual lot standards. Any lot in a cluster residential
development may be reduced from the standards of the district in which it is located by the
following or lesser amounts:
Minimum lot area may be reduced by 20%.
Minimum lot width may be reduced by 10%.
Minimum rear yard, if abutting common open space, may be reduced five feet, if abutting
another residential lot, no reduction is permitted.
Minimum side yards may be reduced by three feet.
Minimum front yard standard may not be reduced.
Maximum lot coverage may be increased by 5%.
Compensating permanent common area ancillary to the dwelling units shall consist of land
and recreational facilities held in common by the owners of lots in the residential cluster
development, exclusive of accessways, common parking areas or other nonresidential areas
which may also be held in common; further, such common space shall be of a nature and
extent to be of benefit to the residents of the residential cluster development.
Compensating permanent common area shall equal or exceed the total of individual lot area
reductions.
Permanent common areas shall be set aside and developed for the common use and
enjoyment of all residents of the cluster development and appropriate convenient access shall
be provided.
Applicable general provisions and supplemental regulations of this chapter shall apply to all
cluster residential developments.
Application and procedures for establishing a cluster residential development.
Application for establishing a cluster residential development shall be made to the Clerk who
shall refer the application to the Municipal Board and the Planning Board.
The application shall include:
The names and addresses of owner and developer.
Written statements concerning need for development and suitability of site; potential
impact on abutting properties and the neighborhood; development schedule for private
and common areas; method of disposition of common areas, including pertinent
documents regarding owner's association or other organization and long-term
maintenance; estimates of annual maintenance costs; and other pertinent information.
A location map drawn to scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet showing
subject parcel, existing and proposed access streets and nature of abutting development.
The overall development plan drawn to scale of one inch equals 10 feet with contour
intervals of two feet, showing the exact size and shape of the subject parcel, natural
features to be preserved, proposed residential lots and their dimensions, internal and
surrounding streets and all other provisions for pedestrian and vehicular access and
circulation, off-street parking and loading areas, utility rights-of-way or installations on or
near the property, location, dimensions and area of proposed open space or other
commonly held facilities which are part of the compensating permanent common area,
comparison of total area of residential lot reduction with total area of common area and
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 203/277
(e)
(f)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
the nature and location of public or private utilities which would serve the residential
cluster.
Preliminary landscaping and drainage plans at a scale of one inch equals 10 feet with
two-foot contour intervals.
Preliminary architectural and engineering drawings to show the nature of residential and
open space or recreational facilities proposed.
Action by the Village Board and Planning Board.
The Village Board will review and rule on the application for a cluster residential development
as expeditiously as practicable and in no case later than 90 days after all information required
for the application is received.
The Board will consider:
The need for development and suitability of site.
The impact on the neighborhood, circulation system and on the Village as a whole.
Feasibility and practicality of providing and maintaining common areas, including costs to
prospective homeowners.
The need for complete disclosure to prospective buyers of future costs and
responsibilities in connection with common areas.
The need to require performance bond if nature of development warrants.
Other factors which affect the viability of the proposal and general welfare of the
municipality.
The Board may request the preliminary meetings with the applicant in order to obtain
additional information or explanation of the proposal.
The Board may hold an informational meeting in addition to the required public hearing to
receive local public opinion and reaction and shall make information concerning the proposal
available to the public before such meeting.
§ 155-38. Mixed residential and commercial uses in B-1 Districts
by special use permit.
Commercial structures (preexisting and new) located within the allowed district may, by special use
permit, be partially used for dwelling purposes when the following conditions are met:
Location in structure. All such dwelling units shall be located on the second or third floor; provided,
however, that such dwelling units may be located on the first floor where:
[Amended 2-16-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
A separate commercial space is maintained in that part of the building adjacent to the street
and commonly referred to as the "storefront";
The commercial space is no smaller than 300 square feet;
The commercial space extends the full width of the storefront, unless a hallway or other
common space is planned; and
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 204/277
(4)
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
The dwelling unit is occupied by the building owner or business manager.
Location. The location is appropriate for housing units with respect to health, safety and welfare of
the occupants.
Parking. Sufficient off-street parking is available, preferably on the parcel where the structure is
located or in close proximity to the structure.
Other conditions. Other reasonable conditions as deemed necessary.
§ 155-39. Apartments / condos / townhouses in AR-1 Districts.
Purpose. This section sets parameters for the construction or conversion to apartments such that
the construction/conversions are compatible with agricultural uses and that rural character is
maintained.
Conditions.
Location. New apartments shall be located in areas that already have residential uses present
so that more rural/agricultural areas are not infringed upon.
Buffers. Where appropriate, buffers shall be established.
Nuisances. Developers shall be aware that minimal agricultural practices may create
unpleasant situations for residential uses, but as per the agricultural section of this chapter,
these circumstances must be tolerated.
§ 155-40. Residential conversions.
Purpose. The conversion of existing single-family dwellings into multiple-family units shall be
regulated in accordance with this section for districts where said conversions are specifically listed
as being an allowed use. The purpose is to protect established neighborhoods (especially
predominantly single-family neighborhoods) from adverse change resulting from density
increases.
Conditions. The following conditions shall be met or a variance must be requested:
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Conditions R-1 District R-2, R-3, B-1, B-2 and AR-1 Districts
Number of apartments
created
Maximum: 1 In R-2, a maximum of 2 by right and 3 by
special use permit; in R-3, B-1, B-2, AR-
1, no limit if requirements are met
Apartment size Minimum: 650 square
feet
Minimum: 650 square feet; no expansion
of existing dwelling is permitted
Area requirements Lot must conform to R-1
area requirements
Lot must conform to 75% of appropriate
area requirements
Off-street parking Minimum: 1.5 spaces
per unit
Minimum: 1/2 space per unit in R-2;
1 1/2 spaces per unit in other districts
Size of original single-family
dwelling
Minimum: 2,000 square
feet
Minimum: 1,500 square feet floor space.
Character of neighborhood Will not be changed Will not be changed in R-2; will not be
substantially changed in other districts
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 205/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(8)
A.
B.
§ 155-41. Home occupations.
Standards. In districts where allowed, home occupations shall meet the following conditions:
Floor area. The maximum floor area of the primary dwelling unit devoted to the home
occupation shall not be more than 25% of the total floor space of the dwelling unit, with a
maximum of 500 square feet.
Use of accessory building. Upon the effective date of this chapter, no accessory building not
being used as a home occupation shall be so utilized.
On-premises sales. For allowed uses, goods may be sold on premises when it is determined
that the sales will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood and will not be
detrimental to property values in the vicinity. The permitting Board may prescribe conditions
that it deems necessary or desirable for the sale, storage and delivery of goods.
Outside display. There shall be no outside display of any nature except for permitted signs.
Signs. One sign up to a maximum of three square feet and no higher than five feet from
ground level to the top of the sign shall be allowed on premises.
Parking. Off-street parking shall be required sufficient to handle peak periods.
Nuisances. No nuisances as defined in the definition section of this chapter[1] shall be
allowed. The effect upon the character of the neighborhood shall be minimal.
Editor's Note: See § 155-6, Definitions.
Permitted uses. The following, as well as similar non-nuisance-producing occupations, is a list
of uses that are allowed as home occupations when they meet the aforementioned
conditions:
Doctor.
Lawyer.
Real estate broker.
Dentist.
Antique shop.
Artist.
Beauty shop.
Business office.
Engineer.
Architect.
Accountant.
Craftsman.
Preexisting home occupations. Home occupations legally existing before the enactment of this
chapter shall not generally be required to comply with the above conditions. However, where there
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 206/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
E.
is clear evidence that a nuisance is present due to an increased level of activity or a substantial
change in the nature of the home occupation, then the use shall be subject to a special use permit
proceeding and any of the above conditions may be imposed on the use where reasonably
possible.
§ 155-41.1. Child day-care centers.
[Added 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
The following criteria apply to any child day-care center except home day cares:
A child day-care center is subject to site plan and design review.
A child day-care center shall be located on a lot that is a minimum of 1.25 acres.
A fence of at least four feet in height shall be provided, separating any outside area
designated for use in relation to the child day-care center from abutting lots, parking areas,
driveways or streets.
Adequate off-street parking is provided for employees, volunteers, and visitors. The number
of required spaces will be calculated based upon the number of children enrolled at the child
day-care center, the number of employees mandated by the state and the required handicap
space(s).
Child day-care facilities are properly licensed by the State Department of Social Services.
Day-care activities shall not be conducted before 5:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. in residential
zones.
§ 155-42. Professional offices within residential dwellings
(incidental offices).
Professional offices may be allowed within residential structures by special use permits in accordance
with the following specific conditions:
Location. Professional offices (noninhabited) shall only be located in the B-1 or AR-1 Districts.
Professional offices may be located within any other district, except R-1, but the professional
utilizing the office must also reside on a full-time basis within the structure in which the office is
located.
Floor space. The maximum floor space to be utilized for a professional office shall be specified.
Parking. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided in order to handle the peak parking
demands. Adequate space for expansion of parking and/or the maneuvering of vehicles must be
provided.
Traffic safety. The ingress/egress system must be designed so as to minimize potential traffic
safety problems.
Signs. A three-square-foot on-premises sign shall be allowed by right (permit required) for any
inhabited professional office. All signs associated with noninhabited professional offices shall be
regulated in accordance with the sign section of Article VI.[1]
Editor's Note: See § 155-53, Signs.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 207/277
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
D.
A.
Buffer. A proper buffer zone shall be provided so as to protect adjacent properties, if deemed
necessary.
Hours. The hours and days of operation shall be included as a condition for the granting of the
special use permit. No incidental office shall be open between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.
Employees. As many as two family members may work in the incidental office, but not more than
one outside employee.
Lot size. The overall size of the property must be such that it is capable of supporting the
professional office operations and any related activity, while at the same time maintaining
appropriate open space.
Neighborhood. The general character of the neighborhood must not be substantially changed by
the presence of the professional offices, nor shall there be a resultant devaluation of adjoining
properties.
§ 155-43. Businesses in AR-1 District.
Purpose. To preserve the rural character of the AR-1 District, only businesses meeting the
conditions below shall be allowed:
Conditions.
Traffic safety. Assurances shall be received that safe entry and exit is available along with
sufficient parking and loading areas.
Lot size. If it is deemed necessary for the purpose of promoting health, safety or general
welfare, the minimum lot size required may be greater than what is specified for the AR-1
District.
Buffers and landscaping. Where adjacent uses warrant, an appropriate buffer can be
required, and, in addition, suitable landscaping may be requested of the applicant.
§ 155-44. Household sales.
In order to preserve the character of neighborhoods, garage and other similar type of noncommercial
sales (lawn sales, household sales, flea market, etc.) shall be subject to the following conditions:
Frequency. Sales shall be limited to three separate periods of three days each year per location.
Signs. Refer to supplemental section on signs.[1]
Editor's Note: See § 155-53, Signs.
Fees. No fee shall be charged for household sales. However, permits are required with application
therefor secured a minimum of one day prior to the sale.
Exempt sales. All public or civic nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from the requirements of
this section.
§ 155-45. Roadside stand (seasonal).
Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, roadside stands shall consist of two types, general
roadside stands and limited roadside stands.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 208/277
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
(d)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
A.
Regulations.
General roadside stands are permitted by special use permit granted in accordance with the
requirements and standards set forth in this chapter.
Limited roadside stands are permitted by right in accordance with Subsection B(3) of this
section.
All roadside stands shall comply with the following:
Safe entry, exit and parking.
Sufficient off-street parking to meet peak demand.
Hours of operation which are compatible with the neighborhood.
Signs in accordance with sign section.[1]
Editor's Note: See § 155-53, Signs.
Preexisting roadside stands. All stands utilized in the twenty-four-month period prior to the
effective date that this chapter was originally enacted shall be exempt from all regulations found in
this section. However, any expansion or alterations shall be subject to special use permit to
determine which of the conditions of this section shall apply.
§ 155-46. Drive-in establishments.
Definition. Drive-in establishments shall include those businesses designed to either wholly or
partly provide services to customers who are in their automobiles parked on the premises.
Included are, but not limited to, drive-in theaters, restaurants, film shops, etc.
Regulations. Drive-in establishments shall be allowed by special use permits in districts where
they are permitted, and the following conditions shall be evaluated in considering action on the
permit:
Requirements for the granting of special use permits set forth in this chapter.
Traffic safety.
Provisions for vehicles of patrons to exit off of and to return to public streets.
Safe entry and exit shall be provided with only one entry and exit point.
Proper parking, which allows convenience and safety.
Pedestrian safety.
Location considerations will be analyzed to ensure that the character of the neighborhood will
not be materially damaged.
Hours of operation.
The need for buffers, especially when situated near residential structures.
§ 155-47. Vehicle repair shop; auto body repair shop.
Permit requirements. Vehicle repair shops and auto body shops shall be allowed by special use
permit in accordance with the all of the applicable provisions of this chapter as well as the
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 209/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
[1]
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
following conditions:
Conditions. The following conditions shall be met:
Vehicle storage. Any vehicle stored outside shall be enclosed within an appropriate fence to
hide it from view.
Hours of operation. The hours of operation shall be derived so as to limit noise during
nonbusiness hours.
Area requirements. The lot on which the shop is located shall be a minimum of three acres in
an AR-1 District. The shop shall be allowed only if it is to be located at least 400 feet from any
existing residential structure.
The supplemental section on trash shall strictly followed.[1]
Editor's Note: See § 155-62, Trash storage.
Preexisting uses.
Expansion and enlargements. All expansions or enlargements of repair shops in existence
prior to the enactment of this chapter shall be subject to Subsection B(1), fences, of this
section.
Preexisting uses. Where it is determined at a public hearing held by the Municipal Board that
a nuisance exists with a preexisting use, then Subsection B(1), fences, and/or Subsection
B(2), Hours of operation, can be enforced within a reasonable time period.
§ 155-48. Gas stations; motor vehicle service stations.
Purpose. Gas stations are regulated in this section to promote safe and properly located stations
which are visually attractive.
Entrance/exit. No public garage or motor vehicle service station, or private garage for more than
five vehicles, shall have a vehicular entrance closer than 200 feet to an entrance to a church,
school theater, hospital, public park, playground or fire station. Such measurement shall be taken
as the shortest distance between such entrances across the street, and along the street frontage if
both entrances are on the same side of the street or within the same square block.
Location. All motor vehicle service stations shall be so arranged and all gasoline pumps shall be
so placed as to require all servicing on the premises and outside the public way; and no gasoline
pump shall be placed closer than 50 feet to any side property line.
Inoperative vehicles. Inoperative vehicles and parts of motor vehicles shall be stored in a neat and
orderly fashion for not more than 30 days.
Waste materials. All waste materials, motors and motor vehicle parts will be stored within the
structure or enclosed within fencing so as not to be visible from off the property.
Preexisting stations. Motor vehicle service stations in existence before the enactment of this
chapter shall be subject to Subsection D, Inoperative vehicles, and Subsection E, Waste
materials. Compliance shall take place within 30 days. In addition, any expansion or enlargement
of motor vehicle service stations shall be subject to all regulations in this chapter, within reason, as
determined by the Municipal Board. Where compliance would conceivably create a hardship, it
shall be the option of the owner of the nonconforming use to apply for a variance.
§ 155-49. Private swimming pools.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 210/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
Conditions. A private swimming pool installed or maintained as an accessory to a residential use
shall meet the following requirements:
Fence. Any pool which is installed in-ground shall be completely enclosed by a security fence
not less than four feet in height, and for all pools there shall be gates, ladders or doors
equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices designed and capable of keeping such
gates, ladders or doors securely closed at all times when not in actual use.
Filtration system noise. Pools which are equipped with an integral filtration system and filter
pumps or other mechanical devices shall be so located and constructed as not to interfere
with the peace, comfort and repose of the occupant of any adjoining property.
Maintenance. Both in-ground and aboveground pools, accessory buildings, fences, etc., shall
be properly maintained.
Drainage. Provisions for the drainage of such pools shall be adequate and shall not interfere
with the public water supply system, existing sanitary facilities, neighboring properties, etc.
Lot coverage. Such pool shall not occupy more than 40% of the area of the rear yard,
excluding all garage or other accessory structures located in such area.
Preexisting uses. Pools in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter shall, within one year,
comply with the following conditions: Subsection A(1), Fence; Subsection A(3), Maintenance; and
Subsection A(4), Drainage.
§ 155-50. Accessory storage structures.
An accessory storage structure shall, generally, be permitted in all districts with the issuance of a
zoning permit. The following regulations shall apply to these structures.
Yard requirements. Accessory storage structures shall meet the yard requirements for the
appropriate district.
§ 155-51. Off-street parking.
Purpose. Off-street parking space(s) with a proper and safe access shall be provided within a
structure or in the open to adequately serve the uses on each lot within the district. Any application
for a zoning permit for a new or enlarged building structure or change in use shall include with it a
plot plan drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any parking in compliance with the
regulations of this chapter. However, in existing business districts, parking shall only be required to
be provided for new development.
Size requirements. A required off-street parking space shall be an area of not less than 162
square feet, not less than nine feet wide by 19 feet long, exclusive of access drives or aisles,
ramps, columns or office and work areas. Aisles between vehicular parking spaces shall not be
less than 12 feet in width when serving automobiles parked at a forty-five-degree angle in one
direction and not less than 20 feet in width when serving automobiles parked perpendicular to the
aisles and accommodating two-way traffic.
Street access; driveways; aisles. Except for one- or two-family dwellings, all parking spaces
required by this chapter shall be accessible from a public street by a driveway or aisle which shall
conform to the following requirements:
No space in any required driveway or aisle shall be counted toward satisfying the parking
requirements of this section.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 211/277
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Driveways serving parking areas containing eight or fewer parking spaces shall be a minimum
of 12 feet in width while those serving nine or more parking spaces or one or more loading
spaces shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width.
Aisles providing access between parking and loading spaces and driveways shall be a
minimum of 24 feet in width.
Driveways, aisles and required off-street parking and loading spaces shall have a minimum
vertical clearance of 14 feet clear of any obstructions.
Entrances to a public street shall be no narrower than the driveway or aisle they serve, nor
more than 36 feet in width, except where land dividers are installed to segregate entering,
exiting or turning traffic.
Location of parking spaces. No parking space nor portion thereof established on the same zoning
lot with a building shall be located within a required front yard, and no parking spaces nor portion
thereof established on a lot without a building shall be located closer to any street line than the
front yard setback requirements of this chapter in the same manner as a building or structure. The
aforementioned required setbacks shall not apply to a business district, nor to driveways serving
one- , two- or three-family dwellings. For nonresidential off-street parking, the Municipal Board
may, upon request by the applicant, allow certain parking spaces off the applicant's property but
within 500 feet of said property to be included as part of the required spaces.
Location of entrances/exits. The location of any entrance or exit of a driveway, aisle or parking or
loading area where it enters a public right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the Village
Superintendent of Highways and, in the case of Routes 20 and 394, by the New York State
Department of Transportation, and a permit for the same shall be obtained prior to construction.
Material composition. All open off-street parking spaces and access areas, except those
accessory to single-family dwellings and duplexes, shall be surfaced with some all-weather lowdust
materials, such as stone, gravel or macadam.
Maintenance. All required parking and loading spaces, driveways and aisles shall be maintained
to at least the standard of original construction by the property owner.
Drainage. All parking areas, driveways and aisles shall be graded to permit drainage either by
surface or by storm drains of suitable capacity and shall cross adjacent property only by way of a
drainage easement to natural watercourses or collective storm sewers.
Number of spaces. The following parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained
by the owner of the property for each use which, after the date when this chapter becomes
effective, is erected, enlarged or altered for use for any of the following reasons:
Uses Minimum of 1 Space Per
One-family residence/mobile home Dwelling unit
Two-family residence Dwelling unit
Multifamily residence Dwelling unit
Church 5 fixed seats
Home for the aged or nursing home 3 residents
Elementary school 20 students
High school/college 12 students
Library 1,000 square feet
Places of assembly (including convention hall
and dance hall)
100 square feet of floor area
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 212/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Uses Minimum of 1 Space Per
Club or lodge (without sleeping
accommodations)
Each 5 capacity of hall
Places providing sleeping accommodations
(including hotels, motels and tourist homes)
Sleeping unit
Mortuaries/funeral parlors 1/8 viewing room, plus 1 per employee
Offices, banks 100 square feet floor area
Food market 200 square feet floor area
Eating and drinking establishments 4 seats or every 200 square feet floor area,
whichever is more
Bowling alley 6 per alley
Other commercial 300 square feet of sales area Minimum of 1
Space Per
Industrial employee Each employee in the largest shift
Other uses not listed above 500 square feet floor area
§ 155-52. Off-street loading and unloading.
Need. Off-street loading and/or unloading spaces for nonfarm commercial vehicles while loading
and/or unloading shall be provided for new uses where it is deemed that such facilities are
necessary to serve the use or uses on the property. At least one off-street loading and/or
unloading space shall be provided for all commercial establishments in excess of 7,500 square
feet of floor area.
Size. Each loading and/or unloading space shall be at least 14 feet wide, 60 feet long and shall
have at least a fifteen-foot vertical clearance and a sixty-foot maneuvering area. Refer to
requirements to obtain a zoning variance where this standard cannot be met.
Use of parking spaces. Generally, parking spaces shall not be used for loading and/or unloading
purposes except during hours when business operations are suspended or if pedestrian and
vehicle traffic will not be obstructed. However, the permitting Board may allow the use of parking
spaces for loading/unloading purposes when it is determined that the effects will be minimal.
Design. Loading and/or unloading facilities shall be designed so that trucks need not back in or out
or park in any public right-of-way. No truck shall be allowed to stand in a traveled roadway or
pedestrian walkway or in any way block the effective flow of people or vehicles. The loading
and/or unloading area shall have an all-weather surface to provide safe and convenient access
during all seasons.
Preexisting uses. Any use existing as of the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to
this section.
§ 155-53. Signs.
[Amended 9-21-1998 by L.L. No. 8-1998; 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002; 6-4-2007 by L.L. No. 1-2007;
4-7-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008; 7-21-2008 by L.L. No. 4-2008; 3-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
Purpose. The intent of this section is to preserve and enhance the historic charm of the Village of
Westfield by regulating signs within the Village. In order to avoid chaotic, unsafe, or unattractive
clutter, all signs within Village limits are subject to these restrictions.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 213/277
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Supersession. The provisions of this section shall supersede any and all provisions to the contrary
found elsewhere in the Village of Westfield Zoning Law, insofar they may now or hereafter relate
to signs.
Procedures for sign permits. After the effective date of this section and except as otherwise herein
provided, no person shall erect, enlarge, change colors, cover or structurally alter any sign without
first obtaining a permit from the Village Code Enforcement Officer, which the Planning Board shall
have authorized him to issue.
Applications for sign permits shall be made, in writing, upon forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer, by the owner, lessee or erector and shall be accompanied by a fee, in
accordance with the schedule of fees established by the Village Board of Trustees, and by a
scale drawing showing dimensions, proposed design, calculated signage area, the legend,
color, materials, structural details and a tract or plat location map delineating the location of
highway right-of-way lines, buildings, parking areas, other signs on the same property,
frontage of each unit and/or any fences or other obstructions in relation to the designated
location of the proposed sign. Lessee or erector applicants shall provide evidence that the
owner of the property has approved such erections.
Once the Code Enforcement Officer has determined that the sign application is complete, he
shall refer it to the Planning Board for review and approval.
Before approving the issuance of a sign permit, the Planning Board shall find that the
applicant has demonstrated the following facts to be true:
The proposed sign is in harmony with the standards for permitted signs and within the
spirit of this section.
The proposed sign is compatible with the neighborhood environment and character and
is not detrimental to adjacent properties.
The proposed sign does not, by reason of its location, create a hazard of any nature to
the public in general or to any adjacent owner or occupant.
The proposed sign does not interfere with the lawful and aesthetic enjoyment of the
public highway or of adjacent property.
The proposed sign comports with the sign design guidelines adopted by the Village of
Westfield, if any.
No permit issued under the terms of this section shall be transferable to any person other
than the original applicant without the consent of the Planning Board.
A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued has not
been started within a period of six months after the date of issue of the permit.
Sign design and location standards. All signs permitted hereunder shall adhere to the following
standards:
Signs and supporting structures should be in harmony with the building to which they relate
and the business or service they represent. Signs should utilize appropriate materials, colors,
type, styles and graphics. Signs should be of a size and scale in balance with the building and
its surroundings.
No sign may be located where it interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No sign shall be
placed where it may confuse or obstruct the view or effectiveness of any official traffic sign,
signal or marking. No sign shall be placed in a manner which prevents free ingress or egress
from any door, window or fire escape.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 214/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[1]
(6)
(7)
E.
Illumination.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
The preferred method of illumination for an exterior sign is direct illumination from a
shielded light source. Illumination should be concentrated on the sign with a minimum
spillover of light. Lighting equipment used to illuminate an exterior sign shall not exceed a
correlated color temperature greater than 2,500 Kelvin or 200 lumens per square foot of
sign area. Sign lighting shall not exceed 2.0 footcandles.
Interior lighted window signs or displays designed for pedestrian viewing are allowed;
however, they must be positioned less than eight feet above the sidewalk and may not
exceed six square feet.
No signs with flashing, intermittent or moving lights are allowed.
Modifications to preexisting signs, or the addition of new signs, which must contain a
form of internal lighting, shall utilize traditional incandescent, fluorescent or light-emitting
diode (LED) lamps within the lighting equipment with a maximum correlated color
temperature of 2,500 Kelvin. Sign lighting shall not exceed 2.0 footcandles.
Signs must be constructed of durable materials and kept in good condition. Dilapidated signs
will be cited by the Village Code Enforcement Officer and, if not repaired within 30 days, may
be removed by the Village at the expense of the owner or lessee of the property.
Exempt signs. The following types of signs shall not require a permit, provided the sign otherwise
complies with this section:
Signs erected and maintained pursuant to any governmental function.
Signs, not exceeding four square feet per face, guiding traffic and parking on private property
and bearing no advertising.
Temporary signs and banners for community events and public celebrations, provided all
other required approvals are obtained. Such signs shall not be placed more than 30 days
prior to the advertised event. Signs placed on the Village Sign Board must receive prior
approval from the Village Clerk. All such signs must be removed immediately upon the
conclusion of the event advertised.
Political signs up to 10 square feet are allowed four weeks before and one week after the
polling date. It shall be the responsibility of the candidate/political group to comply with this
regulation. Permission of the property owner must be obtained prior to sign placement.
Exterior sandwich signs, sidewalk signs and banners up to five feet high by three feet wide
are allowed in the B-1, B-1A and B-2 Districts during business hours. Exterior sandwich signs
up to three feet high and two feet wide are allowed in front of businesses and home
occupations in the R-3 District during business hours. One sign per business is allowed in
front of the business.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Temporary window signs and displays, provided they do not take up more than 50% of the
total ground floor display window(s) area. If there are any permanent signs within the
window(s), the square footage of the permanent signage shall be included toward the total
50% calculation. All existing temporary signs must be in compliance within 30 days after the
issuance of this law.[1]
Editor's Note: "This law" refers to L.L. No. 1-2014.
Flags. Two flags up to three feet high by five feet wide are allowed on the exterior of a
building during business hours.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 215/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
F.
Temporary pennants, balloons, streamers. These and other similar attention-getting devices
are permitted on a temporary basis only, for the promotion of holidays or special events, in
accordance with the following:
[Amended 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Banners or pennants extending across a road shall receive permission from the Village of
Westfield Electric Department and the appropriate highway authority. A banner or
pennant for an event shall not be up for more than 30 days unless it is a municipal or
quasi-governmental banner or pennant.
Temporary banners, pennants, balloons and streamers shall be allowed in the B-1, B-1A
and B-2 Districts. Such attention-getting devices shall be removed during nonbusiness
hours when practicable.
Temporary banners, pennants, balloons and streamers may be utilized in association
with real estate open houses, auctions, estate sales or household sales in residential or
commercial districts in accordance with § 155-53E(12) hereof.
Gasoline price signs: signs, not exceeding one square foot per face, attached to a gasoline
dispenser or service island canopy, showing the cost of gasoline.
Temporary contractor signs up to 10 square feet may be posted at a job site while work is
being completed. The sign must be removed if work is suspended or stopped.
Temporary real estate "for sale, rent or lease" signs. One on-site sign, up to nine square feet,
is allowed in residential districts, and one sign, up to 32 square feet, is allowed in business
and industrial districts. For corner lots, one such sign shall be permitted per frontage.
Temporary real estate open house, household sale, estate sale, auction. These signs, up to
four square feet, are permitted. Two directional off-premises signs and one on-site sign are
allowed. Off-premises signs may be erected no more than 48 hours prior to the event start
time and must be removed no later than the last day of the event.
Seasonal roadside stand signs. One on-premises sign up to 10 square feet is allowed during
the season when the stand is open for business.
One nameplate sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, indicating the name and address
of the occupant of a residence.
Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited:
Digital signs.
Billboards.
Signs illuminated by or containing flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights except to
show time and temperature.
Signs representing or depicting, to any degree, official traffic signs or signals.
Permanent signs made of cardboard, paper or similar nonpermanent material.
Signs mounted on parked vehicles or trailers or other similar mobile advertising media.
Signs attached to trees, utility poles, fences, traffic signs, street corner markers, or the like.
Signs which emit noise, sound or smoke.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 216/277
(9)
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
G.
(1)
H.
Animated signs, whether by mechanical or electrical processes, including signs with banners,
streamers, spinners or other paraphernalia attached to or associated with such signs.
Illuminated signs on residentially zoned properties.
Exterior signs using neon or phosphorescent colors.
Signs in residential districts. No signs shall be permitted in any residential districts except the
following:
Signs indicating the private nature of driveways or trespassing signs shall be permitted,
provided that the size of any such sign shall not exceed two square feet. Such signs shall not
be closer than five feet to any street or property line.
Signs accessory to parking areas, designating entrances and exits to and from a parking area
and limited to one sign for each such exit and entrance and to a maximum size of two square
feet each, shall be permitted.
One sign per parking area, designating the conditions of use or identity of such parking area
and limited to a maximum size of nine square feet, shall be permitted, provided that on a
corner lot two such signs shall be permitted, one facing each street. No parking area sign
shall be less than 10 feet from any street or property line.
For multiple-dwelling projects, one sign, building- or ground-mounted, indicating the name of
the project may be permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in area or per side if
double-faced.
Where a home occupation is permitted by this chapter, nameplate signs may be used to
identify the home occupation. Such signs shall not exceed three square feet per face in area
and shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of the sidewalk nearest the home or, if
there is no sidewalk, 10 feet from the edge of the road pavement. The sign shall only indicate
the nature of the home occupation. No pictorial, graphic or representational media shall be
permitted.
Quasi-public signs. Signs for quasi-public uses, which include but are not limited to churches,
private schools, libraries, hospitals and nursing homes, shall be a maximum of 20 square feet
per face. If the sign is freestanding, it shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of the
sidewalk nearest the building or, if there is no sidewalk, 10 feet from the edge of the road
pavement.
Signs of the type set forth in Subsection G(1), (2), and (3) of this section shall obtain a sign
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer but shall not require sign permit approval from the
Planning Board.
Where a business is permitted by this section in the R-3 District, a nameplate or freestanding
sign may be used to identify the business. Such sign shall not exceed three square feet per
face in area and shall be set back at least five feet from the edge of the sidewalk nearest the
business or, if there is no sidewalk, 10 feet from the edge of the pavement. Such sign shall
not exceed a maximum height of five feet and shall be nonilluminated.
[Added 6-18-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
Signs in the B1, B1-A, B2, SI-1, and Mixed-Use Districts. In addition to the signs permitted and as
regulated in Subsection G above, the following types of signs are permitted within the B1, B1-A,
B2, SI-1, and Mixed-Use Districts:
Storefront signs. Permanent storefront signage shall be restricted to a total square footage of
1.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage or 50 square feet, whichever is less.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 217/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(f)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(g)
(a)
(b)
(2)
All permanent exterior signs, or permanent interior signs located within one foot of the
front of the building that are visible from the street, shall count toward the maximum 50
square feet limitation. These include but are not limited to signs painted on or mounted to
the building, signs in or on windows and doors, awning signs, open-for-business signs,
signs showing hours of operation, occupant directories, projecting signs, freestanding
signs.
Noncommercial signs such as address, name of building or other such building
identification signs not advertising a specific business are not counted in the allowed 50
square feet; however, these signs are subject to the same application and approval
process as all other signs.
If a business has a rear entrance, permanent signage may be placed on the rear of the
building and shall be restricted to a total square footage of 1.5 square feet per linear foot
of the rear width of the building or 50 square feet, whichever is less.
No sign shall be higher than the roofline of the building to which it is attached.
No sign shall project more than 12 inches from a building wall except for permitted
projecting signs as defined below.
Signs are permitted on the side of a building (i.e., a side other than the front or rear),
without limitation to the number of signs; provided, however, that:
The aggregate sign area of all the signs on the side of a building shall not exceed 50
square feet;
The signs shall advertise only on-premises businesses; and
Projecting signs may be used on the side of a building only if the advertised
business has an entrance door on the side on which the sign will be hung.
Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies shall be permitted subject to the following:
They shall not extend beyond a point two feet inside the curbline.
The lowest part shall not be less than eight feet above grade.
Awnings shall be constructed of cloth or metal; however, all frames and supports
shall be of metal. Every awning shall be securely attached to and supported by the
building.
Canopies shall be constructed of cloth, metal hood, or other approved materials. The
framework of all canopies shall be approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
No advertising shall be placed on any awning or canopy, except the name of the
owner and the business, industry, or pursuit conducted within the premises, and
such advertising may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space not
exceeding eight inches in height on the front and side portions thereof.
Projecting signs. Projecting signs which hang perpendicular to the wall of a building shall be
permitted subject to the following conditions:
If flat, each face of the sign shall not exceed 10 square feet.
If three dimensional, total area shall not exceed nine square feet. Area shall be
determined by prescribing a geometric shape which can contain the largest cross section
of the sign and computing the area of that geometric shape.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 218/277
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
I.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
J.
The edge of the sign closest to the building shall be no more than three feet from the
building and the edge closest to the street shall be at least two feet from the curbline.
If projecting over a pedestrianway, there must be a minimum clearance of eight feet
above grade.
If projecting over an alley or driveway, there must be at least 13 feet of clearance above
grade.
Supporting framework must be in proportion to the sign.
No wired cables or other similar devices shall be used except to secure the sign or
framework.
Freestanding signs. One permanent freestanding sign is allowed per building in the B1 and
B1-A Districts, which sign may not exceed 18 feet in height.
Monument signs. In the B1-A District only, one monument sign shall be permitted for each
parcel or group of parcels owned by a single owner, not to exceed five feet in height and 30
square feet per face.
Signs in the Industrial Districts. In addition to the signs permitted and as regulated in Subsections
G and H above, the following types of signs are permitted within the Light Industrial (I-2) and
Industrial (I) Districts:
A storefront or freestanding sign not exceeding 50 square feet per face.
A monument sign not exceeding seven feet in height and 50 square feet per face.
Variances. Pursuant to § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Planning Board is hereby
granted special authority to grant variances from the strict enforcement of the area requirements
found in this section, as follows:
Procedure.
Hearing. Upon the submission of a complete application for a sign permit requiring a
variance, the Planning Board shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the application
and give public notice of such hearing by publication in a paper of general circulation in
the Village at least five days prior to the date thereof. Notice shall also be mailed to
property owners adjacent to the location of the proposed sign. The cost of sending or
publishing any notices relating to such application, or a reasonable fee relating thereto,
shall be borne by the applicant and shall be paid to the Board prior to the variance
hearing. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
Time of decision. The Planning Board shall decide upon the application within 62 days
after the close of the hearing. However, this time may be extended by mutual consent of
the applicant and the Board. If the Planning Board fails to issue a timely decision within
the sixty-two-day period or such period as extended by mutual agreement, the
application shall be deemed approved.
Grounds for variance. The Planning Board shall have the authority to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances to the terms of this section as will not be contrary to public interest
where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this section will
result in unnecessary hardship or where the applicant proposes an idea that, while not
technically permitted hereunder, is not otherwise objectionable, and so that the spirit of the
section shall be observed and substantial justice done. The Planning Board shall consider the
following in making its determination:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 219/277
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
M.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
Whether the granting of the variance would be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this section and would not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
Whether the granting of the variance is reasonable and the variance as granted by the
Board is a minimum variance that will accomplish this purpose.
Conditions. The Planning Board may provide any safeguards or conditions that it deems to be
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of the regulation or provisions to which the
variance applies.
Nonexclusive option. This subsection is not intended to and shall not preempt any rights of
appeal an applicant may have pursuant to Article 7 of the Village Law.
Zoning referral. A variance granted under this section is hereby deemed to be an
administrative variance not treated as a use variance or area variance requiring a referral
pursuant to § 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
Preexisting signs. Existing permanent signs which are accessory to permitted uses but which do
not conform to this section may be continued and maintained but shall not be moved, replaced or
altered in any way except in conformance with this section.
Cessation. If a use ceases for a period of one year, signs not painted or directly attached to the
building shall be removed by the party responsible for the sign. If such signs have not been
removed after 30 days' notice, they may be removed by the Village at the expense of the owner or
lessee of the property.
Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed any
sign which does not conform to the provisions of this section, and all costs and expenses
incurred in such removal shall be assessed against the land or buildings upon which the sign
is located.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue appearance tickets for the
violation of any provision of this section.
§ 155-54. Fences and walls.
Regulations. Fences and walls, as defined in § 155-6, shall be allowed by permit in any district
and shall conform to the regulations which follow:
Exempt fencing. Fencing used for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from all regulations
except for maintenance requirements detailed below. Additionally, nonboundary fencing
located more than 25 feet from any property line shall also be exempt.
Permits. Fences shall be allowed up to four feet in height by right except in the I-1 District,
fences up to a maximum of eight feet in height are allowed by right. Fences above four feet in
height shall require a special use permit and consideration shall be given to visibility from
adjacent properties, light and air movement, etc.
Setback from road. Fences shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the edge of the road
(street) and shall not be located within legal highway rights-of-way.
Proximity to neighboring properties. All fences shall be located no closer than two feet from
adjacent property lines. This rule can be waived if agreed to in writing by adjacent property
owners.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 220/277
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
[Amended 4-15-1996 by L.L. No. 2-1996]
Fire hazard. Any fence considered to be flammable shall be prohibited. Also, any hazardous
fence shall not be allowed.
Finished sides. The finished sides of all fences must face adjacent properties. This rule can
be waived if agreed to in writing by adjacent property owners.
Materials. Only durable materials generally used and accepted by the industry shall be used
for fences.
Maintenance. All fences shall be maintained structurally and visually.
Preexisting fences. Fences in existence at the time of enactment of this chapter shall only be
subject to Subsection A(1), Exempt fencing, and Subsection A(8), Maintenance. However, any
fencing that is deemed to be a fire hazard shall be removed or replaced within six months from the
date of the adoption of this section.
§ 155-55. Towers and windmills.
Towers over 50 feet in height and windmills shall be allowed by special use permit in certain districts
after the following conditions have been considered for inclusion in the permit:
Location. Towers and windmills shall be set back from surrounding residential structures
sufficiently so as not to cause a nuisance, due to noise, appearance or other factors.
Buffer. The placement or retention of buffers shall be required where they would improve the
compatibility of the use with surrounding areas.
Attractive nuisance. The base of towers over 50 feet in height and windmills shall be sufficiently
protected from entry either by tower/windmill design or by protective fences, etc. Additionally, a
sign shall be conspicuously placed near the base of a communications tower and it shall generally
state that danger exists and that no access is permitted.
§ 155-55.1. Regulation of telecommunications facilities.
[Added 1-3-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
Legislative intent. The Village of Westfield recognizes the increased demand for wireless
communications transmitting facilities and the need for the services they provide. Often these
facilities require the construction of a communications tower and/or similar facilities. The intent of
this section is to regulate the location, construction and modification of these facilities in
accordance with sound land use planning by:
Minimizing adverse visual effects of towers and/or similar facilities through careful design,
siting and vegetative screening and/or buffering.
Avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure or falling debris through
engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
Maximizing use of any new and/or existing tower or existing building and/or structure to
reduce the number of towers and/or similar facilities needed in the Village.
Providing for the general health, safety and welfare of the Village by the regulation of these
facilities as such regulation is permitted under applicable federal and/or state law.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 221/277
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
Accommodating and allowing wireless service providers to meet their service objectives in a
manner consistent with these regulations and/or other applicable federal or state law.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A nonhabitable accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with a
communications tower and/or similar facility or antenna, and located on the same lot as the
communications tower or antenna. Examples of such structures include utility or transmission
equipment, storage sheds or cabinets.
ANTENNA
A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive radio frequency signals. Such
signals shall include but not be limited to radio, television, cellular, paging, personal wireless
communications services (PWCS) and microwave communications.
BOARD or VILLAGE BOARD
The Village Board of the Village of Westfield.
COLLOCATED ANTENNAS
Telecommunications facilities which utilize existing towers, buildings or other structures for
placement of antennas and do not require construction of a new tower.
FAA
The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC
The Federal Communications Commission.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Towers and/or antennas and accessory structures used in connection with the provision of
cellular telephone service, personal wireless communications services (PWCS), paging
services, radio and/or television broadcast services, microwave transmission and/or similar or
like broadcast services.
TOWER
A structure designed to support antennas. It includes, without limitation, freestanding towers,
guyed towers, monopoles and similar structures which do, or do not, employ camouflage
technology.
Telecommunications facility permit required.
No telecommunications facility shall be sited, located, constructed, erected, or modified,
without the issuance of a special use permit as prescribed by this section.
The Village Board is hereby authorized, after public notice and a hearing, to review and
approve, approve with modifications or disapprove special use permits pursuant to this
section. The Village Board shall have the authority to impose such reasonable restrictions and
conditions as are directly related to or incidental to the proposed antenna, tower or accessory
structures.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of the Zoning Code of the Village of Westfield,
towers and antennas shall be permitted and regulated only in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
General standards. No permit or renewal thereof or modification of the conditions of a current
permit relating to a telecommunications facility shall be authorized by the Village Board unless it
finds that such telecommunications facility or proposed modification thereto:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 222/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
Is necessary to meet current or expected demands for the services supported by the
telecommunications facility.
Conforms with all applicable regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications
Commission and/or any other applicable state or federal regulatory agency.
Is designed and constructed in a manner which minimizes its visual impact.
Complies with all other requirements of the Zoning Code of the Village, including this section.
Is the most appropriate site within the immediate area for the location of a
telecommunications facility, based upon the report required under § 155-55.1G(1)(c). It is
preferred that telecommunications facilities be collocated as provided in this section unless
the Village Board finds that collocation not to be appropriate under the circumstances.
Siting preferences. Consistent with the objectives set forth in § 155-55.1A hereof, a proposed
telecommunications facility shall be located in accordance with the following siting preferences,
from most favorable to least favorable, to the extent that there are commercially available
locations which are technically feasible and otherwise consistent with the standards of § 155-55.1:
Existing towers in low-density areas suitable for collocation.
Existing towers in high-density areas suitable for collocation.
Property in low-density areas with an existing structure suitable for location or collocation.
Property in high-density areas with an existing structure suitable for location or collocation.
Property owned by the Village of Westfield.
I-1: Industrial District.
B-2: Highway Business District.
AR-1: Agricultural District.
SI-1: Service Industrial District.
B-1: Business District.
Churches, when camouflaged on steeples or bell towers.
Residential districts, except R-1 Single-Family Districts.
Collocated antennas preferred.
The shared use of existing telecommunications facilities or other structures shall be preferred
to the construction of new such facilities. Any application for a telecommunications facility
permit or renewal thereof or modification of the conditions of a current telecommunications
facility permit shall include proof in accordance with § 155-55.1G(1)(c) that reasonable efforts
have been made to collocate with an existing telecommunications facility or upon an existing
structure.
Any proposed tower shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two
additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least one additional user if the
tower is over 60 feet in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of
antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 223/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(1)
G.
The applicant shall submit to the Village Board a letter of intent committing the applicant, and
his/her successors in interest, to negotiate in good faith for shared use of the proposed tower
by other personal wireless communications services (PWCS) providers in the future. Any
permit issued hereunder shall commit the new tower owner and its or his or her successors in
interest to:
Respond in a timely comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential
shared-use applicant.
Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the new tower by
other personal wireless communications services (PWCS).
Allow shared use of the new tower if another PWCS provider agrees in writing to pay
charges.
Make no more than a reasonable charge for shared use, based on generally accepted
accounting principles. The charge may include but is not limited to a pro rata share of the
cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site design,
construction and maintenance financing, return on equity and depreciation, and all of the
costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
In order to keep neighboring municipalities informed, and to facilitate the possibility of
directing that an existing tall structure or existing tower in a neighboring municipality be
considered for shared use, an applicant who proposes a new tower shall notify in writing the
legislative body of each municipality that borders the Village of Westfield as well as the
Chautauqua County Planning Board. Notification shall include the exact location of the
proposed tower and a general description of the project, including, but not limited to, the
height of the tower and its capacity for future shared use.
Special use permit application requirements.
All applicants for special use permits for telecommunications facilities towers and/or antennas
shall make a written application to the Village Board. This application shall include:
Tower special use permit application form, supplied by the Village.
Full environmental assessment form prepared in accordance with the State
Environmental Quality Review Act.
Visual environmental assessment form addendum prepared in accordance with the State
Environmental Quality Review Act.
Service area/inventory report for new towers.
The applicant shall provide a report which establishes to the satisfaction of the
Village Board that the applicant is required to provide service to locations which it is
not able to serve through existing facilities within a one mile search radius of the
proposed tower and which are located either within or outside of the Village. The
search radius may be reduced to 1/2 mile for towers under 100 feet and 1/4 mile for
towers under 60 feet. Said report shall show the specific locations and/or areas the
applicant is seeking to serve which cannot be served through existing facilities.
The report shall set forth an inventory of existing facilities and/or structures within or
outside of the Village which might be utilized or modified in order to provide
coverage to the locations applicant is seeking to service and include a report on the
possibilities and opportunities for a collocation as an alternative to a new site.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 224/277
[a]
[b]
[c]
[3]
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
(f)
(g)
(h)
The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Village Board that despite
good faith efforts, the proposed facility cannot be accommodated on any such
existing facility or structure either within or outside of the Village, due to one or more
of the following reasons:
The proposed equipment would exceed the existing and reasonable potential
structural capacity of existing facilities or structures within or outside of the
Village considering existing and planned use for those facilities or structures.
The existing or proposed equipment would cause interference with other
existing or proposed equipment which could not reasonably be mitigated or
prevented.
Said existing facilities or structures do not have space on which the proposed
equipment can be placed so it can function effectively and reasonably and/or
the applicant has not been able, following good faith efforts, to reach agreement
with the owner or owners of such facilities or structures.
Documentation of the notification required under § 155-55.1F(4).
A site plan is required for all new telecommunications facilities, except those to be
collocated or attached to a suitable existing structure and which otherwise comply with
the requirements of § 155-55.1. The site plan must be acceptable to the Village Planning
Board in form, content, scale and detail sufficient to show, at a minimum:
The exact location of the proposed tower, and appurtenances.
The maximum height of proposed tower.
A detail of tower type (monopole, free or other).
The color or colors of the tower.
The location, type and intensity of any lighting on the tower.
The property boundaries. (A copy of a property survey must also be provided.)
Proof of the landowner's consent and copy of any lease agreement if the applicant
will not own the property.
The location of all structures on the property and all structures on any adjacent
property within 50 feet of the property line, together with the distance of these
structures to the tower.
Names and addresses of adjacent land owners.
The location, nature and extent of any proposed fencing, landscaping or screening.
The location and nature of proposed utility easements and/or access roads, if
applicable.
Building elevations of accessory structures or immediately adjacent buildings.
"Before" and "after" propagation studies prepared by a qualified radio frequency engineer
demonstrating existing signal coverage contrasted with the proposed signal coverage
resulting from the proposed telecommunications facility.
A search ring prepared by a qualified radio frequency engineer and overlaid on an
appropriate background map demonstrating the area within which the
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 225/277
(i)
(j)
(k)
[1]
[2]
(l)
(m)
(2)
(1)
H.
telecommunications facility needs to be located in order to provide proper signal strength
and coverage to the target area or cell. The applicant must be prepared to explain to the
Board why it selected the proposed site, discuss the availability or lack of availability of a
suitable location within the search ring which would have allowed for collocated antennas
and to what extent the applicant explored locating the proposed tower in a more intensive
use district. Correspondence with other telecommunications companies concerning
collocation is part of this requirement.
The applicant must submit a copy of its policy regarding collocation of its proposed tower
with other potential applicants. Such policy should allow collocations if new antennas
and/or equipment do not or will not exceed structural loading requirements, interfere with
tower space use or pose any technical or radio frequency interference with existing
equipment.
A report prepared by a New York State licensed professional engineer, which describes
the tower's height and design, including a cross section of the structure; demonstrates
the tower's compliance with applicable structural standards; and describes the tower's
capacity, including the number and type of antennas it can accommodate. In the case of
an antenna or antennas mounted on an existing structure, the report shall indicate the
existing structure's suitability to accept the antenna and proposed method of affixing the
antenna to the structure. Complete details of all fixtures and couplings and the precise
point of attachment shall be indicated.
A written agreement by the applicant to remove the telecommunications facility if such
facility becomes technically obsolete or ceases to be used for its originally intended
purpose for 12 consecutive months.
Any applicant receiving a special use permit hereunder must, at the time of obtaining
such permit, provide:
A financial security bond to the Village of Westfield, as assignee, in accordance with
the requirements of § 155-55.1L(2); and
Evidence that liability insurance is in effect that covers damages and other losses
due to tower failure or other hazards related to the installation and use of said tower.
The Village Board reserves the right to request reasonable additional visual and aesthetic
information it deems appropriate on a case by case basis. Such additional information
may include, among other things, line-of-sight drawings and/or visual simulations.
The Village Board shall evaluate the application for a telecommunications tower special use
permit in accordance with the criteria and requirements established under this section and all
other applicable special use permit requirements under the Village Zoning Law. Any and all
grants of a special use permit for a telecommunications facility under this article shall be
nonassignable and nontransferable and shall not run with the land, notwithstanding anything
in the general zoning laws of the Village to the contrary.
Performance standards.
Compliance with federal requirements. The applicant must demonstrate in writing that the
telecommunications facility will be operated only at FCC-designated frequencies or power
levels and/or any applicable EPA technical exposure limits. The applicant further must provide
written certification from a New York State licensed professional engineer that the installation
of the antenna, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the radio
or television service enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties or with
public safety telecommunications.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 226/277
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(9)
Antenna safety. Antennas shall be subject to state and federal regulations pertaining to
nonionizing radiation and other health hazards related to such facilities. The owner shall
submit evidence of compliance with the FCC standards on a yearly basis. If new, more
restrictive standards are adopted, the antennas shall be made to comply or continued
operations may be restricted by the Village Board. The cost of verification of compliance shall
be borne by the owner and operator of the tower.
Tower lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted or marked except as required by the
Federal Aviation Administration, the Village or other applicable laws. If lighting is required, the
lighting design must minimize disturbance to the surrounding view. The towers shall be of a
nonreflective finish and the color subject to Village approval unless otherwise required by the
FAA. Any lighting which may be required by the FAA shall not consist of strobe lights, unless
specifically mandated by FAA.
Using any portion of a tower for signs other than for warning or equipment information is
prohibited.
Tower height limitations. All applicants must demonstrate that the height of the proposed
tower is the minimum necessary to meet the applicants' objectives and the standards and
requirements of § 155-55.1. The maximum height of a tower is limited to 150 feet above the
ground upon which the tower is placed, unless the applicant demonstrates in writing that a
higher tower is required to provide necessary coverage and will otherwise meet the standards
of § 155-55.1.
Tower building requirements.
The use of guyed towers is prohibited. Towers must be self-supporting without the use of
wires, cables, beams or other means. The design shall utilize an open framework or
monopole configuration. Permanent platforms or structures, exclusive of antennas, that
increase off-site visibility are prohibited. The Village Board may require only a monopole
tower if it determines that a monopole tower best meets the purpose and intent of this
section.
The base of the tower shall occupy no more than 500 square feet, and the top of the
tower shall be no wider than the base.
Towers must be located on a parcel that meets the minimum lot size requirements for the
zoning district in which the tower is to be located.
Minimum spacing between tower locations is 1/4 mile.
Access to towers. A road and parking area must be provided to assure adequate emergency
and service access. Maximum uses of existing roads, public or private, shall be made.
Setbacks for towers.
Telecommunications towers shall be set back from the lot lines a distance at least equal
to 120% of the height of the tower. Where an applicant proposes to locate a
telecommunications tower at a location consisting of multiple adjacent lots owned or
leased by the applicant, the term "lot line" shall mean the exterior boundaries of the
applicant's owned or leased property which adjoin property not owned or leased by the
applicant.
No telecommunications tower shall be located nearer than 500 feet or five times the
height of the tower, whichever is greater, to a residential building, school, place of public
worship or designated historic district or landmark.
Screening and security of towers and accessory structures.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 227/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
The base of the tower and any accessory structures shall be landscaped.
Towers and auxiliary structures shall be surrounded by a fence or wall at least eight feet
in height of a design approved by the Board so as to make intrusion difficult. Barbed wire
is not to be used in a residential area or on public property unless specifically permitted
by the Board. There shall be no permanent climbing pegs within 15 feet of the ground on
any tower or facility.
A sign shall be conspicuously located near the base of the telecommunications tower that
states that a danger exists and that no unauthorized access is permitted.
Design of antennas, towers and accessory structures. Towers and antennas shall be
designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and
camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by
federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. Every antenna and
tower shall be of neutral colors that are harmonious with, and that blend with, the natural
features, buildings and structures surrounding such antennas and structure; provided
however, that directional or panel antennas and omnidirectional or whip antennas located on
the exterior of a building that will also serve as an antenna tower shall be of colors that match,
and cause the antenna to blend with, the exterior of the building. Accessory structures will be
designed to be architecturally compatible with principal structures on the site.
Other requirements and conditions.
The Village Board may impose such other reasonable requirements or conditions to
ensure that the telecommunications facilities shall be located and buffered to the
maximum extent practicable and technologically feasible to maximize compatibility with
surrounding land uses and minimize any adverse aesthetic impact on neighboring
residents.
The Village Board may further impose any other reasonable requirements or conditions
to ensure that the public health, welfare and safety are protected.
Telecommunications facilities maintenance. All telecommunications facilities, both predating this
article and otherwise, shall fulfill the requirements of this section. The Village Zoning Enforcement
Officer and/or Building Inspector is empowered to enforce these regulations.
The sufficiency of the bond required by § 155-55.1G(1)(l)[1] shall be reevaluated at least
every five years by an analysis of the cost of removal and property restoration performed by a
licensed New York State professional engineer with the results to be communicated to the
Village Board. If the bond amount in force is insufficient to cover the removal cost, it shall be
immediately increased to cover such amount.
The owner and/or operator of the telecommunications facility shall have said facility inspected
at least every two years for structural integrity by a New York State licensed professional
engineer, and a copy of the inspection report submitted to the Village. If such report
recommends that repairs or maintenance are to be conducted, the permittee shall provide to
the Village Board a written schedule for the repairs or maintenance.
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in good order and repair, and all such
work shall comply with all applicable code requirements of any governmental body issuing
such rules and/or regulations.
Any additional antennas, reception or transmission devices or other similar receiving or
transmitting devices proposed for attachment to an existing facility shall require review in
accordance with this article. The intent of this requirement is to ensure the structural integrity,
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 228/277
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
K.
visual aesthetic and land use compatibility of communications towers upon which additional
antennas, reception or transmission devices are to be installed.
No outside storage of vehicles, materials or waste shall be allowed except for the limited
periods when the facility is undergoing construction, repair or maintenance.
Exemptions.
Amateur ham radio towers meeting the following requirements are exempt:
A tower not to exceed 70 feet from ground level for noncommercial private use by a
federally licensed amateur radio operator living on the same premises upon which the
tower is proposed to be located. Said tower shall be set back from all property lines by a
minimum distance equal to 35% of the tower height. The applicant shall submit such
information or certifications to the Zoning Enforcement Officer as may be necessary for
the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine if the safety and welfare of the
neighborhood properties is safeguarded. No lighting of signs shall be permitted on the
tower.
No tower shall be located in the area between the front line of the house and the street.
Towers shall be maintained by the property owner and/or operator in a safe condition and
good repair.
The tower shall be removed by the property owner within 90 days after expiration of the
operator's license.
The applicant for the tower shall submit to the Zoning Enforcement Officer such
information as shall be necessary to make any determinations.
Every antenna and tower shall be of neutral colors that are harmonious with and blend
with the natural features, buildings and structures surrounding the tower.
The Village Board shall have the right to waive or modify any provision of this § 155-55.1 for
facilities whose total height above ground does not exceed 35 feet or for good cause shown.
Costs of review.
[Amended 5-1-2006 by L.L. No. 3-2006[1]]
Upon application to the Village Board for a telecommunications facility, the applicant shall
deposit with the Village an escrow to cover costs incurred by the Village for all consultant
services related to the application, including, but not limited to, engineering, planning and
legal expenses, clerical costs incurred as the application is reviewed and processed, and any
expenses incurred by the Village for review of any environmental impact statements if the
action requires a positive declaration under SEQRA and its regulations.
The initial escrow deposit shall be $10,000, and shall be made to the Village Treasurer, who
shall place it in a separate interest-bearing account.
The application shall be considered incomplete until the escrow deposit is made, and no
review shall be taken by the Village Board, Planning Board, or consultants prior thereto.
If the escrow account balance falls below 20% of the initial deposit, the Village Board may, if
recommended by the consulting engineer, planner, or attorney, require that the applicant pay
additional funds into the escrow account up to 50% of the initial deposit, and, if the account
continues to be depleted below the twenty-percent level, to replenish the account up to 50%
of the initial deposit as often as needed thereafter.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 229/277
(a)
(b)
(5)
[1]
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
L.
M.
If the applicant withdraws his application during any stage of the review process or when the
application review and approval process is complete, the balance of the funds in the
applicant’s escrow account, together with any interest accrued thereon, shall either:
Be remitted to the applicant within 60 days of final action by the Village Board; or
If the applicant directs, remain on deposit as the applicant’s initial payment for any
postapproval inspection requirements.
Editor’s Note: This local law also provided that all applicants with matters pending before the
Village Board as of the effective date of this local law shall be required to deposit the initial escrow
of $10,000 within 15 days of the effective date of this local law, but such funds shall be used only
for expenses incurred after such effective date.
Removal of obsolete/unused facilities.
The applicant shall agree, in writing, to remove the tower or antennas if the
telecommunications facility becomes obsolete or ceases to be used for its intended purpose
for 12 consecutive months. Removal of such obsolete and/or unused towers shall take place
after 12 months of cessation of use. Such agreement shall also include a commitment by the
applicant to impose a similar obligation to remove any unused and/or obsolete tower or
antennas upon any person subsequently securing rights to collocate on the tower or
telecommunications facility.
Bond/security.
The applicant shall be required to execute and file with the Village Clerk a bond or other
form of security acceptable to the Village Board and Village Attorney as to form, content
and manner of execution, in an amount sufficient to ensure the faithful performance of
the terms and conditions of the permit or approval issued hereunder, for the observation
of all Village local laws or ordinances, to cover the maintenance of the tower during its
lifetime, and provide for the removal and restoration of the site subsequent to its removal.
The amount of the bond or security shall be no less than 125% of the cost of removal of
the tower and restoration of the site pursuant to a written estimate prepared by a licensed
New York State engineer to the applicant. Such estimate shall be subject to approval of
the Village Board and shall be reviewed and adjusted at five-year intervals.
In the event of default upon performance of such conditions or any of them, the bond or
security shall be forfeited to the Village of Westfield, which shall be entitled to maintain an
action thereon. The bond or security shall remain in full force and effect until the removal
of the transmission tower, telecommunications tower, communications installation,
freestanding tower, satellite dish, antenna, pole, accessory facility/structure and site
restoration.
The Village of Westfield, at its option, may cause the removal of any tower or antennas which
violate any provisions of this section or which become unsafe or hazardous as determined by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer or the Building Inspector of the Village of Westfield. Prior to
said removal, the Village shall cause at least seven days' notice to be served by certified mail
or personally or by any other method reasonably designed to give notice to the owner of the
tower or antenna that a violation exists or that the telecommunications facility is unsafe or
hazardous and that the Village intends to remove the tower or antenna and assess the entire
cost against the property owner upon which the antenna or tower is located and/or upon the
owner of the tower or antenna. The Village is authorized to petition the County Court or
Supreme Court through a special proceeding to obtain an order of removal and to assess the
entire cost thereof against the owner of the premises, which shall be assessed and collected
in the same manner as a Village tax.
Penalties for offenses.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 230/277
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
B.
This section is adopted pursuant to the zoning and planning powers granted to the Village of
Westfield under the Village Law of the State of New York and other applicable law, rule and
regulation. In the event of any violation of this section or any permit issued hereunder, the
Village may seek enforcement by any legal or equitable remedy.
Any applicant, upon receipt of a special use permit for telecommunications facilities, that fails
to comply with the requirements and/or conditions of that permit may have its permit revoked
and be ordered to remove the telecommunications facilities within 90 days of notification by
the Village of such violation.
Miscellaneous.
In the event of any conflict or inconsistencies between this section and any other provision of
the Village Zoning Law or other local law, ordinance, rule or regulation, the more restrictive
requirement shall apply.
The procedural requirements for a special use permit for a telecommunications facility shall
be as set forth in the Zoning Law for the Village of Westfield and the Village Law of the State
of New York.
Any decision to deny a request for authorization to place, construct or modify a
telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence
contained in a written record.
Local Law No. 3 of 2000 imposing a moratorium on telecommunications towers is hereby
repealed.
§ 155-56. Television dish antennas.
Purpose. Television dish antennas pose unique difficulties that cannot be properly and fully
addressed by the zoning section(s) regulating other types of television towers and antennas.
Aesthetic considerations. Television dish antennas are intrusive and incompatible elements
when installed in front yards which seriously impair the aesthetic qualities of residential
streets and properties.
Potential as attractive nuisance. Dish antennas in highly visible and accessible locations are
an attractive nuisance for small children, who might attempt to climb and play on them, and a
tempting target for vandals, particularly during dark hours.
Potential for weather-related injuries or damage. The size and construction of television dish
antennas, including the large surface area of the dishes, often render them subject to severe
wind loadings. A metal dish antenna could also pose an attraction for lightening strikes. This
section attempts to minimize the possibility that the improper placement and installation of
television dish antennas shall result in weather-related injuries to persons or damage to the
dishes or to adjacent structures and properties. Therefore, it is the intent and purpose of this
section to require that television dish antennas be located safely and inconspicuously on
private property within residential districts.
Location.
The same area standards as listed in Article IV of this chapter shall apply to television dish
antennas as they would for primary structures within the respective zoning districts. Consult
the appropriate area standards section of Article IV, District Regulations, for the zoning district
in which the dish antenna is, or is to be, located for the specific area standards to be applied.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 231/277
(2)
[1]
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Dish antennas shall not be located in a front yard and they shall be inconspicuously located in
relation to adjacent structures as is reasonably possible. The retailer installing a dish antenna
or an engineer/architect shall certify in writing that any installation involving the elevation of
any part of the dish antenna more than 15 feet above the ground has been accomplished in
accordance with industry standards and as such will withstand commonly experienced wind
conditions.
Advertising. For aesthetic purposes and to prevent a circumvention of the regulations in the
section on signs in this chapter,[1] no advertising shall be located on the television dish antenna.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 155-53, Signs.
§ 155-57. Solar systems.
In order to promote and protect the use of solar systems (active and passive) the following regulations
shall apply:
Solar permit and placement. The placement of structures or modification of existing structures
which are to contain solar systems shall be by special use permit if protection is to be sought
under Subsection B of this section. If no protection is sought for a solar system, then no permit
shall be required for the installation unless the floor space is increased. Consideration will be
given to locating the solar structure the furthest distance from adjoining properties, on the
southern exposure, which is reasonably possible. This distance shall be a minimum of 100 feet
and may be required to be more if the slope so dictates.
Adjacent property control. The placement of structures, trees, towers, etc., which have the
potential of blocking the sun from adjacent solar collectors established by special use permit under
Subsection A of this section shall also only be allowed by special use permit. The placement of
said potential obstructions shall be such that it least interferes with the adjacent solar collectors
while still allowing reasonable use of the land.
Notification. If protection is sought, owners of all properties within 200 feet of the property on
which the solar collector is to be placed will be notified in writing of the intent to place a solar
system in the neighborhood and the possible effects that this could have on future development.
The date, time and location of the public hearing shall be included in the notification.
§ 155-58. Toxic waste.
For the purpose of protecting present and future generations from the potentially harmful health and
safety effects of toxic materials, the following regulations shall apply to industries and business:
Local regulations. It shall be unlawful to maintain, store, bury or in any other way keep solid or
liquid wastes which are considered to be toxic or hazardous. However, toxic wastes which are the
results of a locally operated manufacturing process shall be permitted to be temporarily stored for
a reasonable period of time pending proper disposal, as determined by the Village Board.
State regulations. State and federal regulations shall be complied with.
Preexisting uses. This section shall apply to all preexisting industry/business.
§ 155-59. Newspaper tubes.
Newspaper tubes are not allowed within the public right-of-way in any district governed by this chapter.
§ 155-60. Junk vehicles.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 232/277
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
F.
(a)
(1)
A.
Purpose. It is the intent of this section to minimize safety, health and aesthetic-related problems by
limiting, according to district and lot size, the outdoor storage of junk vehicles.
Definition. A "junk vehicle" is any vehicle no longer intended nor in a condition for legal use on
public highways. Also, for the purposes of this chapter, any vehicle which remains unregistered
and is not within an enclosed building for six months or greater shall be considered to be a junk
vehicle. Vehicles utilized for agricultural purposes shall not be considered to be junk vehicles.
Number of vehicles. The number of junk vehicles that may be allowed to be maintained outdoors
shall be based on the following table:
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
District Number of Junk Vehicles Allowed
R-1 0
R-2 0
R-3 0
AR-1 1
B-1 0
B-2 0
I-1 1
I-2 0
SI-1 1
Location of vehicles. Junk vehicles shall be stored out of sight as viewed from adjacent properties
and roadways.
Restoration of vehicle outdoors. Sustained progress in restoring or repairing a vehicle to
operational condition shall be allowed under the following conditions, and said vehicle shall not
constitute a junk vehicle:
A maximum of one vehicle shall be allowed for restoration, with a maximum of three vehicles
allowed.
The entire restoration shall take a reasonable time to accomplish.
Such vehicles shall be located so as to make the least nuisance possible.
Noise associated with the restoration shall be limited to reasonable hours.
Restoration shall be for personal use and not for profit.
Preexisting junk vehicles. Where more than the maximum number of junk vehicles are present at
the time of enactment of this chapter, a maximum of six months shall be allowed for the owner to
come into compliance with this section.
§ 155-61. Vehicle dismantling, scrap and junk yards.
Conditions. Prior to the granting of a special use permit, assurances will be received that the
following conditions will be met:
Fences.
Yards shall be completely surrounded with a fence for screening and security purposes of
at least eight feet in height.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 233/277
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(6)
(7)
There shall be located a gate in the fence which shall be kept locked at all times except
when the vehicle dismantling or scrap yard is in operation.
The fence shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from adjacent public highways.
All dismantling and work on the vehicles or scrap shall take place within the fenced area.
The type of materials used shall be generally accepted by the industry and commonly
used as fencing material. Fences shall be permanent and substantial.
Fences shall obscure or screen, adequately, the contents of the yard.
Fences shall be well maintained and aesthetically pleasing.
Location considerations.
Yards shall only be allowed in the Industrial District.
Yards shall be allowed where there will be a minimum negative effect on the character of
existing neighborhoods.
No yard shall be permitted within 500 feet of a church, school, public building or other
place of public assembly.
Yards shall not be permitted to be located upon areas where an eight-foot fence will not
reasonably screen the contents from adjacent highways or properties.
Off-street parking. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for customers.
Firesafety.
The Fire Inspector shall be notified prior to the granting of a special use permit for a yard
and be given 30 days within which to make recommendations.
Inside, adjacent to and contiguous with the fence, a strip of land at least 10 feet wide
shall be kept clear of all dry grass or other growth or combustible material so as to
provide a fire lane around the whole area.
There shall be maintained at least one fire extinguisher of approved design and capacity
for each 40,000 square feet of area. Each fire extinguisher shall be hung or mounted in a
conspicuous place, clearly marked and visible.
All vehicles and scrap and junk shall be disassembled by means other than burning. It
shall be arranged in neat rows so as to permit easy, clear passage through the area.
Visual considerations.
There shall be no stacking of vehicles, scrap or junk above eight feet in height from the
ground. However, vehicles and scrap which have been crushed may be loaded onto the
bed of a truck where it will be removed from the premises within a reasonable time
period.
An appropriate buffer shall be established between adjacent properties.
Minimum lot size. Adequate acreage shall be available to handle present and future needs of
proposed yards.
Other considerations.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 234/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(1)
B.
Suitable sanitary facilities shall be provided in accordance with state health laws.
Inspection of yards shall be allowed at any reasonable time to ensure compliance with
this and other laws.
Reasonable hours of operation may be specified.
Other reasonable conditions may be imposed as deemed necessary.
Preexisting yards. Yards in existence before the enactment of this chapter shall be subject to the
following: Subsection A(1)(a), regarding fences and gates, and Subsection A(1)(c), with the
exception that the minimum distance is 25 feet and not 50 feet; Subsection A(1)(d), on location;
and Subsection A(5), Visual considerations. Compliance shall take place within a six-month period
of time from the date of the adoption of this chapter. In addition, any expansion or enlargement of
any preexisting yards shall be subject to all of the regulations of this chapter when they can be
reasonably enforced as determined by the Municipal Board.
§ 155-62. Trash storage.
"Trash," for the purposes of this chapter, shall consist of glass, scrap wood, scrap metals, salvaged
metals, rags, refuse, garbage, wastepaper, salvaged machines, salvaged appliances or similar
materials which are prepared for disposal.
Conditions for temporary storage.
Quantity. Trash may be temporarily stored or collected in covered containers other than
dumpsters if the aggregate collection does not exceed 100 square feet in area.
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Location. Trash must be stored in one contiguous location. All spaces between buildings and
structures shall be kept sufficiently free and clear of materials of every nature for the purpose
of providing adequate light, air and protection against fire.
Buffer. Trash shall be located so as to be not visible from adjacent properties, and roadways
or artificial barriers (e.g., fences, shrubs, etc.) shall be used to screen the trash.
Disposal. Trash shall be stored only as long as necessary and shall be disposed of in a timely
manner not to exceed 60 days.
Preexisting trash. These conditions shall apply to all trash existing at the time of enactment of
this chapter.
Dumpsters. No dumpster shall be permitted in the Village of Westfield, subject to the following
exceptions and conditions.
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 2-2010]
Exceptions:
Use exceptions. Dumpsters may be placed on the following properties after having
obtained a special use permit:
Multifamily residences, which for purposes of this section shall be defined as a single
building containing five or more separate apartments or dwelling units.
Places of public assembly, including churches and schools.
Business properties and/or commercial properties.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 235/277
(b)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
A.
(1)
(a)
(2)
B.
Temporary construction dumpsters, for which the property owner and/or contractor shall
obtain a temporary dumpster permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Such permit
shall be valid for 60 days from the date of issuance and may be renewed up to two times
for the same term upon a showing that work on the project is continuing and a dumpster
is required to complete it
Special use permit.
Procedure. The Planning Board shall consider an application for a dumpster special use
permit using the procedure set out in § 155-100, including a public hearing.
General standards. In reviewing an application for a special use permit, the Planning
Board shall take into consideration whether the proposed dumpster meets the following
standards:
Location. Dumpsters shall be located to the side and rear of the property to the
greatest extent practicable yet so as to still comply with applicable side and rear yard
setbacks.
Screening. Dumpsters shall be screened from view of any abutting residence, public
street or walkway to the greatest extent practicable with screening that is at least as
tall as the dumpster.
Covers. Dumpsters shall be equipped with covers or lids, maintained in working
order, that shelter and secure their contents.
Waiver. The Planning Board may take into account the site conditions at the particular
property and waive strict compliance herewith as circumstances warrant and/or impose
reasonable conditions to effectuate the intent of this section to minimize the visibility of
such dumpster.
Preexisting dumpsters.
Dumpsters in place at the time of the enactment of this Subsection B and not in
compliance herewith shall be brought into compliance by June 1, 2010.
Preexisting dumpsters qualifying for special use permits at the time of the enactment of
this subsection shall be exempt from any special use permit fees until June 1, 2010.
§ 155-63. Heavy vehicles.
[Amended 7-10-2006 by L.L. No. 4-2006]
Definition. “Heavy vehicles” shall mean licensed or unlicensed automobile wreckers, commercial
trailers, semi-trailers, tractor trailers, tractors (a truck with a cab and chassis only that may be
used to haul detachable trailers), backhoes, front loaders, loaders, bulldozers, dozers or any other
large vehicle or truck or piece of equipment that is in excess of 13,500 pounds GVW (gross
vehicle weight).
Regulations. Heavy vehicles shall comply with the following regulations:
Location. Heavy vehicles shall not be allowed to park in any residential district.
Location waivers.
In an emergency (e.g., truck breakdown) or for normal deliveries, the location
requirements in Subsection B(1) shall be waived for a maximum of 48 hours.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 236/277
(b)
C.
D.
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Heavy vehicles associated with commercial farm operations shall be allowed on a
temporary basis (not to exceed seven consecutive days).
Preexisting heavy vehicles. This section shall apply to all heavy vehicles immediately, including
those that have, in the past, been parked in such a manner so as not to be in compliance with this
section.
Enforcement. The Village and Town Inspection Officer (Building and Code Enforcement Officer)
and the Westfield Police Department shall be equally responsible for enforcement of this provision
of the Zoning Code.
§ 155-64. Large group gatherings.
Purpose. In order to promote safe and healthy gatherings of large groups of people, as defined in
the definition section,[1] certain conditions shall be complied with as defined below.
Editor's Note: See § 155-6, Definitions.
Conditions. Prior to the granting of a special use permit, the following will be taken into
consideration:
Traffic safety, parking and access.
Noise.
Health and sanitation.
Character of neighborhood and development density.
Beverages to be served.
Security and traffic control.
Cleanup and restoration of land.
Other appropriate considerations.
Sponsor responsibility. The sponsor of any large group gathering shall be responsible for
compliance with any conditions which are specifically imposed as well as the overall conduct of
the gathering.
Exempt gatherings. Nonprofit and local civic group-sponsored gatherings shall be exempt from
permit requirements, including the Arts and Crafts Festival, baseball and softball games and all
events staged through the Westfield Academy and Central School.
Preexisting uses. All gatherings held after the effective date of this chapter shall be subject to this
section.
§ 155-65. Animals, poultry and birds.
[Amended 7-21-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
The keeping of animals, poultry and birds of any type shall be regulated in the following manner:
Commercial operations prohibited. Animals, poultry or birds shall not be raised or kept for resale
purposes and shall only be kept for recreational purposes or for home consumption by the owner
thereof.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 237/277
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
A.
Animals, poultry and birds which create a nuisance due to noise or odor or may be considered an
imminent danger to human health, life or safety shall be prohibited.
The keeping of wild animals, rodents, reptiles or insects which create a nuisance due to odor or
noise or which may be generally considered a threat to health, life and safety shall be prohibited.
Poultry and birds. Poultry and birds may be kept within the Village in all districts except the
industrial and business districts, subject to the following conditions:
[Amended 6-18-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
The keeping of any poultry, bird or birds shall be allowed only after obtaining a special use
permit from the Planning Board.
All poultry and birds shall be kept within completely enclosed and weathertight structures,
such as barns. Such structures shall be placed no closer than 50 feet to any adjoining
property line or boundary line, nor any closer than 50 feet to any residential structure. Poultry
and birds shall be prohibited upon any open area of the premises.
Farm animals. Except for horses, those animals generally considered "farm animals," such as
pigs, goats, sheep, etc., shall be contained within and limited to Agriculture-Residential Districts.
Farm animals shall be fenced so as to be unable to come within 50 feet of any adjoining property
line, boundary line or residential structure.
Horses. The maximum number of horses allowed shall be one horse per acre of usable pasture.
"Usable pasture" shall be defined as completely open space without buildings, storage areas or
other obstruction used solely for the pasture and grazing of horses. Horses shall be fenced so as
to be unable to come within 50 feet of any residential structure, or within 10 feet of any adjoining
property line or boundary line.
Barns and shelters. Suitable barns and shelters shall be provided on-premises for the overnight
keeping of all horses and farm animals. All such barns and shelters shall be completely enclosed
and weather tight.
Preexisting animals, poultry and birds. The keeping of animals, poultry and birds or other
creatures that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming
uses. Preexisting nonconforming uses shall be allowed to continue for one year after enactment of
this chapter, § 155-65. After one year, any nonconforming use shall become an unlawful use and
shall be immediately terminated.
Pet stores. Pet store businesses shall be allowed to operate only in designated B-1 Districts as a
use by right. Pet stores may be allowed to operate in B-2 Districts after first obtaining a special
use permit from the Village Board in accordance with § 155-100 of this chapter. The sale or
keeping of animals or birds or reptiles for commercial purposes in any other district is strictly
prohibited. All animals, birds and reptiles shall be kept within completely enclosed buildings and
within such buildings shall be contained within proper and appropriate enclosures such as cages
and aquariums so as to prevent unauthorized handling and the potential danger of attack, the
spread of disease or other hazardous situations.
§ 155-66. Mobile home parks.
License required.
All mobile home parks existing at the time of this chapter shall be licensed regardless of
conformance to the zoning district regulations contained herein, but no mobile home park
shall be created or enlarged or newly licensed unless in conformance with this section. Such
licenses shall be issued for a period of three years and shall be renewable for an unlimited
number of additional three-year periods. No license shall be issued until the Village Board has
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 238/277
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
approved a site plan therefor in accordance with the provisions of this section. No license
shall be renewed or remain in force unless the provisions and conditions of such approved
site plan are continuously satisfied. The renewal application need not be accompanied by the
site plan unless changes subsequent to the latest issuance have been made to it. Any person
holding a license for a mobile home park and desiring to add additional lots shall file an
application for a supplemental license. The application for such supplemental license shall be
accompanied by a site plan for the additional lots and meet all other specifications of this
chapter. A supplemental license shall be effective from the day of issuance and run
concurrently with the original license.
In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, the following requirements shall be met for
all mobile homes within mobile home parks:
All mobile home sites shall be accessible from a service roadway not less than 20 feet in
width. Roadways shall be surfaced with a hard all-weather surface. Except in cases of
emergency, no parking shall be allowed in such roadways.
All mobile home sites shall be provided with permanent anchors sufficient to anchor a
mobile home, and any mobile home placed on that site shall be so anchored.
Mobile homes containing less than 500 square feet of floor area shall be anchored
and located on foundations by means of at least four frame ties and at least two
over-the-top ties, each tie to be securely anchored to the ground sufficient to
withstand a force of 4,800 pounds without failure.
Mobile homes containing 500 square feet or more of floor area shall be anchored
and located on foundations by means of at least five frame ties and at least three
over-the-top ties, each tie to be securely anchored to the ground sufficient to
withstand a force of 4,800 pounds without failure.
Ties shall consist of a galvanized steel cable at least 1.5 inch by zero and 0.35 inch
or 7/32 inch seven by seven or 0.25 inch seven by 19. Frame ties shall connect the
steel beam supporting the structure to the anchors. Over-the-top ties shall be
anchored on both sides of the unit.
Whenever a mobile home has been constructed with concealed tie-down straps or
frame connections, such straps or connections may be used, however they must be
of the same number and strength as otherwise required by this section.
All mobile home sites shall be so located so as to provide a minimum distance of at least
25 feet between a mobile home located thereon and any part of any adjacent mobile
home or service roadway.
Every mobile home park shall provide a pond, tank or other suitable water storage of a
capacity of a least 30,000 gallons plus 2,000 gallons for every mobile home in excess of
20, said facility to be provided with a dry hydrant of suitable construction approved by the
local Fire Chief. Such hydrant shall be located within 10 feet of and be readily accessible
from a service roadway. No mobile homes shall be located more than 1,500 feet from a
fire hydrant provided under this subsection.
Every mobile home site shall be provided with its own sewer, water and electrical service,
and any occupied mobile home located thereon shall be connected to such utilities.
All sewer and water facilities shall be approved by the New York State Health Department
or Department of Environmental Conservation as required by state law.
Only one mobile home shall be permitted to occupy any one mobile home lot.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 239/277
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
Service buildings may be provided as deemed necessary for the normal operation of a mobile
home park. Such buildings shall be maintained by the owner or manager of the park in a
clean, sightly and sanitary condition.
Conditions. Mobile home parks shall be allowed by special use permit within the I-2 District if the
applicant is able to meet general special use permit conditions as well as the following specific
conditions:
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Area and setback requirements.
Size. Parks shall consist of a minimum of eight acres and shall be designed for a
minimum of 30 lots.
Buffer. All site plans for mobile home parks shall include the location and size of existing
trees to be preserved in the construction of the mobile home park. A landscaped buffer
strip at least 20 feet in width shall be installed along every boundary of a mobile home
park, said buffer strip to be included within the required yard along such boundaries.
Such landscape buffer shall be planted and maintained with nondeciduous or evergreen
plants, shrubs and trees to provide a visual and wind screen. Also, lawn and ground
cover shall be provided on those areas not used for the placement of mobile homes and
other buildings, walkways, roads and parking areas.
Setback. All mobile homes and other development shall be located a minimum of 100
feet from the edge of any public road. Mobile homes shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from the edge of park's private road.
Lot. Each mobile home shall be located on a lot which is a minimum of 6,000 square feet
and a minimum of 50 feet in width.
Floor space. The minimum floor space allowed for a mobile home placed in a mobile
home park shall be 700 square feet. Add-ons shall not be used in calculating the size.
Streets and walkways.
Entrances and exits to the park shall be safely designed.
Private roadways shall be maintained in such a manner so as to permit safe travel (e.g.,
free of snow and ruts).
Walkways from the street to the door shall be recommended in addition to a patio for
each mobile home.
Parking.
Off-street parking shall be provided with a minimum of 400 square feet for each mobile
home.
Sufficient auxiliary parking shall be provided for trucks, boats, travel trailers, etc.
Recreation. Open recreational areas shall be set aside and improved at central locations at a
standard of 400 square feet per mobile home. They shall be maintained in a manner
conducive to recreational use.
Skirting. Mobile homes shall be skirted with an attractive fire resistant material within three
months of time of setup.
Bond. At the discretion of the Village Board, the developer may be required to obtain an
appropriate bond to insure compliance with conditions attached to the special use permit.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 240/277
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
D.
Review. The Planning Board shall be notified of the request for a mobile home park permit and
shall have the opportunity to make a recommendation within 30 days.
Preexisting parks. Mobile home parks in existence before the enactment of this chapter shall be
subject to the following regulations:
Mobile homes shall be skirted with an attractive, fire resistant material within one year.
Enlargements or expansions of all mobile home parks in existence before the enactment of
this chapter shall comply with all regulations in this chapter to the extent determined by the
Village Board.
§ 155-67. Temporary mobile dwelling units.
Definition. See § 155-6.
Inhabitation time. Travel trailers may be inhabited by nonrenters on a temporary basis in
accordance with the following table. No permit or fees are required unless the number of
inhabitation days desired is greater than that specified, in which case the applicant must secure a
special use permit.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
District Maximum Number of Days Inhabited Per Time Period
R-1 14 days during any 2-month period
R-2 14 days during any 2-month period
R-3 14 days during any 2-month period
B-1 14 days during any 2-month period
B-2 14 days during any 2-month period
I-1 14 days during any 2-month period
I-2 14 days during any 2-month period
SI-1 14 days during any 2-month period
AR-1 30 days during any 2-month period
Conditions.
To be inhabited, the accessory temporary dwelling must be located on a lot which contains an
inhabited principal dwelling unit.
An accessory dwelling may be stored (uninhabited) on any lot indefinitely.
All required setbacks and area requirements shall be met.
It is intended that accessory dwellings be inhabited by visitors/guests and not by residents of
the principal dwelling unit. Accessory dwellings shall not be rented.
Accessory dwellings shall not be connected to permanent sewage/water facilities.
Accessory dwellings may not be utilized in such a manner so as to cause a nuisance.
Contractors may use accessory dwellings for field offices at the site of construction after
obtaining a permit.
Seasonal camp. In districts where seasonal camps are allowed, accessory dwelling(s) may be
utilized as the principal structure up to 250 days in any twelve-month period. All Health
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 241/277
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Department rules must be complied with.
§ 155-68. Recreational vehicle or trailer storage.
Number. A maximum of three recreational vehicles, trailers or other similar vehicles may be stored
outside on each parcel or series of contiguous parcels under single ownership. No more than one
type of each vehicle shall be allowed to be stored.
Location. All recreational vehicles/trailers, etc., shall be stored in rear yards whenever it is possible
and otherwise in a side yard. Said vehicles/trailers shall not be stored in a front yard. All area and
setback requirements of the district in which the vehicle is stored shall be met.
Preexisting vehicles. All vehicles covered by this section shall be subject to the regulations of this
section one year from the date of enactment of this chapter.
§ 155-69. Cellar holes; wells; fuel tank; waste.
Within six months or as determined by site plan review as applicable after work or any excavation
for a building has begun, such excavation shall be covered over or refilled by the owner to the
normal grade. Any building substantially destroyed from any cause or rendered incapable of its
intended use shall be rebuilt or demolished within six months or as determined by site plan review
by the Village Board as applicable. Any excavation or cellar hole four feet or more in depth
remaining after the demolition or destruction of a building from any cause or any abandoned well
shall be immediately protected by visible, substantial, childproof barriers and then permanently
covered over or filled by the owner within one day. In the case of a natural disaster, i.e., fire, the
time limit of this section may be waived at the discretion of the local Fire Chief in coordination with
the Zoning Officer.
Any construction requiring a permit must be completed within two years from the date the permit
was granted or the date construction started, whichever is less.
All removal of aboveground and underground tanks shall be done in accordance with current New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation and United States Environmental
Protection Agency requirements.
§ 155-70. Dumping.
Dumping of refuse or waste materials is absolutely prohibited in all districts within the Village except for
the purpose of filling to established grades, for which, if not part of development requiring the Planning
Board to conduct site plan review, a special use permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
§ 155-71. Storage of flammable liquid; liquefied petroleum gas
tanks.
Wherever any flammable liquid is stored aboveground in tanks or other containers with a total
capacity of greater than 550 gallons, such tanks or containers shall be located within earthen
dikes having a capacity 2/3 of the capacity of the largest tanks or containers being surrounded.
The edge of such dikes shall be located at least 100 feet from all property lines.
Regarding the placement and storage of any liquefied petroleum gas tanks, the provisions of
NFPA No. 58, current edition, shall be in effect. Wherever any liquefied petroleum gas is stored
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 242/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
above or below ground in tanks or other containers, the following minimum distances from all
buildings and lot lines shall be required for the sum total of the capacity of all tanks and containers
that are present:
Total Capacity
(gallons water capacity) Minimum Distance
Under 125 0 feet
125 to 500 10 feet
Over 2,000 Not allowed within the limits of the Village of Westfield
§ 155-72. Mining operations.
The following requirements are in addition to all current applicable requirements for a mining permit
issued by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and the Village Board:
All mining operators must apply for a mining permit. In addition, a plan must be submitted for the
reuse of the land after completion of mining operations and a statement of intent on the part of the
owner or operator that said plan will be completed in less than one year after mining operations
have ceased. No permit shall be issued until the Village Planning Board has recommended
approval of all supporting materials and the reuse plan. A mining permit is not required for the
following:
Any excavation which is undertaken to prepare for construction. To qualify for this exemption
there shall be no removal of mined material from said premises for the purpose of sale, and
construction shall be scheduled to begin immediately upon completion of the excavation.
Grading cuts and fills shown on any approved site plan.
Wells for the purpose of providing drinking or agricultural water supplies.
Removal of trees, topsoil or other earth incidental to the business of operating a nursery or
farm.
Excavation or removal of sand, gravel, stone, trees or other minerals or materials incidental to
highway, sidewalk or driveway construction upon the same premises.
The moving of trees, topsoil or other earth, sand or gravel from one part to another of the
same premises as an incident to construction of a building, to farming or to landscaping.
Application for a mining permit shall be made on forms provided by the Zoning Officer and shall be
accompanied by drawings and other supporting materials as follows:
The location of the operation, with distances to property lines and to all buildings, streets or
other existing improvements within 100 feet of such property lines.
The approximate yield anticipated from the operation, estimated either in terms of gallons or
cubic yards per day and the estimated drilling or excavation depth.
The location of all access roads, buildings and structures to be used in the operation of such
facility.
Such additional information as may be required by the Village Planning Board for approval.
In reviewing any permit required under this section, the Village Board may require that a bond be
provided by the owner of the property of sufficient amount to permit the Village to restore the site
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 243/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
to stable slopes and adequate ground cover sufficient to prevent erosion and land or rock slides
and to remove any hazard to public safety should the owner thereof fail to do so.
The required reuse plan shall contain the following:
A description of how all topsoil will be removed, stored and returned to the site at the
completion of the mining operation.
A description of the methods that will be used to return fertility to the topsoil and to seed, the
extent of planting and landscaping that will be completed and an estimate as to the date of
the completion of the restoration.
After completion of excavating or stripping, the property grades shall be finished off consistent
with bordering land, and topsoil replaced to a natural depth consistent with topsoil native to
the site.
The finished grade shall form an appropriate part of the natural drainage area or some
positive drainage system.
Such additional information as may be required by the Village Planning Board.
The mining permit, after issuance, is renewable annually at the discretion of the Village Board
upon request of the owner of the mining operation at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of
said permit. However, no permit shall be renewed unless the provisions of this chapter are
continuously satisfied. If a mining permit is not renewed on its anniversary date by the Village
Board, the owner of the mining operation at the discretion of the Village Board must file a new
application for a permit with the Village Board.
The owner of any mining operation which is adjacent to occupied residential property shall, upon
request of the adjoining owner or occupant or Village Board, provide the proper fencing or
screening to prohibit access from the residential property to the property being mined, to make all
reasonable efforts to eliminate direct visual contact between the first floor area and the lawn area
of the residence and the area where the excavation is to take place. Fencing can also be required
by the Village Board where there is a showing of steep and dangerous conditions due to said
mining.
Where topsoil is removed, this chapter shall require that the soil capable of being cultivated shall
be set aside for respreading over the excavation area when the mining operation is completed.
The site shall be kept free of debris. Cleared trees, stumps, brush, etc., shall be removed. The site
shall not be used for storage of trash or unused equipment.
§ 155-73. Emergency medical heliport.
A special use permit may be issued hereunder only in connection with and as an emergency
service to a hospital.
No special use permit shall be issued by the Village Board until:
The applicant shall have complied with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to
the granting of permission to establish a helicopter landing area or heliport.
The applicant has received favorable airspace determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration and a copy has been submitted to the New York State Commissioner of
Transportation and to the Village Clerk.
The applicant has submitted an application in triplicate to the Village Clerk showing:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 244/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
That it is a duly licensed hospital, furnishing the name and address of its executive officer
and the members of the governing board.
That the establishment of a heliport is essential for the emergency treatment of patients
and the improvement of lifesaving conditions.
The type of helicopter activities proposed, the anticipated number and frequency of daily
operations and the anticipated total annual operations.
A survey map certified by a state-licensed surveyor or engineer showing the exact
location of the proposed helipad and its relation to the hospital and neighboring buildings
including those located on parcels having a common boundary with the parcel on which
the proposed heliport will be located, flight patterns, etc.
That it has complied with all the requirements of Section 75.3 of the Regulations of the
New York State Commissioner of Transportation issued pursuant to § 249 of the New
York General Business Law.
Information regarding the ownership of the land on which the heliport is to be located.
Information regarding the proposed lighting of the heliport, the public liability insurance to
be carried, whether a system of radio communication between the hospital and a
helicopter in flight will be maintained, what plans, if any, the applicant has to minimize
noise and to assure the safety of persons and property within its flight patterns.
A SEQR determination shall have been completed in addition to referral of the applicant to the
County Planning Board in accordance with § 155-93 of this chapter.
A public hearing shall have been held with prior notice given as required by § 155-77F of this
chapter in addition to the general notice by publication of the hearing to be held. The provision
of § 155-100 for the granting of a special use permit shall apply.
§ 155-74. Bed-and-breakfast.
[Amended 10-30-1995 by L.L. No. 5-1995; 6-18-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
A special use permit may be granted by the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of Article XI of
this chapter for applications pertaining to any of the zoning districts indicated, subject to the following
conditions and limitations in addition to those required pursuant to § 155-100.
An application for special use permit shall be accompanied by a fee as provided from time to time
by resolution of the Village Board. The special use permit may be issued only after public hearing
and upon determination that the proposed use is in compliance with the conditions and limitations
set forth pursuant to this section. A permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed two years and
may be revoked at any time by the Planning Board upon a finding of noncompliance with the
conditions set forth in this section or in the permit. A renewal permit may be issued without fee for
a period not to exceed two years.
The applicant for a special use permit shall submit to the Planning Board such plans of the
structure and layout of the residence as the Planning Board deems necessary to determine that
the bed-and-breakfast use complies with this section and § 155-100.
The applicant shall obtain and submit to the Planning Board statements from the Village Fire and
Building Code Inspector on the adequacy of the premises for the purposes intended and in
compliance with the Uniform Fire and Building Code for safety, fire protection and structural
soundness. Such statements shall include recommendations, if any, for improvements or changes
deemed advisable, which will be considered by the Planning Board in determining the merits of
the application.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 245/277
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
F.
A.
The applicant shall be the owner of the single-family dwelling, and the dwelling shall be the fulltime
residence of the applicant, except within a Mixed-Use District.
Parking. Convenient off-street parking shall be available at the rate of one space per proposed
bed-and-breakfast bedroom, plus parking spaces for cars of the owner's family. These spaces
shall be located beyond the minimum front yard setback line. Natural or artificial buffers may be
required as necessary by the Planning Board.
No more than 10 guests per night shall be permitted in any bed-and-breakfast establishment, and
the Planning Board may fix a lower maximum in the permit. No paying guest shall stay on any one
visit for more than seven days. The permit may require that a register of paying guests be
maintained and available for inspection.
The only meal to be furnished shall be one daily morning meal per paying guest.
A sign designating a residence as a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall not exceed three
square feet and must comply with all other regulations for signs as stated in § 155-53 of this
chapter. In addition, all signs shall be affixed to the house.
Any new owner of the residence in which a bed-and-breakfast establishment is authorized and
operating must apply to the Planning Board for a new special use permit to continue use as a bedand-
breakfast establishment.
§ 155-75. Seasonal Christmas tree sales.
[Added 10-17-1994 by L.L. No. 3-1994]
Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, "Christmas tree sales" shall consist of fresh-cut trees,
wreaths, garlands, etc., made from greens.
Frequency. Sales shall be limited to the thirty-day period immediately preceding Christmas.
Signs. Signs shall be subject to the provisions as set forth in § 155-53C(3)(e).
Fees. No fee shall be charged for Christmas tree sales. However, permits (household sale permit)
are required with application therefor secured a minimum of one day prior to commencement of
sales.
Regulations. All Christmas tree sales shall comply with the following:
Safe entry, exit and parking.
Hours of operation which are compatible with the neighborhood.
Exempt sales. All public or civic nonprofit organization shall be exempt from requirements of this
section.
§ 155-75.1. Adult uses.
[Added 5-15-2006 by L.L. No. 2-2006]
Purpose. The Village and Town of Westfield have conducted a joint study of the potential
secondary affects posed by adult businesses. This study, along with other similar studies, has
shown that buildings and establishments operated as adult uses pose secondary effects that are
detrimental and harmful to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of a community. In order
to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the Village of
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 246/277
[1]
[2]
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
Westfield, this section is intended to control those secondary effects by restricting adult
businesses to areas of the Village that have a limited number of sensitive uses as identified in the
study, particularly residential areas, and otherwise regulating their operation.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT
A commercial establishment, including but not limited to an adult bookstore, adult eating or
drinking establishment, adult theater, adult motel, massage establishment, nude model studio
or other adult commercial establishment, or any combination thereof, as defined below:
ADULT BOOKSTORE
A store which has as a substantial portion (equal to or greater than 25%) of its stockin-
trade and/or floor area as hereinafter defined in any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter which is characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
Photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
For the purpose of determining whether a substantial portion (equal to or greater
than 25%) of an establishment includes an adult bookstore, the following factors
shall be considered:
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers and
allocated to such uses; and
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers and
allocated to such uses as compared to the total floor area and cellar space
accessible to customers in the establishment.
For the purpose of determining whether a store has a substantial portion (equal to or
greater than 25%) of its stock in materials defined in Subsection (1)(a)[1] or [2]
hereof, the following factors shall be considered:
The amount of stock accessible to customers as compared to the total stock
accessible to customers in the establishment;
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers containing
such stock; and
The amount of floor area and cellar space accessible to customers containing
such stock as compared to the total floor area and cellar space accessible to
customers in the establishment.
ADULT EATING OR DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT
An eating or drinking establishment which regularly features any one or more of the
following:
Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which
are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 247/277
(c)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
Employees who as part of their employment, regularly expose to patrons specified
anatomical areas, and which is not customarily opened to the general public during
such features because it excludes minors by reason of age.
ADULT THEATER
A theater which regularly features one or more of the following:
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which
are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
Live performances which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, and which is
not customarily opened to the general public during such features because it
excludes minors.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
Any business where body rubs, body shampoos, massages or similar services are
administered. This definition shall not include persons licensed or authorized pursuant to
Article 155 of the Education Law, or specifically exempt from Article 155 of the Education
Law (see Education Law § 7800, et seq.). This definition shall not be construed to include
a hospital, nursing home or medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon,
chiropractor, osteopath or duly licensed physical therapist or barbershops or beauty
salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders.
This definition also shall exclude health clubs which have facilities for physical exercise,
such as tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise rooms, and which do not receive
their primary source of revenue through the administration of massages. Such
establishments are not prohibited, provided they have a duly licensed or authorized
person pursuant to Article 155 of the Education Law, or are specifically exempt from
Article 155 of the Education Law.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO
Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays specified
anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons present either immediately or by
videoconference or similar electronic means who pay money or any form of consideration
for such observation.
BUSINESS
Any commercial enterprise, association or arrangement for profit.
PERSON
A person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal representative, acting individually
or jointly.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
Less than completely and opaquely concealed human genitals, pubic region, human
buttock, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
concealed.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
For the purpose of defining adult establishments:
Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
Actual or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 248/277
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
D.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus or female
breast.
SUBSTANTIAL CONNECTION
In a sole proprietorship, an individual who owns, operates, controls or conducts, directly
or indirectly, any premises, building or location upon which any adult use takes place.
In a partnership, limited or general, an individual who shares in any potential profits or
losses of the business or who shares in the ownership of any of the assets of the
partnership business.
In a corporation, an individual who is an officer, director or a holder, either directly,
indirectly or beneficially, of more than 20% of any class of stock.
Any person who furnishes more than 20% of the capital financing or assets of such
business, whether in cash, goods or services.
Restrictions affecting adult uses. In addition to the other requirements of this section and the Code
of the Village of Westfield, adult uses shall be permitted, subject to the following restrictions:
No adult use shall be allowed within 500 feet of another existing adult use.
No adult use shall be located within 250 feet of the boundaries of any zoning district which is
zoned for residential use.
No adult use shall be located within 250 feet of a pre-existing school or place of worship, daycare
center or playground.
No adult use shall be located in any zoning district except in that part of the Industrial (I-1)
District lying 300 feet east of the eastern bounds of Lake Street.
Registration. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall lease, rent, maintain, operate, use
or allow to be operated or used any business or establishment, any part of which contains an adult
use, without first complying with the provisions of this subsection as follows:
In addition to any and all other necessary licenses and permits, no form of adult use shall be
allowed to operate or be allowed to continue to operate until a certificate of registration is filed
with the Clerk of the Village of Westfield, containing:
The address of the premises.
The name and address of the owner(s) of the premises and the name and address of the
beneficial owner(s) if the property is in a land trust.
The name of the business or the establishment subject to the provisions of this section.
The names, business and home addresses and business or home phone numbers of all
owners of the business or establishment subject to the provisions of this section.
The names, business and home addresses and business or home phone numbers of all
those persons having a substantial connection with the business or establishment subject
to the provisions of this section.
The date of the initiation of the adult use.
The exact nature of the adult use.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 249/277
(h)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
If the premises or the building in which the business containing the adult use is located is
leased, a copy of the lease.
If there occurs any change in the information required for the certificate of registration, the
Clerk of the Village of Westfield shall be notified of such change, and a new or amended
certificate shall be filed within 30 days of such change.
The processing fee for each such certificate of registration or amendment thereto shall be
$500.
A licensing fee in the amount of $500 per year shall be required of each and every business
and/or establishment as defined under this section.
No certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this section shall be transferable to
any person other than the registrant, nor shall a certificate of registration be transferable for
use at any premises, building or location other than stated in the certificate of registration.
The owner or manager of any adult use shall cause a copy of the certificate of registration
issued under the provisions of this section to be prominently displayed on the premises,
building or location for which it is issued.
Any knowingly false statement or any statement which the registrant or applicant should
reasonably have known to be false which is provided in the certificate of registration, license
or any document or information supplied therewith shall be grounds for the rejection,
suspension or revocation of the certificate of registration.
It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or person in control of any property to establish or
operate thereon or to permit any person to establish or operate an adult use without having in
force a certificate of registration and current valid license complying with this section.
The Village of Westfield Police Department and the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
authorized to inspect and enforce all provisions of this section.
Prohibition regarding public observation. No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that
permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any property not registered as
an adult use. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, screen or
other opening.
Article VII. Administration
§ 155-76. Application procedures.
Duties of the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk is hereby given the following duties and authority:
Assist applicants for zoning permits by explaining the process, assisting them in filling out
forms and providing general guidance as to the contents of this chapter.
Keep the Village Board aware of applications before it; ensure that Village Board members
receive all forms, etc.
Schedule or arrange for all meetings/hearings dealing with zoning matters to include legal
notices, etc.
Issue all zoning permits (by right/special use permit) as authorized by the permitting Board;
grant requests for uses which are permitted by right (no public hearing required).
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 250/277
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
[1]
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Keep records of all zoning proceedings, including the issuance or denial of permits and
certificates of occupancy; ensure that the applicant receives a copy of the decision.
Assist the Zoning Board of Appeals in dealing with zoning variances.
Inform the Zoning Officer and Fire Inspector of all permits requested and issued.
Receive all required fees and account therefor.
Carry out all duties specified for the Village Clerk in this chapter.
§ 155-77. Zoning permits.
Permit requirements. No land shall be used or occupied and no building or structure shall be
constructed, demolished, erected, altered, extended, repaired, demolished, removed or changed
to another use unless a building permit has been issued. Permits are not required for interior
modifications or home repairs or improvements meeting these conditions. Additionally, for uses
not requiring permits as specified in the district regulation sections,[1] said uses shall meet all
zoning regulations.
Editor's Note: See Article IV, District Regulations.
Permit contents.
The application for a zoning permit shall be made on a form obtained from the Village Clerk.
The form shall at a minimum contain the following, either typed or legibly printed:
Applicant information: the name, address, etc., of the property owner.
Property identification: the street address and zoning district/section/block/lot.
Project description, including purpose and proposed use.
Construction type, height, family units, lot dimensions, setbacks, accessory buildings, etc.
Other information: a copy of Health Department permit; the location of wetlands; offstreet
parking; plan for drainage; need for curb cuts.
Signature of the applicant.
Sketch or drawing drawn to scale, showing the building location, dimensions to all
property lines, setbacks, highways, all proposed parking and loading areas, anchors or
tie-downs or required landscape buffer areas.
Any additional statements or drawings necessary to determine that the proposed work
will comply with the various provisions of this chapter.
A flood development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins
within any area of special flood hazard. Application for a flood development permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the Village Clerk and may include, but not be limited to, plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area
in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and
the location of the foregoing.
Whenever a proposed building, structure or land use requires approval of a site plan, no
building permit shall be issued therefor until such site plan is approved in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, and such site plans may be substituted for the drawings and
statements required under Subsection B(2).
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 251/277
(4)
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
No building permit for construction of a new residential, commercial or industrial building shall
be issued for any undeveloped parcel not served by the municipal sanitary sewer system until
the applicant has furnished a plan for a proposed septic system(s) which meets the current
criteria of the New York State Department of Health, based upon on-site percolation test and
other soil profile data. An undeveloped parcel for this section shall be any land requiring
construction or upgrading of an existing septic system.
Commercial zoning permit requirements. All applications for zoning permits for commercial
buildings must contain information detailing drainage and landscaping plans, off-street parking,
off-street loading and other data the Village Board deems necessary. Industrial zoning permit
requirements - refer to Article XV, Performance Standards.
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
Rescission of permits; stop-work orders. The Zoning Officer may, for just cause, issue a stop-work
order upon finding any violation and may rescind any zoning permit which has been issued.
Validity period. Zoning permits shall be valid for a one-year period only. Within one year from the
date that the building permit is granted, the exterior of the structure shall be completed, backfilling
and rough grading will be accomplished, and no new building materials will be stored outside.
Upon expiration of the one-year period, a new zoning permit will be required in order not to be in
violation of this chapter.
Notification of adjacent property owners. When a special use permit or variance is being
requested, all property owners adjacent to the applicant's property shall be provided by mail a
copy of the public hearing notice, while other property owners who may be affected by the
proposal may be notified if it is deemed appropriate due to the controversial nature of the project.
Additionally, for applications not involving public hearings, potentially affected property owners
may be notified by mail if it is deemed appropriate. Where a notification is mandatory, it shall take
place at least 10 days prior to the public hearing. Failure of any property owner to receive such
notice where reasonable attempts have been made shall not be a basis for invalidating such a
zoning permit nor for contesting the actions of the Zoning Officer, Board of Appeals, Planning
Board or Municipal Board in regard to the issuance or withholding of such permit.
Decisions.
Generally. The Village Clerk shall issue, refer to the appropriate board or refuse to issue such
permit, all within 30 days of receiving a complete application. Notice of refusal to issue any
permit shall be given to the owner or to his authorized representative in writing, by certified
mail, and shall state the reasons for the refusal and indicate the alternative course of action.
All decisions to grant or deny a zoning permit by right shall be made in writing within 30 days
from the time that the completed permit form is submitted along with full payment of the
required fee.
The decision form shall, at a minimum, include a project description, location information,
reference to the section(s) of this chapter which would not be complied with and a description
of alternatives open to applicants who are turned down.
§ 155-78. Certificate of occupancy.
No land shall be used or occupied, no building hereafter erected, altered or extended shall be used
and no building shall be changed in any use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by
the Zoning Officer. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
zoning permit but shall not be issued until the building and/or use of the property has been completed
in strict conformance with this chapter and the fire and building codes and whatever additional local,
county, state of federal law, rule or regulation may be applicable. A record of all certificates shall be
maintained by the Village Clerk.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 252/277
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A certificate of occupancy shall remain valid only for those specific conditions of use and
occupancy in effect at the time of issuance or for which said certificate was issued.
In case the Zoning Officer shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy, his reasons for so doing
shall be stated in writing on the application, and a copy shall be returned to the applicant.
The Zoning Officer may rescind, for just cause, a certificate of occupancy which has been issued.
§ 155-79. Enforcement.
Duties and authority of the Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer or his authorized designee shall enforce this chapter. The Zoning Officer is
hereby given the following duties and authority:
To develop such forms, with rules and regulations therefor, as he deems necessary for the
proper administration and enforcement of this chapter. Said forms, rules and regulations shall
be reviewed and approved by the Village Board and shall be available for public view at the
Village Clerk's office. Such rules, regulations and forms shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter or any other law of the Village of Westfield nor shall they have the
effect of waiving any provision of this section or any other law. Such rules, regulations and
forms shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this section and shall be
subject to the same penalties for violations thereof.
To enter upon, examine or inspect with reasonable cause, or cause the same to be done, any
land, building or structures for the purposes of administering this chapter. Written notes of
each such examination or inspection shall be prepared and kept on file. Every reasonable
effort shall be made to contact the owner prior to the inspection of said property, which efforts
shall be noted.
To receive written complaints of violations of this chapter and to serve a written notice of
violation upon the owner or occupant of the premises where there appears to exist a violation
of any provision of this chapter.
To perform any and all administrative or enforcement duties specified in this chapter, including
but not limited to accepting or reviewing applications, plans or plats, reviewing and issuing of
permits, licenses or certificates and issuing notices of violation, stop orders and appearance
tickets for the violation of this chapter and carrying out any lawful order of the Village Board or
Zoning Board of Appeals.
To extend the date of compliance in a notice of violation for not more than 30 days after
receipt if the violation does not present an immediate risk to persons or property, after receipt
of a written request by the violator for an extension, if, in his opinion, there is reasonable
evidence of intent to comply and that reasonable conditions exist which prevent compliance
by the specified date.
In issuing of permits, licenses or certificates or notices of zoning violations, all correspondence
must be by certified mail or, if hand delivered, by signed hand receipt.
Any person served with notice of a violation in accordance with Subsection A and who denies the
violation or is allegedly aggrieved by the required action necessary for compliance may, within 10
days after service of notice, make a request, in writing, for a hearing before the Zoning Officer
stating the reasons why such a hearing is requested. Compliance with a notice of violation shall
not be required while a hearing is pending.
Within 10 days after receipt, properly stamped, of a request for a hearing, the Zoning Officer shall
acknowledge receipt, in writing, by certified mail, and set a time and place for such hearing within
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 253/277
E.
F.
G.
30 days after the date the request was received. Hearings may be postponed up to an additional
30 days by the Zoning Officer for just cause, and notice of postponement shall be served the
applicant. The person requesting the hearing shall be required to show cause or give evidence
why he should not be required to remedy the violation outlined in the notice of violation.
After consideration of all testimony given at the hearing held in accordance with Subsection D, the
Zoning Officer shall sustain, withdraw or modify the notice of violation as originally served. If such
notice is sustained or modified, the Zoning Officer shall set a new compliance date by which the
violation shall be remedied or removed in accordance with the original notice of violation or
modified remedial action specified at the hearing.
On reinspection following expiration of the date of compliance as specified in the notice of
violation, if the violation has been remedied or removed in accordance with the specified remedial
action and there is no longer a violation of any provision of this chapter, then a certificate of zoning
compliance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer.
On reinspection following the expiration of the date of compliance as specified in the notice of
violation or as extended in accordance with Subsection E, if the remedial action specified has not
been carried out and that, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, violation of a provision of this
chapter remains, then the Zoning Officer shall immediately refer the matter to the proper local
Justice Court for legal action. The Justice Court, with the assistance of the Attorney of the Village
of Westfield, shall thereupon institute an appropriate civil action to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate,
remedy or remove such violation of the provision(s) of this chapter, including the imposition of
penalties as provided in Article XIII of this chapter, or commence criminal proceedings against the
defendant or take whatever other legal action is necessary to compel compliance with this chapter.
§ 155-80. Flood Insurance Administration.
For areas which are located within an area of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration on its Flood Hazard Boundary Map No. H01-02, dated May 17, 1974, and any revisions
thereto, applicants for a zoning permit must obtain all necessary permits from all federal, state and
local agencies from which prior approval must be granted before a zoning permit shall be issued.
§ 155-81. Schedule of fees.
The application for any permit, certificate, license or any review by the Village Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount specified from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board.
Article VIII. Nonconforming Uses
§ 155-82. Nonconforming uses.
The lawful use of any land or building existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued, although such building or use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter except as
hereinafter noted.
§ 155-83. Special extension.
No zoning permit shall be issued, no nonconforming use or building shall hereafter be extended or
enlarged and no abandonment time period extended, except following written authorization by the
Zoning Board of Appeals as a special extension.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 254/277
A.
B.
§ 155-84. Abandonment; discontinuance.
Any nonconforming use which lies abandoned or discontinued for a period of six consecutive months
shall not be permitted to be reestablished as a nonconforming use, and any future use of the property
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 155-85. Restoration.
A nonconforming building, damaged by any cause, may be restored, repaired or reconstructed as a
nonconforming building, provided that the extent of the nonconformity is not increased. Restoration,
repair or reconstruction of a nonconforming building shall be subject to the granting of a special
extension by the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall make a finding of the extent to which the
building may be made conforming through repair or reconstruction. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
grant a special extension subject to the elimination or reduction of the extent of any or all
nonconformities involving the damaged portion of the building. Such repair or restoration shall be
completed within one year from the time of such damage or destruction and the use at the time of such
damage or destruction resumed within the same year.
§ 155-86. Completion.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the completion of any lawful structure for which the excavation has
been prepared and the foundation walls constructed at the date this chapter takes effect; provided,
however, that construction must be completed within a period of one year from that date.
§ 155-87. Moving of buildings.
Should any nonconforming structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. If any
building in which any nonconforming use is conducted is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the
land on which such building was located and the subsequent use of any building erected thereon shall
conform to the regulations of the district.
§ 155-88. Changes.
A nonconforming structure or use cannot be changed to another nonconforming structure or use.
Article IX. Zoning Board of Appeals
§ 155-89. Establishment; membership; meetings.
A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby created, said Board to consist of five members and no more
than two alternate members, appointed for terms of five years. The Chairperson and members of
the Zoning Board of Appeals and alternates shall be appointed by resolution of the Village Board,
which shall also have the power to remove any member for cause after a public hearing.
[Amended 6-2-2008 by L.L. No. 3-2008]
All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the public, and said Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question. Every rule,
regulation, amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 255/277
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
D.
E.
F.
of the Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record.
§ 155-90. Powers and duties.
Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Officer. The concurring vote of a
majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Officer. Such appeal may be taken by any
person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Village by filing with the
Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Officer
shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed was taken. An appeal stops all proceedings in furtherance of the
appeal, unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice stated in
the certificate, that a stop would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this
case, proceedings shall not be stopped except by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record. The Zoning Board of Appeals may disapprove,
approve or modify the decision of the Zoning Officer.
Standards of review in the evaluation of use and area zoning variances. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have authority to vary the requirements of this chapter, including effect the
preservation agricultural uses, wherever possible, in accordance with § 155-34. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall refer to § 155-36 for a checklist of areas of concern to be evaluated in its review
of requests for area or use variances. This checklist is not all-inclusive and does not limit the
factors over which development conditions may be imposed. Section 155-34 of this chapter and
the checklist of areas of concern to be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals in its review of
requests for use and area zoning variances is intended only to supplement and in no way
supersedes, replaces, supplants or modifies the standards and procedures specified for the
granting of use and area variances contained in § 7-712 of the New York State Village Law or any
other applicable provisions thereof.
Variance application. An application for such variance shall be made to the Zoning Officer for
transmittal to the Zoning Board of Appeals, said application to contain the following items:
The name, address and phone number of the applicant.
The location and zoning district of the property for which the variance is sought.
The existing use of said property, including a description of any existing buildings.
A citation to the provision of this chapter for which the variance is sought.
A justification of the request for a variance.
Special extension. On direct application, supplementing an application to the Zoning Officer for a
building permit or certificate of compliance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special
extension for the expansion or extension of a nonconforming use. Such applications for special
extensions shall follow procedures and satisfy the standards for a variance.
In the exercise of its powers and duties, the Zoning Board of Appeals, through its Chairperson or,
in his absence, its Acting Chairperson, may compel the attendance of witnesses and may
administer oaths prior to taking the testimony of any witness.
In addition to the findings required before the granting or denial of any variance or special use
permit under this section, the Zoning Board of Appeals may consider any additional evidence.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 256/277
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The Zoning Board of Appeals, in granting any appeal, variance or special use permit, may attach
such conditions to said approval as in its determination are necessary to achieve the intent and
purpose of this chapter.
§ 155-91. Interpretation.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to interpret the meaning of this chapter whenever
called upon by the Village Board, Zoning Officer or an aggrieved party. This shall include the power to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official or board. This
interpretive power shall include the determination of district boundary lines.
§ 155-92. Procedures and referrals.
Applications for actions by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made to the Zoning Officer on
such forms as he may prescribe. Such applications may be made at any time, except that an
application for appeal under § 155-90A shall be made within 30 days of the action being appealed.
All applications shall be accompanied by drawings at an appropriate scale, showing the size and
placement of the lot, location of proposed buildings, driveways, parking areas, landscaping,
screening and proposed drainage and utility systems. The applicant shall prepare all required
documents and shall bear all costs of advertising and mailing that are required in connection with
the hearings.
The Zoning Officer shall transmit a copy of the application, together with any accompanying
documents, to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which shall schedule a hearing thereon. Public notice
of such hearing shall be given by publication in the official paper of a notice of such hearing at
least 10 days prior to the date thereof, by the Village Clerk. Where any variance, special use
permit or site plan application affects any real property lying within 500 feet of the Village
boundary or the boundary of any existing or proposed county or state park or other recreation area
or any existing or proposed county or state parkway, thruway, expressway, road or highway or of
the existing or proposed boundary of any county- or state-owned land on which a public building
or institution is situated, the Village Clerk shall notify the Chautauqua County Planning Board of
said application and submit copies of the application and any supporting documents thereto. No
action shall be taken on any matter referred to the Chautauqua County Planning Board until said
Board shall have made a recommendation thereon to the Zoning Board of Appeals or 30 days
shall have elapsed since the date of referral. If the County Planning Board disapproves the
proposal or recommends modification thereof, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not act contrary
to such disapproval or recommendation, except by a vote of a majority plus one of all members
thereof and after the adoption of a resolution fully setting forth the reasons for such contrary
action. The Zoning Board of Appeals may at its option refer any application for a variance or
special use permit to the Village Planning Board. The Village Planning Board shall, within 30 days,
recommend its approval or disapproval. Failure of the Village Planning Board to reply within 30
days after receipt of the application will be construed as the Village Planning Board having no
recommendation to submit in regard to the application.
The hearing of an appeal or application shall take place within 60 days of the filing of the appeal or
a complete application.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reach a decision on any application or appeal within 45 days of
the final hearing thereon. Such decisions shall be promptly filed in the Office of the Village Clerk
and shall be a public record. Within seven days of such decision, notice thereof shall be
transmitted to the Chautauqua County Planning Board whenever such decision relates to an
application referred to said County Planning Board.
§ 155-93. Use and area variances.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 257/277
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
D.
Reasons for variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals has the authority to vary or modify the strict
letter of this chapter where a literal interpretation would cause unnecessary hardship, in the case
of a use variance, or where the benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted would outweigh
the detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the neighborhood, in the case of an area
variance.
[Amended 8-2-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
Applicability and limitations.
The Zoning Board of Appeals can decide appeals from a person who feels aggrieved by a
decision of the Enforcement Officer.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse, affirm or modify the decision made by the
Municipal Board.
The Zoning Board of Appeals has absolutely no power to amend this chapter and must
exercise great care to ensure that its rulings do not, in effect, amend this chapter.
Basis for granting area variances.
[Amended 8-2-2010 by L.L. No. 4-2010]
Area variances provide relief of a dimensional nature (e.g., lot shape or grade) and must be
based on an analysis of whether the benefit to the applicant would outweigh the detriments to
the health, safety, and welfare of the neighborhood. The burden of proof is on the applicant,
and, if relief is warranted, it should be the minimum necessary.
In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take into consideration the
benefit to the applicant if the variance is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such
determination, the Board shall consider whether:
An undesirable change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood or a
detriment to nearby properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
The benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some method, feasible for the
applicant to pursue, other than an area variance;
The requested area variance is substantial;
The proposed variance will have an adverse effect or impact on the physical or
environmental conditions in the neighborhood or district; and
The alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration shall be relevant to the
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of
the area variance.
Basis for granting use variances.
Use variances provide relief to an applicant who is denied through application of this chapter
by the Municipal Board the right to use land or structures in a certain manner since the use is
not listed as an allowable use in this chapter. In order to be granted the use variance the
applicant must prove that unnecessary hardship exists and this is accomplished by showing
all of the following:
The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return if used only for a purpose allowed
in the district. This does not mean that profits will necessarily be maximized.
The use requested by the variance will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood and be detrimental to properties in the vicinity.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 258/277
(c)
(2)
E.
F.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(3)
G.
The plight of the applicant is due to unique circumstances and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood.
In the case of a use variance, if the hardship is self-imposed then the variance should,
generally speaking, be denied. An example of this would be the purchase of property which is
not appropriate for the proposed use.
In granting any variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall prescribe any conditions that it deems
to be necessary or desirable and are in compliance with the intent of this chapter. The decisions
must be written in the form of a resolution and must state in detail the reasons for granting or
denying the variance and the conditions imposed.
Temporary variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals may issue, for uses which are of a temporary
nature, a variance. Said variance shall clearly state the conditions of the variance to include when
it shall terminate, the possibility of renewal and other conditions deemed necessary.
Flood variances.
Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
A showing of good and sufficient cause;
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection G(3), which
follows, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other section of this chapter and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner.
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to
flooding or erosion damage.
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program of that area.
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 259/277
(j)
(k)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas electrical and
water systems and streets and bridges.
The Village Clerk shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical
information and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
§ 155-94. Mandatory referral.
Applicability. Before issuing a special use permit or granting a variance affecting any real property
lying within a distance of 500 feet of the boundary of this municipality or from the boundary of any
existing or proposed county or state park or other recreation area or from the right-of-way of any
existing or proposed county or state parkway, thruway, expressway, road or highway, or from the
channel owned by the county or for which the county has established channel lines or from the
existing or proposed boundary of any county- or state-owned land on which a public building or
institution is situated, the matter shall be referred to the Chautauqua County Planning Board.
Response time. Within 30 days after receipt of a full statement of such referred matter, the
Chautauqua County Planning Board to which referral is made, or an authorized agent of said
agency, shall report its recommendations thereon to the Board of Appeals, accompanied by a full
statement of the reasons for such recommendations. If the Chautauqua County Planning Board
fails to report within such period of 30 days, the Board of Appeals may act without such report. If
the Chautauqua County Planning Board disapproved the proposal or recommends modification
thereof, the Board of Appeals shall not act contrary to such disapproval or recommendation except
by a vote of a majority plus one of all the members thereof and after the adoption of a resolution
fully setting forth the reasons for such contrary action.
Report of action. Within seven days after final action by the Board of Appeals, modifications or
disapproval of a referred matter, the Board of Appeals shall file a report of the final action it has
taken with the Chautauqua County Planning Board which has made the recommendations,
modifications or disapproval.
§ 155-95. Dual hearing for variance and special use permit.
Applicability. Whenever a variance (use or area) is required prior to a special use permit review,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be the authorized authority for issuing both the variance and
special use permits. The Zoning Board of Appeals is only authorized to review special use permits
meeting the following criteria: commercial projects involving 5,000 square feet or less of floor
space or residential projects involving five or fewer units.
Basis for granting special use permits. When reviewing a special use permit under this section, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall apply all the standards and conditions as set forth in §§ 155-95,
155-100, 155-101 and 155-102.
§ 155-96. Judicial review.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals or any officer, department, board or bureau of the Village after all administrative remedies
have been exhausted may apply to the Supreme Court for review by a proceeding under Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceeding shall be instituted within 30 days after filing
of a decision in the office of the Village Clerk.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 260/277
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
A.
Costs shall not be allowed against the Zoning Board of Appeals unless it shall appear to the Court
that it acted with gross negligence or bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed
from.
Article X. Planning Board
[Amended 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 4-2002; 7-10-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
§ 155-97. Appointment.
A Planning Board consisting of five members shall be appointed and shall exist and serve as
specified in § 7-718 of the New York State Village Law and all other applicable provisions of the
Village Law.
Alternate Planning Board members may be appointed by the Village Board to serve in the place of
a regular Planning Board member in those instances where it is difficult for the Planning Board to
maintain a quorum because a regular Planning Board member is ill, on extended vacation, or has
a conflict of interest situation on a specific matter before such Board. In such instances, official
business cannot be conducted which may delay or impede adherence to required time lines. The
use of alternate Planning Board members in such instances is hereby authorized.
The number of alternate Planning Board members shall not exceed two.
All provisions of New York State law relating to Planning Board member eligibility, vacancy in
office, removal, compatibility of office, service on other boards, as well as any provisions of
any local law relating to training, continuous education and attendance, shall apply to
alternate members of the Planning Board.
§ 155-98. Duties.
The Planning Board shall have the following duties with respect to this chapter:
Recommendations.
Optional reports. The Planning Board shall submit reports within 30 days after referral on any
matter referred to it.
Mandatory recommendations. The Planning Board shall submit recommendations to the
appropriate Board on all applications for:
Cluster residential development.
Mobile home park.
Subdivisions, including all supporting materials.
Site plan review, providing recommendations for approval or for disapproval as required
by this chapter.
Mining permits, all supporting materials and reuse plan.
Zoning amendments.
All zoning issues uses for which referral to the Planning Board is mandatory.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 261/277
(3)
(4)
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
Delegation. By delegation of the Planning Board, an individual member may make
investigations into specific matters currently before the Planning Board, provided that they do
not overlap or infringe upon the duties of the Zoning Officer.
Failure to report. When the Planning Board fails to make a recommendation/report within 30
days from receipt of the request, it shall be deemed that the Planning Board has no opinion
on the proposal. The thirty-day requirement may be extended with the permission of the
Board making the referral.
Special use permits. To issue or deny special use permits after a public hearing for any of the uses
for which this chapter requires the obtaining of such permits.
Architectural plan review. To issue or deny architectural plan approval for any of the uses for which
this chapter requires architectural plan review.
[Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012[1]]
Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections C and D as
Subsections D and E, respectively.
Review. To review this chapter at least every five years and make written recommendations for
amendments, should it be necessary.
Regulation. The Planning Board is responsible for developing, updating and administering the
Village subdivision regulations.
Article XI. Duties of Village Board
§ 155-99. Duties.
[Amended 7-10-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
Duties. The Village Board shall have the following duties with respect to the general administration
of this chapter:
Direct all actions involving violations of this chapter.
Amendments. The Board may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition or on
recommendation of the Planning Board, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and
provisions of this chapter after public notice and hearings. (See § 155-101.)
Site plans. The Village Board shall review and approve, disapprove or approve with
modifications any site plan filed pursuant to the procedures and requirements of Article XII of
this chapter.
Mining permits. The Village Board shall issue, deny or renew all mining permits.
All other duties, stated or inferred, as needed to apply this chapter.
Notice. The Board, by resolution adopted at a scheduled meeting, shall fix the time and place of a
public hearing on the proposed amendment and special use permit and cause notice to be given
in accordance with law.
§ 155-100. Special use permits.
[Amended 7-10-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 262/277
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
General provisions. The special uses listed in this chapter for which conformance to additional
standards is required shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject to
the satisfaction of the requirements and standards set forth herein and additional special
provisions that may be imposed in the granting of a special use permit, in addition to all other
requirements of this chapter. All such uses are hereby declared to possess characteristics of such
unique and special form that each specific use shall be considered as an individual case and
permit the imposition of additional special requirements.
Standards. The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations involved,
the size of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to the existing or future
streets giving access to it shall be such that it will be in harmony with the orderly development of
the district, and the location, nature and height of the buildings, walls and fences will not
discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings in accordance
with §§ 155-36 and 155-38.
Conditions for special use permits. The Village Planning Board shall consider:
[Amended 2-16-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
In the granting of special use permits, the Village Planning Board shall attach such conditions
and safeguards as it deems appropriate under this chapter.
A plan for the proposed development for a site for the designated special use shall be
submitted with an application for a special use permit. The supplemental section of this
chapter, § 155-36, entitled "Development conditions for granting of use/area variances and
special use permits," will be referred to and used as a checklist of possible conditions to be
attached to the special use permit being requested; the section is not all-inclusive.
Procedures. The Village Planning Board shall act in strict accordance with procedures specified by
law and by this chapter with regard to public hearings, notices, publications, etc.
[Amended 2-16-2010 by L.L. No. 3-2010]
Expiration. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular use and shall
expire if the special use ceases for more than one year for any reason.
Existing violations. No special use permit shall be issued for a property where there is an existing
violation of this chapter.
§ 155-101. Referral to the Planning Board.
[Amended 7-10-2006 by L.L. No. 5-2006]
Prior to zoning law amendments, the Village Board shall refer the proposed changes to the Planning
Board for its recommendation. If such referral is made, then the Planning Board shall have 30 days in
which to review the proposed amendment and return its recommendation. After the 30 days have
expired, the Village Board may act without receipt of a recommendation from the Planning Board. The
thirty-day requirement may be extended with the permission of the Village Board.
§ 155-102. Certain mandatory referrals.
Under General Municipal Law § 239-l and 239-m, certain special use permits and amendments must
be referred to the County Planning Board prior to local decisions being made. (See Article IX, Zoning
Board of Appeals, § 155-94, Mandatory referral, for procedures to be followed.)
Article XII. Site Plan Review
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 263/277
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
C.
§ 155-103. Uses requiring approval.
[Amended 6-16-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
Any newly developed use or structure or modification to an existing use or structure within the
Village for which a building permit is required shall undergo site plan review and approval before
being undertaken, except those specifically exempted below.
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
Exempted uses. The following land use activities are exempted from the requirements of this
article, except as specifically required in the respective zoning districts in which such activities are
located:
Construction of one- or two-family dwellings, ordinary accessory structures and related land
use activities.
Ordinary repair or maintenance of existing structures or uses.
Agricultural land uses, with the exception of roadside stands for the sale of agricultural
products from a permanent structure.
Incidental landscaping or grading.
Individual mobile homes within zoning districts which authorize their placement.
Exterior alterations or additions to an existing residential structure which do not substantially
change its nature or use and to any commercial or industrial structure which will not increase
the gross floor area of the existing structure by more than 10% within any five-year period.
Commercial and industrial structures within the SI-1, B-1, and B-1A Districts shall not be
granted this exemption.
[Amended 1-4-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
Interior alterations that do not substantially change the nature or use of a commercial or
industrial structure.
In the B-1 and B-1A Districts, changes to the facade of an existing building that do not alter
the footprint of the building and are either for maintenance and repair purposes or to improve
the aesthetic appeal of the facade, except that such activities shall be subject to architectural
plan review under Article XVI.
[Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
Existing uses and structures. This article does not apply to uses and structures, except as
provided for in § 155-19G, SI-1 District Site Plan Review, that are lawfully in existence as of the
date this chapter becomes effective. Any use that would otherwise be subject to this chapter,
which has been discontinued for a period of one year or more, shall be subject to review pursuant
to any terms of this chapter before such use is resumed. Any use or structure shall be considered
to be in existence, provided that such use or structure has started construction prior to the
effective date of this chapter and is fully constructed and completed within one year after the
effective date of these regulations.
§ 155-104. Statement of development.
Each site plan application shall contain a statement of development intent containing the names of the
owners, developers and agents on the appropriate forms provided by the Zoning Officer. The need for
site plan review by the Village Board shall be determined by the Zoning Officer upon receipt of an
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 264/277
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
application for any permit, certificate or license. The site plan application shall include information
regarding:
Evidence of compatibility with the Village land use plan as stated in this chapter and any
Comprehensive Master Plan for the Village which has been updated within 10 years of the date of
the application.
Time period for completion of construction or restoration.
§ 155-105. Submission of plan.
A site plan shall be submitted to the Village Board for review and approval and shall include the
following information:
All districts:
Proposed site plan generally showing buildings and structures, location, parking areas, drives,
pedestrianways, landscaping, developed open space, recreational areas, setbacks, egress
and ingress points.
Existing and proposed utility systems and location of wells and septic treatment areas and
drainage system, if any.
Proposed construction sequence for buildings and other development, ownership and
maintenance of open space, if any.
Such additional information as may be required by the Village Board.
The location and size of all proposed signs.
In any district for which design guidelines have been adopted, an explanation of the measures
taken to comply with such guidelines.
[Added 4-3-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008]
Business and industrial districts:
Proposed site plans within business and industrial districts shall be prepared by an engineer
or architect licensed by the State of New York.
A boundary survey to show all legal property boundaries and the location of existing
easements and improvements.
The location of the maximum number of points of access to public streets.
An explanation of measures to be taken to accommodate parking and loading and vehicular
and pedestrian circulation.
The location and size of proposed signs.
Existing land uses for a distance of 200 feet outside the boundaries of the lot.
Buffering of the use (if abutting a residential use) via fences, screening, plantings, easements,
embankments, etc.
§ 155-106. Application.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 265/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
An application for site plan approval shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer and shall be
accompanied by information drawn from the following checklist. The Village Board may require
additional information, if necessary, to complete its review.
Plan checklist for all site plans:
Title of drawing, including the name and address of the applicant and the person responsible
for the preparation of such drawing.
North arrow, scale and date.
Boundaries of the property plotted to scale.
Existing ditches, watercourses and bodies of water.
The location of any slopes of 5% or greater.
Proposed grading and drainage.
The location, proposed use and height of all buildings and site improvements, including
culverts, drains, retaining walls and fences.
The location, design and construction materials of all parking and truck loading areas,
showing points of entry and exit from the site.
The location of outdoor storage, if any.
A description of the method of sewage disposal and location of the facilities.
Identification of water source; if a well, the location.
The location, size and design and construction materials of all proposed signs.
The location and proposed development of all buffer areas, including existing vegetative
cover.
The location and design of outdoor lighting facilities.
General landscaping plan.
The proposed location of water, sewer, electric and telephone lines.
As necessary, the Village Board may require the following:
Provision for pedestrian access, if necessary.
The location of fire lanes and hydrants.
Designation of the amount of building area proposed for retail sales and similar commercial
activity.
Other elements integral to the proposed development as considered necessary by the
Planning Board.
§ 155-107. Flood Protection District.
All site plans for development within the Flood Protection District shall be in conformance with the
provisions of the FEMA Flood Insurance Study.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 266/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
§ 155-108. Planning Board review.
As specified in Article X of this chapter, the Village Board shall refer all site plan requests to the Village
Planning Board for review and the preparation of a report on said site plan application to the Village
Board. The Planning Board's review of the site plan shall include, as appropriate, the following:
General considerations:
Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and circulation, including intersections,
road widths, pavement surfaces, dividers and traffic controls.
Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and circulation, walkway structures,
control of intersections with vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian convenience.
The location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street parking and loading.
The location, arrangement, size and design and general site compatibility of buildings, lighting
and signs.
Adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities.
Adequacy and alignment of water supply, sewage disposal and electrical facilities.
Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other landscaping constituting a visual
and/or noise buffer between the applicant's and adjoining lands, including the maximum
feasible retention of existing vegetation.
In the case of an apartment complex or other multiple dwelling, the adequacy of usable open
space for play areas and informal recreation.
Protection of adjacent or neighboring properties.
Protection of solar access on adjacent or neighboring properties.
Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the provision of fire hydrants.
Special attention to the adequacy of structures, roadways and landscaping in areas with
susceptibility to ponding, flooding and/or erosion.
Consultant review.
The Planning Board may consult with the Zoning Officer, Village Engineer, Superintendent of
Streets, County Planning Department and other local and county officials, in addition to
representatives of federal and state agencies, including but not limited to the Soil
Conservation Service, the State Department of Transportation and the State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
The Planning Board may hire a consultant, if needed, to review plans with the approval of the
Village Board.
§ 155-109. Recommendations of Planning Board with regard to
the site plan proposal.
The Village Planning Board, after review of the site plan and determination that the appropriate
requirements of this chapter have been met, shall recommend the approval, approval with
modifications or disapproval of the application for site plan approval. The Village Planning Board
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 267/277
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
A.
shall enter its reasons for such actions in its records and transmit its findings to the Village Board.
The Village Planning Board shall act in strict accordance with the procedure specified by law and
this chapter.
The Village Planning Board may approve the site plan and recommend its approval by the Village
Board, provided that it finds the facts submitted with the site plan establish that:
The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the operations involved, the size
of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to it shall be such that it will
be in harmony with the orderly development of the district as contained in this chapter and
any updated Comprehensive Master Plan, and the location, nature and height of buildings,
walls and fences will not discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land
and buildings.
Operation in connection with any use subject to site plan review shall not be more
objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes, vibrations, flashing lights or
increased nonresidential activity than would be the operations of uses permitted by right
within the district.
Existing streets are suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic generated by the
proposed use and in the vicinity of the proposed area.
The proposed use will not be detrimental to:
Personal safety within the area.
The natural characteristics of the site or area.
Present and potential surrounding uses.
Any new streets shall at least meet the minimum standards for accepting dedicated streets.
Storm drainage facilities shall provide a clear and protected channel fully adequate to handle
surface runoff water from any source.
If any proposal includes lands lying within the Flood Damage Prevention District shown on the
Flood Hazard Boundary Map No. H01-02, dated May 17, 1974, and any revisions thereto, or any
subsequent Flood Boundary Maps issued by the Federal Insurance Administration which
supplants, replaces or modifies FMBH No. H01-02, such proposal shall be reviewed consistent
with the need to minimize damage, that all utilities are located to minimize damage or eliminate
flood damage and adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
§ 155-110. Approval of site plan by Village Board.
The Village Board may accept or disregard, in whole or in part, the report or failure to report of the
Village Planning Board, and the Village Board may conduct its own independent review of the site plan
request using the conditions to be considered by the Village Planning Board as the appropriate
standard of review.
§ 155-111. Procedure.
All applications for site plan review shall be made to the Zoning Officer on such forms as he may
prescribe. The Zoning Officer shall transmit a copy of the applications, together with any
accompanying documents, to the Village Board. A copy of the application and any accompanying
documents shall also be sent to the County Planning Board for review where any site plan review
application affects real property lying within 500 feet of the Village boundary or of the boundary of
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 268/277
B.
C.
D.
E.
any existing or proposed county or state parkway, expressway, road or highway or of the existing
or proposed right-of-way of any stream or of the existing or proposed boundary of any county- or
state-owned land on which a public institution is situated. No action shall be taken upon any
matter referred to the Chautauqua County Planning Board until said Board shall have made a
recommendation thereon to the Village Board or 30 days shall have elapsed from the date of
referral. If the County Planning Board disapproves the proposal or recommends modification
thereof, the Village Board shall not act contrary to such disapproval or recommendation except by
a vote of a majority plus one of all members and after the adoption of a resolution fully setting forth
the reasons for such contrary actions.
Within 45 days of receipt of a completed site plan or 60 days in cases when the application must
be referred to the County Planning Board, the Village Board shall review the same and approve,
approve with changes or disapprove the site plan application. Failure of the Village Board to act
within the prescribed period of time shall constitute approval unless the applicant and the Village
Board mutually agree to extend this time limit. The Village Board may conduct a public hearing of
the site plan, if it is considered desirable by a majority of the members of the Village Board. Such
public hearing shall be conducted within 45 days of the receipt of the application and shall be
advertised in the official newspaper of the Village at least five days before the public hearing. A
decision on the site plan shall be rendered within 60 days of the public hearing.
Upon approval or conditional approval with modifications, the applicant shall file three copies of
the approved site plan with the Zoning Officer who shall then issue the appropriate building
permits.
Upon completion of the work depicted in the site plan, the Zoning Officer shall make a field
inspection noting on one copy of the approved site plan compliance between the site plan and
actual development and shall submit the same to the Village Board. No performance bond or other
surety shall be released and no certificate of occupancy issued unless or until the Village Board is
satisfied that actual development is in substantial compliance with the approved site plan.
Whenever a site plan is submitted for a planned development for which a zone change is required,
approval by the Village Board shall be made, conditional upon the granting of a change of zone by
the Village Board, and all time limits upon review and approval herein specified shall be waived.
Article XIII. Complaints and Penalties
§ 155-112. Complaint of violation.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such
complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall properly
record such complaint and immediately investigate and report thereon. The Zoning Officer, upon
completion of his investigation, shall file a report with the Village Clerk.
§ 155-113. Penalties for offenses.
[Amended 7-21-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
The general agent, architect, building contractor, owner, or tenant, or any other person who commits or
takes part or assists in any violation of this Zoning Law, or who maintains any building or land in or on
which any violation of this Zoning Law shall exist, shall be deemed guilty of an offense, punishable for
each and every violation by a fine of not less than $100 and not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
Article XIV. Interpretation
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 269/277
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
A.
§ 155-114. Conflict with other provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be a minimum
requirement, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety or the general welfare. Whenever
the requirements of this chapter are at variance with other requirements of this chapter or the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
Article XV. Performance Standards
[Added 6-17-2002 by L.L. No. 3-2002]
§ 155-115. Purpose.
Performance standards, regulating industrial development and activity within the Industrial (I-1) District
and Light Industrial (I-2) District, are intended to:
Ensure that all industries institute practices that protect the community from hazards and
nuisances that are preventable by legitimate processes of control and nuisance elimination.
Protect industries from arbitrary exclusion from such districts or reservation based solely on
subjective determinations.
Allow industrial operations to be measured factually and objectively.
§ 155-116. Applicability.
Performance standard provisions of this article shall be applicable to any use established in the
Industrial (I-1) District or Light Industrial (I-2) District in either of the following instances:
If any use, building or other structure established prior to the effective date of this article is
extended, enlarged, moved, structurally altered, or reconstructed, said changes in building or land
use or configuration shall be in full compliance with this provision.
Any use established, any building or structure constructed, or tract of land developed for any
permitted use allowed by right or special use permit shall comply with all of the performance
standards herein set forth.
§ 155-117. Procedure.
Showing of probable compliance.
Uses, buildings, or structures required to comply with this provision, prior to establishment or
alteration, shall make a showing of probable compliance with these performance standards.
Said showing shall be in the form of a letter submitted with the zoning application (or building
application if proper industrial zoning already exists), prepared by a professional engineer
licensed by the State of New York, certifying that said use, building, or structure complies with
all industrial performance standard requirements. Said letter shall be based on the engineer's
personal scrutiny of the site and proposed use of alteration, and shall have analytical
foundation in accepted engineering principles. In addition, the Zoning Administrator (Code
Enforcement Officer-CEO) may require the applicant to submit:
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 270/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A plot plan showing the location of all present and proposed structures, drives, parking
lots, waste disposal areas, bulk storage areas, streets, streams, or other significant
features on or within 200 feet of the proposed site.
A description of the activity to be conducted regarding waste products, external effects,
or other conditions which are regulated herein; provided, however, that the applicant shall
not be required to reveal any trade secrets or sufficient detail with regard to a process
which would cause any secret process or manufacturing procedure for a closely guarded
proprietary compound or product to become public knowledge and be available to
competitors.
The type and location of abatement devices to control, or recording instruments to
measure, conformance with required standards, not including devices and instruments
which are inherent in the manufacturing process.
Such other data and certification as may reasonably be required by the Zoning
Administrator (CEO) to reach a determination.
All information and evidence submitted in applications to indicate conformity to performance
standards shall constitute a certification and an agreement on the part of the applicant that
the proposed use can and will conform to such standards at all times.
Administrative options. The Zoning Administrator (CEO) may, upon application submittal, approve
and authorize the establishment of said use, building, or structure, provided that all pertinent
provisions of this article, and other applicable local laws, are complied with. If however, the Zoning
Administrator (CEO) determines that the proposed use, building, or structure requires a special
use permit, site plan review, or use or area variance she/he shall forward all pertinent information
to appropriate permitting board for review. The permitting board will determine if the proposed
project will comply with performance standards, and may inform petitioner that either more
information is necessary or that an independent engineer analysis of the proposed use, building,
or structure is required.
Need for independent engineering analysis. If the permitting board determines that there is reason
to doubt compliance with any applicable performance standard provision, a state licensed
professional engineer of the municipal board's choosing — but acceptable to the applicant — may
be asked to analyze the prospects of compliance. Costs of such analysis shall be borne by the
applicant.
Use of independent engineering analysis. Upon submission of an independent engineering
analysis authorized by the municipal board, the permitting board shall authorize establishment of
the use, building, or structure if said independent analysis confirms probable compliance with this
provision and if all other applicable provisions of this and other local laws and ordinances are
satisfied. If, however, the independent engineering analysis indicates that the proposed use,
building, or structure is not likely to comply with this provision, then said application shall be
denied until such time that the proposal is able to fully comply.
Appeal of administrative determination. Action, or a lack of action by the permitting board, with
reference to these performance standards may be appealed to the Village Zoning Board of
Appeals.
Continued enforcement. The Zoning Administrator (CEO) shall investigate any purported violation
of performance standards. To constitute a violation, a use, building, or structure must have been
established subject to Article XV, § 155-16 and must be found to be operating in conflict with this
provision. If a violation is alleged, the Zoning Administrator (CEO) shall inform the municipal board
and the Chief Executive Officer of the industry allegedly in violation. The Village Board shall
evaluate the claim and may initiate an independent engineering analysis consistent with the
analysis procedure outlined in Article XV, § 155-117C and D to substantiate claim. Administrative
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 271/277
G.
(1)
A.
determinations made in conjunction with said analysis may be appealed in the same manner
heretofore outlined.
Mitigation. If an alleged violation is determined to be valid by the independent engineering
analysis, the municipal board shall, with the assistance of the independent engineer, draft a
reasonable timeline for the industry in question to institute corrective measures. Failure to correct
the violation within the timeline established by the municipal board shall constitute an aggravated
violation of this article and the penalty provision cited in Article XIII shall be imposed in accordance
with state law.
§ 155-118. Technical provisions - industrial performance
standards.
Uses shall comply with the following:
Noise.
At no point along the boundary of a parcel on which a use is located shall the sound pressure
level of any operation or plant exceed the decibel limits in the octave bands designated in the
following charts. For the purpose of measuring the intensity and frequency of sound, the
sound level meter, the octave band analyzer, and the impact noise analyzer shall be
employed. The flat network and the fast meter response of the sound level shall be used.
Sounds of short duration, which cannot be measured accurately with the sound level meter,
shall be measured with the impact noise analyzer. Octave band analyzers calibrated in the
preferred frequencies (American Standards Association S1 6-1960, Preferred Frequencies for
Acoustical Measurements) shall be used with the following tables.
Maximum Permitted Sound Level In I-1
Octave Bank Frequency
(cycles per second) Decibels
0 through 74 67
75 through 149 59
150 through 299 52
300 through 599 46
600 through 1,199 40
1,200 through 2,399 34
2,400 through 4,799 32
4,800 and over 32
Maximum Permitted Sound Level In I-2
Octave Bank Frequency
(cycles per second) Decibels
0 through 74 58
75 through 149 54
150 through 299 50
300 through 599 46
600 through 1,199 40
1,200 through 2,399 33
2,400 through 4,799 26
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 272/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(1)
B.
Maximum Permitted Sound Level In I-2
Octave Bank Frequency
(cycles per second) Decibels
4,800 and over 20
Exceptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations
in the I-1 and I-2 Districts:
Noises not directly under control of the property user of a temporary nature.
Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. Such activities are those that are nonroutine operations accessory to the
primary activities, and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently.
The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves.
Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes, and railroads.
Vibration.
Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along the
nearest adjacent lot line, earthborne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column I
(Frequency) or Column II (Displacement) of the following Tables is prohibited:
Maximum Permitted Steady-State Vibration Displacement Level In I-1 and I-2
I* II*
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement
(inches)
0 through 9 0.0008 - 0.0004
1 through 19 0.0005 - 0.0002
20 through 29 0.0003 - 0.0001
30 through 39 0.0002 - 0.0001
40 and over 0.0001 - 0.0001
NOTES:
* Steady-state vibrations, for purposes of this article, are vibrations, which are continuous,
or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute.
Discrete impulses, which do not exceed 100 per minute, shall be considered impact
vibrations, and shall not cause in excess of twice the displacement stipulated.
Maximum Permitted Impact Vibration Displacement Level In I-1 and I-2
I* II*
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement
(inches)
0 through 9 0.0016 - 0.0006
10 through 19 0.0010 - 0.0003
20 through 29 0.0006 - 0.0002
30 through 39 0.0004 - 0.0001
40 and over 0.0002 - 0.0001
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 273/277
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
NOTES:
* Impact vibrations, for purposes of this article, are vibrations that occur in discrete
impulses separated by an interval of at least one minute and numbering not more than
eight in any 24-hour period.
Exceptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the vibration level
regulations:
Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user.
Vibrations emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. Such activities are those which are nonroutine operations accessory to the
primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently.
Transient vibrations of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes, and
railroads.
Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a
three-component measuring system approved by the Zoning Administrator (CEO).
Smoke and particulate matter. The emission, from all sources within any lot or particulate matter
containing more than 5% by weight of particles having a particle diameter larger than 44 microns
is prohibited. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage
areas, yards, and roads within the boundaries of any lot shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate
landscaping, paving, oiling, or other acceptable means. Emission of particulate matter from such
sources in excess of the weight limitations specified herein is prohibited. The emission of smoke
or particulate matter of a density or equivalent opacity equal to, or greater than, No. 2 on the
Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times, except as otherwise provided herein. (The
Ringelmann Chart is the chart published by the United States Bureau of Mines).
Smoke emission. In the I-1 and I-2 Zone, the emission of more than 12 smoke units per stack
in any one-hour period is prohibited. However, once during any six-hour period each stack
shall be permitted up to 12 additional units in a fifteen-minute period for soot blowing and fire
cleaning. Only during such fifteen-minute periods shall smoke of a density or equivalent
opacity equal to, but not exceeding, Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted, and then only for fire
cleaning and for not more than four minutes per period.
Particulate matter. The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within the
boundaries of any lot shall not exceed the rate established in the following table:
Maximum Permitted Particulate Matter Emission Rate In I-1 and I-2
Height of Emission
(feet)
Pounds Per Hour
(per acre)
0 through 49 1.00
50 through 99 1.01
100 through 149 1.06
150 through 199 1.10
200 through 299 1.16
300 through 399 1.30
400 and over 1.50
Method of measurement.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 274/277
(a)
(b)
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
H.
Smoke. For the purpose of grading the density or equivalent opacity of emission of
smoke, the Ringelmann Chart shall be employed. For the purpose of determining smoke
units the Ringelmann reading shall be made at least every minute during the period of
observation. Each reading (Ringelmann number) shall be multiplied by the time in
minutes for which it is observed, and the products added together to determine the total
number of smoke units observed during the total period of observation.
Particulate matter. The total net rate of emission of particulate matter within the
boundaries of any lot shall be determined as follows: Determine the maximum emission
in pounds per hour from each source of emission and divide this figure by the number of
acres of lot area, thereby obtaining the hourly rate of emission in pounds per acre. Add
together the individual rate of emission as derived above to obtain the total rate of
emission from all sources of emission within the boundaries of the lot. It is this total that
shall not exceed the rate established in the preceding table.
Odors. No continuous, frequent, or repetitive emission of odors or odor-causing substances that
would be offensive beyond any property line of any industrial use will be permitted. An odor
emitted no more than 15 minutes in any one day shall not be deemed as continuous, frequent, or
repetitive within the meaning of these regulations. The existence of an odor shall be presumed
when analysis by a competent technician demonstrates that a discernible odor is being emitted.
The measurement of the threshold odor shall be in accordance with the American Society for
Testing and Materials Method DI391-57 "Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in
Atmosphere (Dilution Method)" (Philadelphia: American Society of Testing and Materials, 1957). In
addition the rules and regulations of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (6 NYCRR, Chapter 3, Sections 200-317) shall be complied with.
Radiation hazards. The handling of radioactive materials, the discharge of such materials into air
and water, and the disposal of radioactive wastes shall be in conformance with (a) the applicable
regulations of the Atomic Energy Commission, and (b) the applicable regulations of the State of
New York.
Fire and explosive hazards.
The provisions of the latest New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, and
other applicable New York State and federal regulations, shall be complied with, and no
explosives shall be stored, used, or manufactured without first submitting to the Zoning
Administrator evidence certifying compliance.
No gasoline or other flammables or explosives shall be stored unless the location, plans, and
construction conform to the laws and regulations of the State of New York and have the
approval of the Village of Westfield Fire Department.
Glare and heat.
Every use and activity shall be so operated that it does not emit heat or heated air beyond the
boundary of the lot on which it is located. No direct or sky reflected glare shall emanate from
any use or activity so as to be visible at any point on or beyond the boundary of the lot on
which such use or activity is located.
This restriction shall not apply to signs otherwise permitted by the provisions of the Zoning
Chapter or other applicable ordinances, not to activities of a temporary or of an emergency
nature, nor to night lighting necessary for safety and the protection of property.
Electromagnetic interference. There shall be no electromagnetic interference that adversely
affects the operation of any equipment other than that belonging to the creator of such
interference, or that does not conform to the regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 275/277
I.
(1)
(2)
A.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Landscaping. A planted visual barrier may be required to be maintained in yard areas that abut
land upon which residential structures exist or are permitted at the time of the special use permit
application except when natural or man-made barriers exist. This planting barrier or visual screen
shall have a width of no less than three feet. It shall be of such plant materials that within a
reasonable period of time (five years) the vegetation barrier will provide a high degree of
separation and privacy on a year-round basis.
§ 155-119. (Reserved)
Article XVI. Architectural Plan Review
[Added 6-4-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 155-120. Uses requiring review.
The following uses shall require architectural plan review and approval before being undertaken:
In the B-1 and B-1A Districts, changes to the facade of an existing building that:
Do not alter the footprint of the building; and
Are either for maintenance and repair purposes or to improve the aesthetic appeal of the
facade.
§ 155-121. Submission of plans.
An architectural plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review and approval and shall
include the following information:
Drawings of any building for which the applicant proposes facade improvements, showing both
how the facade appears at the time of the application and how it is proposed to be altered. It is
preferred, but not required, that such drawings be prepared by an engineer or architect licensed
by the State of New York.
The location and size of proposed signs.
In any district for which design guidelines have been adopted, an explanation of the measures
taken to comply with such guidelines.
Such additional information as may be required by the Planning Board.
§ 155-122. Procedure.
All applications for architectural plan review shall be made to the Zoning Officer on such forms as
he may prescribe. The Zoning Officer shall transmit a copy of the application, together with any
accompanying documents, to the Planning Board.
Within 45 days of receipt of a completed architectural plan, the Planning Board shall review the
same and approve, approve with changes, or disapprove the architectural plan application. Failure
of the Planning Board to act within the prescribed period of time shall constitute approval unless
the applicant and Planning Board mutually agree to extend this time limit.
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 276/277
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Village of Westfield adopted since the 2005
republication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the 2004 republication of the Code was L.L. No. 2-2004
adopted 9-7-2004.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 7-5-2005 Moratorium on adult use
establishments
NCM
1-2006 4-3-2006 Moratorium on telecommunications
facilities
NCM
2-2006 5-15-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
3-2006 5-1-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
4-2006 7-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
5-2006 7-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
6-2006 9-5-2006 Officers and employees: residency
requirements amendment
Ch. 39, Arts. II and III
7-2006 11-20-2006 Fire prevention and building
construction
Ch. 85
1-2007 6-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
2-2007 10-15-2007 Moratorium on certain permits in B-1
District
NCM
1-2008 4-3-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
2-2008 4-7-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
3-2008 6-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
4-2008 7-21-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
1-2009 1-5-2009 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2009 8-3-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 146
1-2010 1-4-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
2-2010 1-4-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
3-2010 2-16-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
4-2010 8-2-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
5-2010 8-2-2010 Retirement incentive program, Part
A
NCM
6-2010 8-2-2010 Retirement incentive program, Part
B
NCM
7-2010 11-15-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
1-2012 1-16-2012 Tax levy limit override 2012 NCM
2-2012 6-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
8/4/2020 Village of Westfield, NY Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/WE0661?guid=WE0661&children=true 277/277
Local Law No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2012 6-18-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
1-2013 2-19-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
2-2013 2-19-2013 Tax levy limit override 2013 NCM
3-2013 5-20-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
4-2013 6-17-2013 Moratorium on digital signs NCM
5-2013 10-21-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
6-2013 12-16-2013 Extension of moratorium on digital
signs
NCM
1-2014 3-17-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
2-2014 5-19-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 146
3-2014 6-23-2014 Village Administrator amendment;
Department of Public Works
amendment
Chs. 3; 45
1-2015 12-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
2-2015 2-17-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
3-2015 7-20-2015 Fire Department Ch. 50
1-2016 1-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 155
2-2016 10-17-2016 Recreation Commission amendment Ch. 48
1-2017 8-21-2017 Mini pre-treatment program See. Ch. 124
1-2018 6-18-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 155