CHARTER, RELATED LAWS AND MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS, NEW YORK 
____________ 
Containing the Charter, Related Laws and the White Plains Municipal Code 
  
 
  
PUBLISHED IN 1984 BY O RDER OF THE C OMMON C OUNCIL 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF WHITE PLAINS, NEW YORK 
____________ 
Thomas M. Roach 
Mayor 
____________ 
Common Council 
Justin Brasch 
Nadine Hunt-Robinson 
John Kirkpatrick 
Dennis Krolian 
Milagros Lecuona 
John Martin, Council President 
____________ 
John G. Callahan 
Corporation Counsel 
____________ 
Anne M. McPherson 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This publication contains the Charter for the City of White Plains, being Chapter 356 of the Laws of 1915 as amended; the Related Laws, which contains special laws relating to the city and selected local laws of Westchester County; and the White Plains Municipal Code, being a codification of all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted by the city. The White Plains Municipal Code also contains various local laws enacted by the city which were not amendatory of the Charter and various resolutions, rules and regulations in force in the city. When adopted the White Plains Municipal Code will supersede all ordinances not included therein or recognized as continuing in force; local laws, resolutions, rules and regulations are not re-enacted by the White Plains Municipal Code and are included for the convenience of the user of the Code. 
The Charter is numbered and arranged as enacted and amended from time to time. In the Related Laws, the various laws have been arranged into articles and divisions; only one law, together with any laws amendatory thereof, is included in any one division. The arrangement and numbering system in the White Plains Municipal Code, has been developed with the cooperation of city officers and employees. The Code is arranged into titles and the titles contain independent chapters. The sections in each chapter are catchlined to facilitate usage. 
As the Code contains many titles each chapter is preceded by an arabic number designating the title. Thus the second chapter of Title II is Chapter 2-2 and the second chapter of Title IX is Chapter 9-2. Section numbers are keyed to chapters so that the first section of Chapter 1-1 is section 1-1-1 and the first section of Chapter 2-1 is section 2-1-1. 
Under this system each section is identified with its title and chapter number and any additions can be inserted in their proper place by the use of the decimal system. New material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 2-4-2 and 2-4-3 would be designated as sections 2-4-2.1, 2-4-2.2 and 2-4-2.3, respectively. When appropriate sections have been reserved at the end of articles and divisions for future expansion. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 2-4 and 2-5 it will be designated as Chapter 2-4.1. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Footnotes which tie related sections of this publication together and which refer to relevant provisions of the state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within this publication is included at the back of this publication. The source of each section is indicated by the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables any ordinance, law, resolution, rule or regulation included herein can be readily found in the Code. 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service, by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Morton H. Zucker, Deputy Corporation Counsel, and to other city officers and employees too numerous to mention, for their invaluable cooperation and assistance in the preparation of the manuscript of this publication. 
The publication of this Code was under supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
Credit must also be to Mr. Robert L. Laslie, Vice President, who was the editor of the 1970 publication "Charter and Appendix of the City of White Plains, New York" from which the editor obtained the city charter and related materials. 
ORDINANCE ADOPTING CODE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting the White Plains Municipal Code; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing That no Local Law, Resolution, Rule or Regulation Contained Therein Is Adopted or Repealed; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; and Providing a Penalty for the Violations Thereof. 
The Common Council of The City of White Plains Hereby Ordains and Enacts as Follows: 
Section 1. That the White Plains Municipal Code, consisting of Chapters 1-1 through 9-10, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "White Plains Municipal Code," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances of the city passed on or before August 1, 1983, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force from and after the effective date of this ordinance and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of The City of White Plains, enacted on final passage on or before August 1, 1983, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not affect the following: 
(a)  any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; 
(b)  any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(c)  the administrative ordinances of the city, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(d)  any ordinance creating jobs or positions, or any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city or any ordinance providing social security, health insurance or retirement benefits for specific officers or employees of the city; 
(e)  any appropriation or budget ordinance; 
(f)  any right or franchise granted by the Common Council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(g)  any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(h)  any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; or any ordinance prescribing standards and specifications for streets and sidewalks within the city; 
(i)  any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(j)  any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same; 
(k)  any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(l)  any zoning ordinance of the city; 
(m)  any ordinance approving or authorizing any contract; 
(n)  any ordinance relating to urban renewal; 
(o)  any ordinance enacted after August 1, 1983; 
nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Nothing in this ordinance or in the Code adopted hereby shall be deemed to adopt, amend or repeal any local law, resolution, rule or regulation approved by the Common Council. It is hereby declared the intent of the Common Council that such local laws, resolutions, rules and regulations as are included in such Code are included only for the convenience of the user of the Code. 
Section 5. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments and all legislation which the Common Council desires made a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the Common Council. 
Section 6. That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
Section 7. That this ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
Adopted by the Common Council of the City of White Plains, N.Y., January 7, 1985.  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This is the Charter of the city of White Plains, being Ch. 356 of the Laws of 1915, as amended. The numbering system and catchlines are as set out in such act. In some instances, however, catchlines and other material have been added by the editors for clarity or to facilitate indexing; in such instances such material has been encased in brackets. In the original charter the symbol "§" was used for the term "section;" in catchlines the editors have used the term "Sec.". The editors have also used parentheses for editorially inserted numerals in the body of many sections, subsections and subparagraphs. 
Absence of a history note following a section in the charter indicates that the content thereof is set as originally enacted in the basic charter act; a history note enclosed in parentheses following a section indicates that such section has been amended by the act and/or local law cited in such history note. Provisions of such amendments, including, but not limited to, severability, repealer and effective date provisions, not being of a substantive or regulatory nature, have been deleted. Whenever the term "title" appears in the charter, such word is to be construed to mean "act". 
 
ARTICLE I. - CITY AND WARD BOUNDARIES; INCORPORATION[2] 
Section 
1.
Short title. 
2.
City boundaries. 
3.
Reserved. 
4.
Corporate name and powers. 
5.
Official and fiscal year. 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The city of White Plains lies in the County of Westchester which has its own Charter and Administrative Code. The city is a member of the Westchester County Public Welfare District, the County Health District and the County Laboratory District, the Bronx Valley Sanitary Sewer District and the Mamaroneck Valley Sanitary Sewer District. 
The city school district is a separate political entity created by Laws 1950, Ch. 762 and having its own taxing powers. 
 
Sec. 1. - Short title. 
This act shall be known as the charter of the city of White Plains.  
Sec. 2. - City boundaries. 
The territory in the county of Westchester included within the following boundaries shall constitute the city of White Plains. 
All that portion of the towns of White Plains, North Castle and Greenburgh, in the county of Westchester, which is embraced in the following limits, namely: 
Commencing at the center of the Bronx river, on the line dividing the towns of White Plains and North Castle, running thence southerly by and along the center of said Bronx river and along the division line between the town of White Plains and the town of Greenburgh till it comes to the junction of a small brook known as Randall's brook with said Bronx river, a little to the northward of the former residence of William Roberts, in said town of Greenburgh; thence running northwesterly and westerly by and along the center line of said brook, with its various windings and turnings until it comes to the northerly side of the highway which runs westerly from the westerly side of the Tarrytown road to Hart's Corners, now known as North street; thence westerly by and along the northerly line of said road which leads to Hart's Corners, until it comes to a bend in said last mentioned road, opposite the southeasterly corner of the former residence of Daniel Burtnett; thence running southwesterly by and along the northwesterly side of said road which leads to Hart's Corners, now known as Hartsdale road or Fulton street until it comes to the projection of the southerly line of the road which leads from White Plains over Chatterton's hill, now known as Battle avenue, nearly opposite the former residence of John Hart; thence running in a straight line southerly to the town line dividing the town of White Plains from the town of Scarsdale (at the westerly end thereof at its intersection with the Bronx river); thence southerly and southeasterly by said town line, to the west side of the highway known as the New York Post road, where the same is intersected by the division line between the towns of White Plains and Scarsdale; running from thence in a southerly and southeasterly direction along the division line between the said towns of White Plains and Scarsdale as the same winds and turns, to a small brook known as Branch brook; thence following the center line of the said brook in a southeasterly and southerly direction as it winds and turns, and still along the division line between the towns of Scarsdale and White Plains, to a point in the center line of the Mamaroneck river and to the town line of the town of Harrison; thence in a northeasterly, northerly, northwesterly and northeasterly direction through the center line of said Mamaroneck river and the center line of the west branch of the Mamaroneck river and by and along the division line between the towns of White Plains and Harrison, as said river and the west branch thereof winds and turns, continuing in said line to the line dividing the towns of White Plains and North Castle; thence westerly by and along said line between the towns of White Plains and North Castle to a point on the westerly line of Cottage avenue, so-called; thence northeasterly along the westerly side of Cottage avenue to an angle in said avenue; thence crossing said avenue to a point at the southeast corner of the land of the village of White Plains and used by the village of White Plains for water purposes; thence in a northeasterly, westerly, northerly, westerly, northerly, westerly, southerly, westerly and southerly direction along the lines of the lands of the village of White Plains owned and used for water purposes to a point where the westerly line of said lands intersects the division line between the towns of White Plains and North Castle; thence westerly by and along said line between the towns of White Plains and North Castle to the place of beginning. 
Being all of the territory heretofore comprising the village of White Plains as defined by chapter seven hundred and sixty-eight of the laws of eighteen hundred and ninety-six, and all that part of the town of White Plains, not included in the village of White Plains, lying southerly of said village and all that part of the town of North Castle owned and used by the village of White Plains for water purposes. 
Related laws references— Boundary line between city of White Plains, city school district, Town of Harrison in the Cross Westchester Expressway Right-of-Way, between the former Central Westchester Parkway and Maplemour Golf Course, Art. A, Div. 9; boundary line between city, city school district and Town of Harrison between a point in the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway and a point in Silver Lake, Art. A, Div. 11; boundary line between city of White Plains and Town of North Castle, Art. B, Div. 1.  
Sec. 3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of L.L. No. 1-1972 repealed former § 3 pertaining to ward boundaries.  
Sec. 4. - Corporate name and powers. 
The citizens of the state of New York, from time to time inhabitants of the territory comprised within the boundaries of the city of White Plains, shall be a municipal corporation, by the name of "the city of White Plains," and shall be a municipal corporation in perpetuity under its corporate name and the same shall in that name be a body politic and corporate in fact and in law, with power of perpetual succession. The city shall have power to make, have and use, and from time to time alter, a corporate seal; to sue and be sued; to acquire property in fee simple, or lesser interest or estate, by condemnation or by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or lease with the privilege to purchase, for any municipal purpose; to sell, lease, hold, manage and control such property, and make any and all rules and regulations by ordinance or resolution which may be required to carry out fully all the provisions of any conveyance, deed or will, in relation to any gift or bequest, or the provisions of any lease by which it may acquire property; to acquire by purchase or condemnation, contract, own, lease and operate and regulate public utilities; to make contracts for water supply; to erect suitable memorials in memory of the citizens of White Plains who were in the service of their country in the wars in which the United States were engaged; to assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all the subjects or objects which the city may lawfully tax; to appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; to create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things of the nature of public works and improvements and prescribe the width and grade of streets, and sidewalks and provide for the numbering of the lots or buildings adjoining the street; to levy and collect assessments for local improvements; to license and regulate persons, corporations and associations engaged in any business, occupation, profession or trade which it may be necessary or proper to license or regulate, to promote the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its inhabitants; to define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and all nuisances and causes thereof; may regulate the construction, height and material used in all buildings, and the maintenance and occupancy thereof; may regulate the planting, maintenance, protection and control of shade trees planted or growing upon the public highways or public places of said city, and for that purpose shall have power to enact an ordinance or ordinances providing for the appointment of a shade tree commission; and establish fire limits and require the erection of fire escapes; may regulate and license the construction of billboards, signs and similar structures; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purposes of the streets and other public places and require and compel railroad companies to provide flagmen or to erect and maintain gates at street crossings at grade and to suitably protect street crossings other than at grade and to regulate the obstruction of the streets by railway locomotives and cars and their running and rate of speed; may compel the owner or occupants of any premises adjoining any street to construct, maintain and repair sidewalks in front of said premises, including the space between the outside limits of the street and the curb and to erect barriers or safeguards at dangerous places and to remove snow and ice from such sidewalks and barriers and in case of the failure of such owner or occupant to remove such snow and ice, to assess the cost and expense thereof against such property; may create, establish, abolish and organize offices and fix the salaries and compensation of all officers and employees; may make and enforce local police, sanitary and other regulations; may regulate and license the running at large of dogs and provide for impounding and killing unlicensed dogs; may contract at the expense of the city for insurance indemnifying the city against any loss arising from injuries to persons or property, and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, good government and welfare of the city; and for the performance of the functions thereof. The city shall have all the powers that now are or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the constitution or laws of the state of New York; and all such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this act, or when not prescribed herein, in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the common council. The enumeration of particular powers in this act shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall have and may exercise, all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the state of New York, it would be competent for this act specifically to enumerate. 
(Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1925, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1928, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1951, § 1) 
Cross reference— Common council constituted and organized, § 28; legislative power of city vested in common council, § 32. 
State Law reference— Bill of rights for local governments, Const., Art. 9, § 1; grants of powers to local governments, Statute of Local Governments, § 10; general powers of the city, General City Law, § 19; powers enumerated, General City Law, § 20; power of local governments to adopt and amend local laws, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10; municipal powers, limitations and liabilities, General Municipal Law, § 70 et seq.  
Sec. 5. - Official and fiscal year. 
The official year of the city shall, except as otherwise provided in this act, commence on the first day of January, in each year. The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of July in each year and shall terminate at midnight on the thirtieth day of June next following. 
(L.L. No. 3-1951, § 1)  
ARTICLE II. - CITY OFFICERS; ELECTIONS; APPOINTMENTS; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS; COMPENSATIONS; VACANCIES[3] 
Section 
6.
City officers. 
7.
Elective officers. 
8.
Appointive officers. 
9.
Term of office. 
9-a.
Appointment of three full-time city court judges and one part-time city court judges. 
9-b.
Termination of powers, duties and jurisdiction of civil justices. 
10.
Eligibility. 
11.
Qualifications. 
12.
Election districts. 
13.
City elections; procedure in event of a tie. 
14.
Vacancies. 
15.
Notice to persons appointed. 
16.
Compensation of city officers and employees. 
17.
Fees and perquisites. 
18.
Official oaths and bonds of city officers. 
19.
Office and business hours of city officers. 
20.
Resignations and removals. 
21.
Appointments during disability and suspension. 
22.
Clerk to keep a book containing list of officers. 
23.
Power to administer oaths. 
24.
Reserved. 
25.
Officers to be elected at the first city election under this act. 
26.
City officers not to be interested in contracts. 
27.
Reserved. 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Regulation of powers and duties of officers by common council, § 39; emergency succession of mayor and others, §§ 46, 46-a; officers not to incur expenditures, debts or contracts in excess of appropriations, § 70; creation of debt, § 289. 
Code reference— Officers and employees generally, Ch. 2-5. 
State Law reference— Continuity of political subdivisions, Unconsol. L., § 9134-a(McKinney). 
 
Sec. 6. - City officers. 
City officers, within the meaning of this act, include all persons elected or appointed to any office of the city created or authorized by this act or otherwise by law.  
Sec. 7. - Elective officers. 
There shall be elected by the qualified electors of the city a mayor and six councilmen. 
(Laws 1964, Ch. 588, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 1) 
Cross reference— Common council constituted and organized, § 28; legislative power of city vested in common council, § 32; executive power, duties of mayor, § 45 et seq. 
State Law reference— Election of officers not provided for, Const., Art. 9, § 1(b).  
Sec. 8. - Appointive officers. 
There shall be appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the common council, a commissioner of finance, an assessor and a board of assessment review, a corporation counsel, a commissioner of public works, a commissioner of public safety, a commissioner of building, a commissioner of recreation and parks, one or more city marshals, a personnel officer, a commissioner of purchase, a commissioner of traffic, a commissioner of planning, a city clerk, a chief information officer, a commissioner of parking and a budget director. In order to obtain the consent of the common council to any such appointment, the mayor shall submit a nomination for such appointment to the common council, at a meeting of the common council, whose consent to such appointment shall be evidenced by either the affirmative vote of four members of the common council taken within thirty days of the nomination, or such consent shall be deemed to have been given if the common council fails to approve or disapprove such nomination within said thirty day period. Other officers may be appointed as provided in this act or otherwise by law. Any city officer, when authorized by the common council, may appoint a deputy or deputies, or other representatives, who when so appointed, shall be authorized to act generally for and in place of their principals, and other subordinates. The aforementioned officers shall appoint, direct, and have authority to discharge their respective staff. All appointments to any city office shall be evidenced by a certificate in writing, signed by the appointing officer and filed in the office of the city clerk, if an appointment is made by the common council, or by the mayor, with the consent of the common council, such certificate shall be signed by the officer presiding at the time the appointment was made and attested by the city clerk. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 627, § 1; Laws 1926, Ch. 633, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1932; L.L. No. 4-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 10-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1957, § 1; L.L. 5-1960, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1961, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1962, § 1; Laws 1970, Ch. 469, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1971, § 1; Laws 1972, Ch. 843, § 5; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 5; L.L. No. 4-1976, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1977, § 5; L.L. No. 2-1977, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1979, § 2; L.L. No. 7-1982, § 5; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 2; L. L. No. 2-1999, § 1; L.L. No. 1-2004, § 2; L.L. No. 2-2006, § 1; L.L. No. 3-2012, § 5; L.L. No. 3-2014, § 2) 
Editor's note— See § 74 of the charter and Arts. 5 and 15-A of the Real Property Tax Law for the duties of the assessor and board of assessment review generally. 
Cross reference— City clerk as clerk of common council, § 31; powers and duties of city clerk generally, § 50; powers, duties of commissioner of finance, § 51 et seq.; powers and duties of assessor and board of assessment review, § 74 et seq.; powers, duties, jurisdiction of commissioner of public works, § 117 et seq.; powers, duties of commissioner of public safety, § 219 et seq.; power, duties of commissioner of recreation and parks, § 238-b; duties of personnel director, § 238-g; duties of commissioner of purchase, § 238-i; duties of commissioner of building, § 238-u; duties of commissioner of planning and traffic, § 238-y; powers and duties of corporation counsel, § 239 et seq.; board of library trustees, general powers, appointment § 270 et seq. 
State Law reference— Appointment of officers not provided for, Const., Art. 9, § 1(b).  
Sec. 9. - Term of office. 
The term of office of each elective officer, unless elected to fill a vacancy then existing, shall commence on the first day of January next succeeding his or her election; the term of office of each appointive officer shall commence on the day succeeding his or her appointment unless a different date is specified in the certificate of appointment. The term of office of the mayor and the council shall be four years. The term of office of the four full-time city court judges shall be for a period of ten years, except that in accordance with chapter five hundred forty-eight of the laws of two thousand and thirteen, the term of the person serving in the part-time judgeship abolished by said act shall continue in service in the newly created full-time judgeship for the remainder of the term of office to which he was selected in the abolished judgeship until the nineteenth of December two thousand and fifteen. All other city officers shall be appointed without term and shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the common council, except as herein otherwise provided. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 627, § 2; Laws 1926, Ch. 633, § 2; Laws 1970, Ch. 469, § 2; Laws 1971, Ch. 81, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1976, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1976, § 1; Laws 1982, Ch. 790, § 1; L.L. No. 1-2003, § 1; L.L. No. 1-2007, § 1; L.L. No. 1-2014, § 1) 
Cross reference— See § 10 of Charter as last amended by Laws 1970, Chapter 469, § 4.  
Section 9-a. - Appointment of four full-time city court judges. 
The terms of the city court judges and the part-time city court judges in office upon the effective date of this act are continued until the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred eighty-two. In the month of January, nineteen hundred and eighty-three, and in such month or months every ten years thereafter, or upon the vacancy of such office, the common council shall appoint four full-time city court judges for a term expiring ten years from the date of such appointment. An appointment by the common council at any time to fill a vacancy in such offices shall be for a full ten year term if such vacancy occurs in the office of a full-time city court judge. 
The full-time city court judges shall give their whole time to their duties and shall not engage in the practice of law, act as an arbitrator, referee or compensated mediator in any action or proceeding or matter, engage in the conduct of any other profession or business which interferes with the performance of their duties as city court judges. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 627, § 3; Laws 1926, Ch. 633, § 3; Laws 1970, Ch. 469, § 3; Laws 1971, Ch. 81, § 2; Laws 1982, Ch. 790, § 1; L.L. No. 1-2003, § 2; L.L. No. 1-2007, § 2; L.L. No. 1-2014, § 2) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-2014 changed the title of § 9-a from "Appointment of three full-time city court judges and one part-time city court judge" to "Appointment of four full-time city court judges." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
Sec. 9-b. - Termination of powers, duties and jurisdiction of civil justices. 
Upon the appointment and qualification of the city judge and the acting city judge, as provided for in section 9-a of this act, in the month of January, nineteen hundred and twenty-seven, the powers, duties and jurisdiction of the civil justices then in office shall terminate. All actions and special proceedings commenced prior to the time this act takes effect before a civil justice of the city of White Plains may be prosecuted in the same manner and with the same effect as they might under the laws then existing and for that purpose the present civil justices in the city of White Plains shall continue to hold office until the determination of such actions and special proceedings. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 627, § 3; Laws 1926, Ch. 633, § 4)  
Sec. 10. - Eligibility. 
No person shall be elected to a city office in said city unless at the time of his or her election he or she is a resident elector of said city and shall have resided in the city for at least two years prior to his or her election. Whenever any elective officer shall cease to be a resident of said city his or her office shall thereby become vacant. 
A corporation counsel hereafter chosen shall be an attorney-at-law who has been admitted to practice in this state for at least five years. The four full-time city court judges hereafter appointed shall be attorneys-at-law who shall have been admitted to practice in this state for at least five years and shall be a resident of the city. No person shall at the same time hold more than one salaried city office. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 627, § 4; Laws 1923, Ch. 570, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1957, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1967, § 1; Laws 1970, Ch. 469, § 4; L.L. No. 7-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 1-2003, § 3; L.L. No. 1-2007, § 3; L.L. No. 1-2014, § 3)  
Sec. 11. - Qualifications. 
Every inhabitant in said city who shall at the time and place of offering his vote be qualified to vote for member of assembly shall be entitled to vote for all officers to be elected by virtue of this act in the ward and district where he shall be qualified.  
Sec. 12. - Election districts. 
The common council shall have authority to subdivide the several wards into election districts in accordance with the general election laws; and said districts, when so designated by said council, shall constitute election districts for all general and other elections to be held in said city, unless herein otherwise provided, and all provisions of law applicable to election districts and to the inspectors and other officers of election thereof and therein shall apply to said election districts, inspectors and other election officers. 
Code reference— Election districts, § 2-1-1. 
State Law reference— Division of city into election districts, Election Law, § 4-100.  
Sec. 13. - City elections; procedure in event of a tie. 
All city elections, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be held biennially on the Tuesday next succeeding the first Monday of November in each odd-numbered year, and shall be conducted and the votes cast thereat canvassed and the returns thereof made in all respects in the same manner as general elections in cities are required to be conducted, and all provisions of law relative to such elections shall be applicable to the election of officers of the city. In case of the failure to elect an elective city officer, except as otherwise provided herein, the office shall be deemed to be vacant for the purpose of choosing a successor and the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided herein for the filling of a vacancy in such office happening otherwise than by expiration of term. In each district for the election of officers under this act there shall be a ballot box and other boxes required by the general election law of the state. Upon the closing of the polls, the inspectors shall forthwith, without adjournment, canvass the votes, and shall make and certify statements of the result in the manner required by the general election laws of the state. Separate returns as to the city officers voted for shall be filed in the office of the city clerk on the next day succeeding the election. 
In the event that each of two (2) or more candidates for the office of Mayor or supervisor has more votes than any other candidate for the same respective office, and such votes are equal in number for such office, the common council shall appoint one of such tied-vote candidates as mayor, or supervisor, as the case may be, to serve until the first day of January next succeeding the first annual election after such appointment at which the vacancy can be filled. 
In the event that each of two (2) or more candidates for the office of councilman has more votes than any other candidates for such office, and such votes are equal in number, each shall be considered to be elected to such office, provided that no more persons shall be deemed to be so elected than there are offices of councilmen to be filled at such election. Should such candidates be more in number than the offices to be filled, the common council shall select and appoint whomever are to be deemed to be elected, such appointee or appointees to serve until the first day of January next succeeding the first annual election after such appointment at which a vacancy can be filled. Similar procedure should be followed in case of a tie vote among two (2) or more other candidates for the office of councilman, except that no more shall be selected and appointed than are necessary to fill the offices voted for at such election. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1960, § 1)  
Sec. 14. - Vacancies. 
Except as otherwise provided in this act, if a vacancy shall occur in any elective office of the city otherwise than by expiration of term, the common council shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy until the commencement of the political year next succeeding the first annual election after the happening of the vacancy at which the vacancy can be filled. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 2) 
Cross reference— Emergency succession of mayor and others, §§ 46, 46-a. 
State Law reference— Creation of vacancies, Public Officers Law, § 30; filling vacancies in elective offices, Public Officers Law, § 42; vacancies in office, Const., Art. 13, § 3; election, term of officers, Const., Art. 13, § 8.  
Sec. 15. - Notice to persons appointed. 
The city clerk shall give notice, in writing, to every person appointed to any office under this act of his appointment, within twenty-four (24) hours after the certificate of his appointment has been filed in his office, which notice shall be served personally, or by leaving it at the residence of such person, or by mailing such notice to the place of residence or business of the person so appointed. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 3)  
Sec. 16. - Compensation of city officers and employees. 
Effective January 1, 1990, the mayor shall receive an annual salary of $99,500, and each councilman shall receive a salary of $24,875, except that the member of the common council elected by said common council to serve as president shall receive an additional annual salary of $2,500. Effective January 1, 1991, the mayor shall receive an annual salary of $107,500, and each councilman shall receive an annual salary of $26,875. The common council by an ordinance adopted by a two-thirds vote of all its members shall have the power to fix the salaries or compensation of all other officers and employees of the city, except as to such officers and employees as are required to serve without compensation. All salary or compensation changes for other officers and employees of the city shall not take effect until commencement of the next ensuing fiscal year of the city, except by reason of collective bargaining negotiations and related adjustments. The salaries of all city officers and employees shall be payable in such installments and at such time as the common council shall determine. A person appointed to fill a vacancy or temporarily appointed to discharge the duties of an office during the sickness, absence or suspension from office of the incumbent shall receive such salary or compensation as the common council may fix and determine. 
Any further changes to the salaries for elected officials are to be adopted by ordinance at the time the city's annual budget is adopted. 
(L.L. No. 1-1959, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1965, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1969, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1975, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1981, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1983, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1985, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1989, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991; L.L. No. 1-1994, § 1) 
State Law reference— Increasing compensation during fiscal year prohibited, General City Law, § 25; payment of overtime compensation to public officers or employees, General Municipal Law, § 90; local law increasing salary of elective officer during term of office subject to referendum on petition, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 24(2)(h).  
Sec. 17. - Fees and perquisites. 
No city officer except city marshals shall have or receive to his own use any perquisites, compensation or fees for services pertaining, directly or indirectly of which may hereafter be added, to the duties of his office in addition to his salary; but any perquisite, compensation or fee legally chargeable for services performed by any such officer shall be collected by him and paid to the commissioner of finance for the benefit of the city. Except as otherwise provided by law, every city officer receiving any such perquisites, compensation or fees shall, at least once each week and more frequently if directed by the commissioner of finance, report in relation to and pay over same to the said commissioner of finance. 
(Laws 1926, Ch. 633, § 5; L.L. No. 3-1948, § 1)  
Sec. 18. - Official oaths and bonds of city officers. 
Each officer and appointee of the city shall before he enters upon the duties of his office take and file the constitutional oath of office. The said officer must take and file said oath within ten (10) days after notice in writing of his election or appointment and if he fails to do so and to file a bond as required by this section the office shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled as in case of a vacancy. Each commissioner of finance, commissioner of public safety, commissioner of public works, commissioner of recreation, commissioner of purchase, commissioner of building, city clerk, city judge, acting city judge and city marshal shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, execute and file an official bond of a solvent fidelity or surety company, authorized by the laws of this state to transact business, which must be approved by the common council; the penal sum named in such bond, or the sums specified in such undertakings as the maximum amount of liability thereon shall be fixed by the common council. Where a surety company is required, the cost thereof shall be a charge against the city. All bonds shall be properly endorsed and filed in the office of the city clerk. In addition to the officers required by this section to give bonds for the faithful performance of their several duties, the common council may require any officers, or any person who is or may be appointed by them, or by any other city officer, to give like bonds with sureties such as the common council may approve, conditioned as the council may direct, and the common council may whenever it deems proper, require additional further security of any officer or person after the giving of the bond first mentioned. The city of White Plains may sue for and recover for any breach of such bond or bonds. Nothing contained herein or in this act, as amended, shall prevent the use of a schedule or a blanket bond for any officer or employee as authorized by law. 
(Laws 1926, Ch. 633, § 6; L.L. No. 2-1960, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 3) 
State Law reference— Official undertakings generally, Public Officers Law, § 11 et seq.  
Sec. 19. - Office and business hours of city officers. 
All city offices shall be kept open for the transaction of business at such hours and times as the common council may from time to time direct. 
Code reference— Office hours designated, § 2-1-2. 
State Law reference— Operating hours of public offices, Public Officers Law, § 62.  
Sec. 20. - Resignations and removals. 
A city officer may resign his office by delivering a written resignation to the city clerk, and his resignation shall take effect upon the delivery thereof, unless a time be specified in such resignation, in which case such resignation shall take effect at the time so specified. Such resignation shall be filed with the city clerk in his office, and he shall immediately notify the officer, board or other body authorized to fill a vacancy in such office of such resignation. Any city officer, except the mayor, councilmen, city judge and acting city judge, may be removed from office by a majority vote of all the members of the common council to be taken by ayes and nays and recorded, at the pleasure of the common council and such officer may be suspended at the pleasure of the common council by a majority vote thereof. Any elective officer for whose removal no provision is made herein may be removed by the governor in the same manner as a sheriff, except that the governor may direct the inquiry provided by law be conducted by the attorney general. After charges have been received by the governor he may suspend the officer affected thereby for a period not exceeding sixty days pending the investigation. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to take from any officer or board the powers to remove subordinates according to law. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 627, § 5; Laws 1926, Ch. 633, § 7; L.L. No. 4-1976, § 3) 
State Law reference— Removal or suspension of appointive officer requires approval of mayor, General City Law, § 4; remedies for negligence, malfeasance of public officers, General Municipal Law, § 50 et seq.  
Sec. 21. - Appointments during disability and suspension. 
If any city officer, except the mayor, or councilmen, shall, from sickness, absence, suspension from office or from any other cause, be unable to discharge the duties of this office, the common council with respect to the library board trustees, city judge, acting city judge and associate city judges, and, the mayor with the consent of the common council with respect to all other city officers, may appoint some suitable person to discharge such duties during such disability, and the person so appointed shall have and exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties and be subject to all the provisions of law applicable to the officer whose place he shall supply, or to the officer or the duties of the office to which he is appointed, and shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 5; L.L. No. 4-1976, § 4)  
Sec. 22. - Clerk to keep a book containing list of officers. 
The city clerk shall keep a book, ruled in columns, in which he shall enter the name of every person elected or appointed to a city office, the name of the office, when elected or appointed, the commencement of the term, the expiration thereof, time of filing oath of office, and time of filing official bond, and every person so elected or appointed to any such office shall, upon filing his oath of office, subscribe his name beside the office to which he was elected or appointed. Such book shall be open at all times to the inspection of any elector of said city.  
Sec. 23. - Power to administer oaths. 
Every person elected or appointed to any office under this act shall have power to administer any oath or take any affidavit in respect to any matter before him as such officer. Any person who may be required to take any oath or affirmation or to make any affidavit or statement under oath or affirmation under oath or by virtue of any provision in this act, who shall under such oath or affirmation make any statement or affidavit or otherwise willfully swear falsely as to any material fact or matter, shall be guilty of perjury.  
Sec. 24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— As to the status of the board of supervisors, see Town of Greenburgh v. Board of Supervisors, 59 Misc. 2d 152, 298 N.Y.S. 2d 615 (S. Ct. 1969), aff'd. 32 App. Div. 2d 892, 30 N.Y.S. 2d 970 (S. Ct., App. Div. 1969), aff'd. 25 N.Y. 2d 817, 303 N.Y.S. 2d 673, 250 N.E. 2d 719 (Ct. App. 1969). This section was repealed by L. L. No. 1-1990, § 4.  
Sec. 25. - Officers to be elected at the first city election under this act. 
There shall be elected at an election to be held on the Tuesday next succeeding the first Monday of November in the year nineteen hundred and fifteen the following elective officers, provided for in this act, for the following terms, namely: A mayor, and three (3) councilmen, for a term beginning on the first day of January, nineteen hundred and sixteen, and expiring on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and seventeen, and three (3) councilmen, for a term beginning on the first day of January, nineteen hundred and sixteen, and expiring on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and nineteen. One supervisor from the first and second wards for a term beginning the first day of January, nineteen hundred and sixteen, and expiring on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and seventeen. One supervisor from the third and fourth wards for a term beginning on the first day of January, nineteen hundred and sixteen, and expiring on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and seventeen. One supervisor from the fifth and sixth wards for a term beginning on the first day of January, nineteen hundred and sixteen, and expiring on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred and seventeen. 
For the purposes of providing for the above election, the board of trustees of the village of White Plains are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to procure the necessary supplies and appoint the necessary election officers to hold and carry out such election, and to define and elect the various election district boundaries within said wards, if required, and to perform all acts necessary for the holding of the said election in a manner prescribed by the provisions of this charter and the provisions of the election law, and the said board of trustees of the village of White Plains are authorized, empowered and directed to act as a board of canvassers in and for the said election so held. 
For the election provided under this section, all persons, residents of the said city entitled to vote at the last general village election of the village of White Plains, and those taken within this city by this act, who are electors of the towns of North Castle and White Plains, and would be eligible to vote at a town election, are hereby declared to be entitled to vote for the officers provided under this act. 
When the officers elected as hereinbefore provided shall take office on the first day of January, nineteen hundred and sixteen, this act and the city of White Plains shall then be in full force and effect, and the present form of government, including all existing town, village and school districts within the territory incorporated under this act shall thereupon cease, be dissolved and terminate and the present officers of the territory so incorporated by this act shall turn over to the new city officers all the books, papers, records, and property of every kind, and shall account to the said officers for all funds or property of any kind of which they are properly chargeable as such officers.  
Sec. 26. - City officers not to be interested in contracts. 
(1)  No member of the common council of the city of White Plains shall, during the period for which he was elected, be capable of holding under the appointment or election of the common council any other office the emoluments of which are paid from the city treasury, or paid by fees or compensation directed to be paid by any act or ordinance of the common council, nor shall the mayor or any councilman or other public or city officer of the city of White Plains be directly or indirectly interested either as principal, surety or in any other manner, in any contract, lease, concession or other agreement to or in which the city is a party, but this section shall not affect the right to any fees or emoluments belonging to any office. 
(2)  The terms "city officer," "public officer" or "employee" shall mean and include the mayor, councilmen and any elective or appointive officer, deputy, subordinate, or any other employee of the city receiving salary or compensation for services, from funds appropriated by the city of White Plains. 
(3)  No city officer, public officer or employee shall voluntarily be pecuniarily or individually interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale or lease with the city, except for lawful compensation and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of duties. Any such contract, sale or lease made to or with the city shall be null, void and unenforceable. 
(4)  No city officer, public officer or employee representing or acting for the city shall accept any consideration, commission or gratuity from any vendor or real or personal property, purchased or acquired by the city, nor from any contractor of services to be rendered the city. 
(5)  The common council of the city of White Plains may allow sale of city bonds, notes or other obligations to, or may designate as a depository of city funds, any corporation in which any city officer or public officer or employee paid his compensation for services from city funds is only a director or officer or stockholder or employee of such corporation, provided not more than twenty-five per centum (25%) of the capital stock of the corporation is owned by all such city officers paid their compensation from city funds, who shall be deemed not interested individually in such sales or contracts under such conditions, and provided further that neither the commissioner of finance of the city nor any deputy or subordinate or employee in his office shall be a stockholder in any corporation which purchases city bonds, notes or other obligations or which is designated as a depository of city funds. 
(6)  The provisions of this entire section shall not apply to members of boards or commissions, appointed or created by the mayor or the common council of the city of White Plains, who receive no compensation or salary for services, but no such member of any board or commission of the city shall take part in, or vote or pass upon, any matter before said board or commission in which matter he has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest. 
(L.L. No. 7-1957, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 7-1957 which added § 26 to the Charter further provided in sec. 2 thereof that section three of chapter twenty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred nine, entitled "An act in relation to cities, constituting chapter twenty-one of the consolidated laws", as last amended by chapter eight hundred seventy-eight of the laws of nineteen hundred fifty-three, is hereby superseded in its entirety. Laws 1964, Ch. 946, §§ 13—15 provides for supersession of charter provisions inconsistent with General Municipal Law, Art. 18. 
Code reference— Code of ethics, § 2-5-106 et seq. 
State Law reference— Appointment of members of common council to other offices prohibited, General City Law, § 3; conflicts of interest of municipal officers and employees, General Municipal Law, § 800 et seq.  
Sec. 27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 27 was omitted from the basic Charter Act. Said section number is included by the editors to maintain sequence.  
ARTICLE III. - THE COMMON COUNCIL[4] 
Section 
28.
Common council, how constituted and organized. 
29.
Rules; meetings. 
30.
Discipline of members; expulsion. 
31.
Clerk of council; city clerk. 
32.
Legislative power. 
33.
Ordinances and appropriation of money; franchises. 
34.
Ordinances, publication. 
35.
Reserved. 
36.
Record of ordinances; evidence. 
37.
Penalties for violation of ordinances; actions to restrain violations. 
38.
Functions of city officers; how performed. 
39.
Regulation of powers and duties of officers. 
40.
Official newspaper; bills for printing. 
41.
Reserved. 
42.
Minutes of meetings. 
43.
Powers of members to incur expenses. 
44.
Special reports to the common council. 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Members of common council to be elected officials, § 7; term of office of common council members, § 9; filling of vacancies in elective offices, § 14; compensation of common council members, § 16; official oath and bond of city officers, § 18; resignations and removals of city officers, § 20; members of common council not to hold other city offices, § 26; power of common council as to street improvements, § 126. 
Code reference— Common council generally, Ch. 2-3. 
State Law reference— Local government to have elected legislative body, Const., Art. 9, § 1(b); appointment of members of common council to other city offices, General City Law, § 3; powers of city, General City Law, § 19; powers of city enumerated, General City Law, § 20; grants of power to local governments, Statute of Local Governments, § 10. 
 
Sec. 28. - Common council, how constituted and organized. 
The council shall consist of a mayor and six (6) councilmen. Each member of the council, including the mayor, shall have the right to vote on all questions coming before it. Four (4) members of the council will constitute a quorum, and unless otherwise provided by law the affirmative vote of four (4) members shall be necessary to adopt any motion, resolution or pass any measure coming before it. Less than a majority of all of the members of the common council, in the absence of a quorum, may adjourn a meeting of such common council from time to time, and adopt such measures as may be necessary to compel the attendance of absent members. 
Meetings of the council shall be public and stated meetings shall be held as the council may provide by ordinance or resolution, but at least one meeting shall be held each month. The mayor shall preside at all meetings but shall have no power of veto any other provisions of this act to the contrary notwithstanding. The first meeting of the common council in January of each year shall be the annual meeting. Said council shall at the annual meeting in each even-numbered year elect one of its members president of the common council, who shall hold office until his successor shall have been elected and qualifies, and who shall preside at all meetings in the absence of said mayor. A journal shall be kept in which full and accurate minutes of each meeting shall be recorded, including the result of the voting upon each resolution. Special meetings may be called by the mayor when he deems advisable and shall be called by him at the request of any two (2) councilmen by giving such written notice that the council may by ordinance or resolution direct. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 6) 
Code reference— Council meetings, § 2-3-16 et seq.  
Sec. 29. - Rules; meetings. 
The common council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings. Its meetings shall be public, except when the public interests require secrecy, but no vote shall be taken in secret or executive session. Its records shall be open to public inspection. The passage of an ordinance, unless otherwise herein provided, shall require the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 7; L.L. No. 2-1982, § 1) 
Code reference— Rules of order and procedure, § 2-3-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Quorum and majority established, General Construction Law, § 41; Open Meeting Law, Public Officers Law, § 95 et seq.  
Sec. 30. - Discipline of members; expulsion. 
The common council may compel the attendance of absent members at any meeting properly called, and may punish or expel a member for disorderly conduct, for the violation of its rules, or for official misconduct, or declare his seat vacant by reason of absence, provided such absence has continued for the space of four (4) months; but no expulsion shall take place and no vacancy on account of absence be declared except by the vote of three-fourths (¾) of all the members of the common council, or until the delinquent member has had an opportunity to be heard in his defense.  
Sec. 31. - Clerk of council; city clerk. 
The city clerk shall be the clerk of the common council, and shall attend its meetings, keep a journal of its proceedings, and discharge such other duties as by law further provided, or which may be prescribed by the city ordinances, or the direction of the common council not inconsistent therewith. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 8)  
Sec. 32. - Legislative power. 
The legislative power of the city is vested in the common council thereof, and it has the authority to enact, amend or repeal ordinances, not inconsistent with the laws of the state, for the government of the city and the management of its business, for the preservation of good order, peace and health, for the safety and welfare of its inhabitants, and the protection and security of their property; and its authority, except as otherwise provided in this act or by other laws of the state, is legislative only. The common council shall have power to establish any office, position or employment that may in its opinion be necessary or expedient for the carrying out of the provisions of this charter and to fix the salary and the duties thereof. The common council may at any time abolish any such office, position or employment established by it, whereupon the salary attached thereto shall thereupon cease. All the legislative acts of the common council shall be by ordinance, and on the vote on every ordinance, the yeas and nays of the members shall be taken and entered in full in the journal. 
(L.L. No. 8-1961, § 1) 
Cross reference— Corporate name and powers, § 4. 
Code reference— Introduction and notice, etc., of local laws, § 2-3-28 et seq. 
State Law reference— Powers of city enumerated, General City Law, § 20; powers of local governments, Statute of Local Governments, § 10; Bill of rights for local governments, home rule powers, statute of local governments, etc., Const. Art. 9; general powers to adopt, amend local laws, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10.  
Sec. 33. - Ordinances and appropriation of money; franchises. 
No ordinance shall be passed by the common council on the same day in which it is introduced, except by unanimous consent, which consent may be given by roll call vote or provided in writing on a form approved by and filed with the City Clerk prior to said roll call vote, and no appropriation of money shall be made for any purpose, except by an ordinance passed by a majority of all the members elected to the common council, specifying by items the amount thereof and the department or specific purpose for which the appropriation is made. No franchise shall be leased, assigned or otherwise alienated without the express consent of the city, and any franchise so leased, assigned or alienated without such consent shall be and become void. No exclusive franchise shall be granted; no franchise shall be made for a longer period than twenty-five (25) years, and no franchise shall be renewed prior to one year previous to its expiration. 
Every grant of a franchise or right shall provide that the city may, upon the payment therefor of its valuation, to be made as provided in the grant, purchase and take over the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part. 
No franchise, lease or right to use the streets or the public places or property of the city shall be granted by the city without fair compensation to the city therefor, and in addition to the other forms of compensation to be therein provided, the grantee shall be required to pay annually to the city such percentage of the gross receipts arising from the use of such franchise and of the plant used therewith as shall be fixed in the grant of said franchise. 
Every grant of a franchise or right shall provide that the city may, upon the payment therefor of its fair valuation, to be made as provided in the grant, purchase and take over the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part. 
The procedure to effect such purchase shall be as follows: 
When the council shall, by resolution, direct that the mayor shall ascertain whether any such property or part thereof, should be acquired by the city, or in the absence of such action of the council, when a petition subscribed by twenty-five per centum (25%) of qualified taxpayers requesting that the mayor shall ascertain whether any such property or part thereof should be acquired by the city, shall be filed with the clerk, the mayor shall forthwith carefully investigate said property and report to the council: 
(1)  At what probable cost said property may be acquired. 
(2)  What, if any, probable additional outlays would be necessary to operate same. 
(3)  Whether, if acquired, it could be operated by the city at a profit or advantage in quality or cost of service, stating wherein such profit or advantage consists. 
(4)  Whether, if acquired, it could be paid for out of its net earnings, and if so, within what time. 
(5)  Such other information touching the same as he shall have acquired. 
Such report shall be made in writing, shall include a statement of facts in relation thereto, with such particularity as will enable the council to judge of the correctness of his findings, and immediately after submission to the council, shall be filed with the clerk, recorded in a public utility record and published once in each of two (2) daily newspapers of general circulation published in the city, or printed and distributed in pamphlet form, as the council may deem best. 
Every grant reserving to the city the right to acquire the plant as well as the property, if any, of the grantees situated in, on, above or under the public places of the city, or elsewhere, used in connection therewith, shall in terms specify the method of arriving at the valuation therein provided for and shall further provide that upon the payment by the city of such valuation the plant and property so valued, purchased and paid for, shall become the property of the city by virtue of the grant and payment thereunder and without the execution of any instrument of conveyance; and every such grant shall make adequate provision by way of forfeiture of the grant, or otherwise, for the effectual securing of efficient service and for the continued maintenance of the property in good order and repair throughout the entire term of the grant. 
Whenever any plant or property shall become the property of the city of White Plains, the city shall have the option at any time then or thereafter, either to operate the same on its own account, or by ordinance to lease the same or any part thereof, together with the franchise or right to use the streets or other public property in connection therewith for periods not exceeding twenty-five (25) years under such rules and regulations as it may prescribe, or by ordinance to sell the same to the highest bidder at public sale. 
(Laws 1945, Ch. 839, § 70; L.L. No. 1-2019, § 1 )  
Sec. 34. - Ordinances, publication. 
No ordinance of the common council shall become operative until it has been enrolled and attested by the clerk, and whenever the same may be necessary, promulgated according to law; provided that in case of insurrection, riot, pestilence, conflagration or other public necessity requiring immediate operation of such ordinance, it shall take effect as soon as proclamation thereof has been made by the mayor and it, with such proclamation, has been posted in five (5) public places in each ward of the city. Except as aforesaid, no violation of an ordinance imposing a penalty or forfeiture for such violation shall be punishable until a notice setting forth the title of such ordinance, together with a statement that such ordinance is on file with the city clerk, shall have been published once in each week for two (2) successive weeks in the official newspaper of the city. Except as otherwise provided by law, or in the absence of an express provision in said ordinance to the contrary, any provision of an ordinance imposing or increasing fees shall take effect seven (7) days after adoption of such ordinance or on the effective date of such ordinance, whichever is later. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 322, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1960, § 9; L.L. No. 1-1966, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1997, § 1)  
Sec. 35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 35 was omitted in the numbering of the Charter, Laws 1915, Ch. 356. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 36. - Record of ordinances; evidence. 
Every ordinance shall, within a reasonable time after it becomes a law as herein provided, be recorded in a book kept for that purpose by the clerk. Such record shall include the attestation of the clerk, and as soon as the due publication is complete a certificate thereof shall be added to such record. Such record, or a certified copy thereof, shall be presumptive evidence of the passage of an ordinance. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 322, § 2)  
Sec. 37. - Penalties for violation of ordinances; actions to restrain violations. 
The common council may provide by a general ordinance, or in any ordinance, that any person guilty of a violation of such ordinance shall be liable to a fine which shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in amount, or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or to pay to the city a penalty not exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to be recovered in a civil action, or to both fine and imprisonment. Each and every day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain by injunction the violation of any ordinance of the common council, or an order of the commissioner of public safety or of the commissioner of building, notwithstanding that an ordinance may provide a penalty or fine for its violation. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 10; L.L. No. 3-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 5) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for penalties, forfeitures, General City Law, § 20(22).  
Sec. 38. - Functions of city officers; how performed. 
Whenever an executive or administrative function shall be required by an ordinance of the common council to be performed, the same shall be performed by the proper executive or administrative officer or department to be designated in the ordinance, and in case no such designation be thus made, the mayor shall make the same.  
Sec. 39. - Regulation of powers and duties of officers. 
The common council may, by ordinances passed by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all its members, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, or other laws of the state, regulate the powers and duties of any city officer or department.  
Sec. 40. - Official newspaper; bills for printing. 
At the annual meeting of the common council, it shall designate one daily newspaper published in the city, to be the official newspaper of the city, and such designation shall be of such daily paper as will print all such proceedings and ordinances of the common council, boards or offices of the city, as may be by law required to be published, and all demands and legal notices of said city, or any board or officer thereof, required to be published. No bid shall be accepted for a sum in excess of the fees as allowed by law. For the purpose of so letting the public printing, the city clerk shall, at least two (2) weeks before such annual meeting, give notice to the publishers of all daily papers within the city, of the fact of such letting, at the time above stated; but no papers shall be eligible to bid unless published as a bona fide daily paper of general circulation for at least one year previous to such bidding. The city clerk of the city of White Plains, first appointed pursuant to this act shall immediately upon his appointment publish the notice above required of the letting of such contract, and upon the receipt of bids therefor the common council shall immediately designate one daily newspaper published in the city to be the official newspaper of the city until the first annual meeting of the common council. If, for any reason, a designation of an official paper shall not be made at the annual meeting of the common council, the official paper previously designated shall continue to be the official paper of said city until a designation shall be made, as herein provided. Such paper shall publish the proceedings and ordinances of the common council and all other matters required by law or by ordinances of the city to be published. In case the official paper shall refuse or fail to act or perform as such or in case there shall be no bids received from a newspaper qualified to be designated as the official newspaper under this act, the common council may designate any newspaper published in the county of Westchester as the official newspaper of the city. All bills and accounts for publication in the official newspaper, and all city printing and advertising shall be a city charge. 
(L.L. No. 1-1942, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1960, § 11)  
Sec. 41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 41 was repealed by L.L. No. 2-1960, Sec. 12. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 42. - Minutes of meetings. 
The minutes of each meeting of the common council shall be printed in full within thirty (30) days after its adjournment and immediately distributed, one to the mayor, one to each member of the common council, one to the head of each department. At the end of the year the printed minutes shall be indexed and bound in such number as shall have been provided in the original letting of the official printing. 
(L.L. No. 2-1960, § 13)  
Sec. 43. - Powers of members to incur expenses. 
No member or committee of the common council has power to employ any person, incur any expense or purchase any material for or on behalf of the city or any of its officers, boards or commissions, except as expressly provided in this act.  
Sec. 44. - Special reports to the common council. 
All officers of said city who have any power as such officers to collect, receive or disburse money shall, when requested by the common council, render to it a verified statement and account of all moneys received or disbursed by them, and shall also, whenever required by the common council, personally appear and submit to an examination under oath by the common council or any committee thereof. A willful refusal or neglect to obey any such order of the common council shall be deemed a neglect of duty and a sufficient cause for removal from office.  
ARTICLE IV. - THE MAYOR; PRESIDENT OF COMMON COUNCIL; CITY CLERK[5] 
Section 
45.
Executive power. 
46.
Acting mayor. 
46-a.
Procedure in event of an extraordinary emergency. 
46-b.
Disability of mayor. 
46-c.
Vacancy in the office of mayor. 
47.
Duties. 
48.
Consultation with heads of departments. 
49.
Examination of accounts. 
50.
City clerk; additional powers and duties. 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Code reference— Officers and employees, Ch. 2-5. 
 
Sec. 45. - Executive power. 
The executive power of the city is vested in the mayor, and in such executive officers and departments as are or may be created by law, or by the ordinances of the common council.  
Sec. 46. - Acting mayor. 
Whenever by reason of disability, or sickness, or absence from the city, the mayor shall be prevented from or unable to attend to the duties of the office, or if the office of mayor is vacant and until a new mayor takes office, the president of the common council shall act as mayor and possess all of the rights of mayor, except entitlement to fees or compensation of any kind as may be prohibited by a general law of the state applicable to the city. The acting mayor shall not exercise any power of appointment or removal from office unless the mayor's sickness or absence shall have continued for a period of thirty days. In the event that the mayor and the president of the common council shall be prevented from attending to the duties of the office of mayor, by reason of disability, sickness, or absence from the city, or that the president of the common council informs the common council immediately of an inability to serve as acting mayor, a majority of the then-members of the common council, any other section of this charter notwithstanding, shall designate one of their number to act as mayor. Such person who acts as mayor shall be the acting mayor until the disability, sickness, absence, or vacancy no longer exists. 
(L.L. No. 2-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1957, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1960, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1976, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Succession to certain city offices, General City Law, § 2-a; continuity of political subdivision, Unconsol. L., § 9134-a (McKinney).  
Sec. 46-a. - Procedure in event of an extraordinary emergency. 
If, as a result of an attack, actual or imminent, or series of attacks by an enemy or a foreign nation upon the United States, causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property or persons in the city of White Plains in any manner by sabotage or by the use of bombs, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological or biological means or other weapons or processes, or if as a result of a natural or peacetime disaster, the office of mayor becomes vacant, or the mayor by reason of disability or absence from the city shall be prevented from attending to the duties of the office of mayor, and the president of the common council is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor or be absent from the city, and there shall not be a majority of the members of the common council able, because of disability or absence from the city, to select one of their number to act as mayor, or if for any other reason, they are unable to select one of their number to act as mayor, then the councilman longest in service as such councilman shall act as mayor during such vacancy, disability or absence. Should such councilman longest in service be unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor, or be absent from the city, the councilman next longest in service shall so act as mayor during such disability or absence, and if he is unable to discharge such powers and duties or be absent from the city, the councilman next longest in service shall so act as mayor during such disability or absence, and such progression shall continue so long as such disability or absence continues and there be councilmen to act as mayor. Such person shall have for such period the same powers and be subject to the same limitations as are hereinbefore specified for the president of the common council acting as mayor. A councilman acting as mayor under the aforesaid circumstances shall not receive the salary of the mayor while so acting nor shall he receive any compensation for so acting other than the salary of the office of councilman. Should two (2) or more councilmen able to so act have the same length of service as such councilman, the one to act as mayor shall be selected by lot. If a vacancy shall occur in any elective office of the city, in the event of such extraordinary emergency, the common council, or if vacancies have reduced its membership to less than a majority then a majority of the remaining members of the common council, shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy until the commencement of the political year next succeeding the first annual election after the happening of the vacancy. If any city officer except the mayor, councilman or supervisor, shall, from sickness, absence, suspension from office by the common council or from any other cause, be unable to discharge the duties of his office, in the event of or during such extraordinary emergency, the common council, or if vacancies have reduced its membership to less than a majority then a majority of the remaining members of the common council, shall appoint some suitable person to discharge such duties during such disability and the person so appointed shall have and exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties and be subject to all the provisions of law applicable to the officer whose place he shall supply, or to the officer or the duties of the office to which he is appointed and shall receive such salary as shall be fixed by the members of the common council making such appointment. 
(L.L. No. 7-1960, § 1) 
State Law reference— Succession to certain city offices, General City Law, § 2-a; continuity of local governments in event of public disaster, General Municipal Law, § 60; continuity of political subdivisions, Unconsol. L., § 9134-a (McKinney).  
Sec. 46-b. - Disability of mayor. 
(a)  In the event that the mayor is temporarily disabled, the provisions relating to the acting mayor shall become operative. 
(b)  The mayor shall be deemed temporarily disabled upon delivery by the mayor to the city clerk of a writing stating that the mayor is unable to perform the duties of the office. 
(c)  A vacancy in the office of mayor shall exist upon the effective date of permanent disability of the mayor. 
(d)  The mayor shall be deemed to be permanently disabled effective: 
(1)  Upon delivery by the mayor to the city clerk of a writing stating that the mayor is unable to resume the duties of office; or 
(2)  Upon the expiration of any consecutive period of ninety days during which, without notification to the city clerk of temporary disability as hereinabove provided, the mayor has been absent from each meeting of the common council; or 
(3)  Upon the expiration of a consecutive period of one hundred twenty days, without notification to the city clerk of temporary disability as hereinabove provided, during any ninety of which the mayor is absent from the mayor's office or fails to perform the duties of office; or 
(4)  Upon the adoption by the common council of a resolution approved by the affirmative votes of at least five members declaring that, for the reasons stated in said resolution relating to the mayor's inability to discharge, or nonperformance of, the duties of office, the mayor is permanently disabled. 
(e)  The effective date of permanent disability shall be stayed if, before the expiration of the ninety days of absence from meetings of the common council or from office, or within ten days after the adoption by the common council of a resolution of permanent disability, the mayor presents to the common council a request for a physical examination by the city medical board of the mayor's ability to resume the duties of office: 
(1)  Immediately after such request the physicians who comprise the city medical board, appointed by the common council pursuant to this charter, shall cause to be made a physical examination of the mayor in connection with the mayor's ability to resume the duties of office. As promptly as possible thereafter the medical board, acting by a majority, shall report to the common council whether the mayor will be able to resume the duties of office within sixty days from the date of the mayor's request for such examination. 
(2)  If the medical board reports that the mayor will not be able to resume the duties of office within such sixty days, the mayor's permanent disability shall become effective as of the date of said report. 
(3)  If the medical board reports that the mayor will be able to resume the duties of office within such sixty days, the effective date of permanent disability shall remain stayed for such sixty days and the mayor shall be continued in office during such period as temporarily disabled. 
(4)  If the mayor fails to resume the duties of office within such sixty days then, notwithstanding the medical board report, the mayor's permanent disability shall become effective upon the expiration of such sixty day period. 
(L.L. No. 3-1976, § 3)  
Sec. 46-c. - Vacancy in the office of mayor. 
If a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor, the common council shall initiate the proceedings available to it for the purpose of ordering a special election to be held within sixty days of the occurrence of the vacancy, unless such vacancy arises within six months of a general election and prior to September twentieth of any year, in which case the vacancy shall be filled at the general election. If the vacancy is filled either by special election or at the general election, the person elected mayor shall take office upon election and shall serve as mayor for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(L.L. No. 3-1976, § 4)  
Sec. 47. - Duties. 
The mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of the laws of the state applicable to the city, the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of this city; he shall execute in the name of the city all contracts or other instruments requiring the assent of the city except as otherwise provided by the local finance law; he shall be charged with the general oversight of all departments, boards and commissions of the city; he shall have such other rights and powers as may be provided by ordinance or assigned to him by said council and not in conflict with this charter. He shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this act or by law or by ordinance of the common council not inconsistent with law. He shall not engage in any other business or occupation conflicting with the performance of the mayor's duties. 
(Laws 1943, Ch. 710, Pt. 3, Title 62, § 1040; Laws 1945, Ch. 839, § 71; L.L. No. 2-1976, § 1) 
State Law reference— Removal or suspension of appointive officer requires approval of mayor, General City Law, § 4; provisions as to city civil defense forces, authority of mayor, General Municipal Law, §§ 209-n, 209-o.  
Sec. 48. - Consultation with heads of departments. 
The mayor shall call together the heads of the city departments for consultation and advice upon the affairs of the city as often as he may deem advisable; and at such meetings he may call upon the heads of the departments for such reports as to the subject-matters under their control and management as he may deem proper, which it shall be their duty to prepare and submit at once to him.  
Sec. 49. - Examination of accounts. 
The mayor shall have authority at all times to examine the books and papers of any officer, employee, court, department or board of the city, and as often as he may deem proper, to appoint one or more competent persons, whose compensation shall be fixed by the common council, to examine, without notice, the accounts of any city officer, department, board, court or employee, and the money, securities and property belonging to the city in the possession or charge of any officer, department, board, court, or employee, and to report to the common council the result of such examination; and he may administer oaths to witnesses and take affidavits in all cases relating to the affairs of the city.  
Sec. 50. - City clerk; additional powers and duties. 
The city clerk shall have an office in the city hall. In addition to the other duties herein prescribed he shall have custody of the corporate seal; carefully index, file and arrange in his office, for convenient use, all books and papers required by law or the common council; see that all matters requiring publication are promptly and correctly published; except as otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, sign all licenses and enter in an appropriate book the name of every person to whom a license shall be granted, the date and particulars thereof, and the sum paid therefor. At the end of each week he shall pay the amount so received to the commissioner of finance, and report to the commissioner of finance the amount so received. Within twenty-four (24) hours after any resolution directing the payment of any money shall take effect, he shall furnish to the commissioner of finance, certified copies of such resolution, with a statement of the proceedings of the common council relating thereto. He shall immediately notify every person appointed to any office, and shall give notice to all members of the common council, of special meetings thereof. He shall serve, or cause to be served, all notices required by the common council, and perform such other duties as it may require. His office is hereby declared a town clerk's office for the purpose of depositing and filing therein all books and papers required by law to be filed in a town clerk's office, and he shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties of a town clerk not inconsistent with this act or the Local Finance Law. Copies of all such papers duly filed in his office and of the records of the proceedings of the common council and of any board of which he is clerk or secretary, certified by him under the corporate seal of the city, shall be evidence in all courts and places the same as the originals. When required to make copies of records he shall be entitled to twenty cents ($0.20) a folio therefor, except from the city. In case of the temporary absence or disability of the clerk, if there be no deputy clerk, the common council may appoint a clerk for the time being, who, on taking the required oath, shall possess the powers and perform the duties of the clerk during the continuance of such absence or disability. 
(Laws 1943, Ch. 710, Pt. 3, Title 62, § 1041; L.L. No. 4-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1960, § 14)  
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE; COMMISSIONER OF FINANCE[6] 
Section 
51.
Duties of commissioner of finance; department accounts; drafts. 
52.
Form, approval and presentation of claims. 
53.
Notice of claims; audit. 
54.
Appeal from audit of claim. 
55.
Allowed claims to be filed. 
56.
Custody of sinking funds. 
57.
Name of claimant; complaints against claims. 
58.
Annual financial statement of commissioner of finance. 
59.
Commissioner of finance as custodian of certain city property; transfer to successor. 
Secs. 60, 61.
Reserved. 
62.
State, county and special district taxes. 
63.
Reserved. 
64.
Reserved. 
65.
Investment of capital funds. 
66.
Reserved. 
67.
Bonds not to be issued for certain purposes. 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 6 of L.L. No. 1-1990 deleted "Tax Budget and Bonds" from the end of the title of this article. 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; assessment, levy and collection of taxes generally, § 74 et seq.; collection of water charges, § 199; monies, funds, received by the public library to be paid over and delivered to commissioner of finance, § 271; annual reports of departments, § 287; capital projects board, § 238-p et seq.. 
Related laws reference— Capital notes, Art. A, Div. 8. 
Code reference— Taxation and financial affairs, Ch. 2-4. 
State Law reference— Local finances, Const., Art. 8; authority to levy and collect taxes, General City Law, § 20(4); to spend money for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(5); to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11); to regulate manner of transacting city's business and affairs and the reporting of and accounting for all transactions concerning the city, General City Law, § 20(19). 
 
Sec. 51. - Duties of commissioner of finance; department accounts; drafts. 
The commissioner of finance shall superintend the fiscal concerns of the city and manage the same pursuant to law and ordinances of the common council. He shall receive and have the care and custody of all moneys of the city, and he shall pay them out as hereinafter provided. He shall be receiver of all taxes and assessments assessed or collected in said city, and shall demand, collect and receive all claims and moneys due to the city from any source. All moneys of the city received by the commissioner of finance shall be deposited by him daily in one or more incorporated banks or trust companies to the credit of the city. The interest on such deposits shall belong to the city. The commissioner of finance shall require each bank, trust company or other banking depositary in which the funds of the city are deposited, to provide collateral for such funds in accordance with the investment policy of the city of White Plains. Such collateral shall be subject to the approval of, and shall be deposited in such place and held under such conditions as the commissioner of finance may determine. In lieu of such collateral, the commissioner of finance may, in his discretion, accept a bond, with a bonding or surety company authorized to conduct business in the state of New York, as surety, for the security of such deposit of city funds. He shall keep bank books in which shall be entered his account of deposits in, and moneys drawn from the banks in which such deposits shall be made; no money shall be drawn out of a city depositary except on checks or drafts signed by the commissioner of finance, and such checks or drafts shall always be made payable to the person entitled to receive the money, unless such money be drawn for public use in the office of the commissioner of finance, in which case the checks, so signed, shall be payable to the order of the commissioner of finance. The commissioner of finance shall keep a separate account with every department for which funds are specially raised by tax, or for which funds are raised by assessment for local or other improvements, and in every check or draft drawn by him he must state particularly against which of such funds the check or draft is drawn (unless money is drawn for use in the office); he shall at no time permit any fund to be overdrawn, or draw upon one fund to pay a claim chargeable to another; and no money shall be paid out by him unless upon a bill, claim, draft or warrant audited or drawn by the proper officer, board or department, except for principal and interest upon the bonds or notes of the city. 
The commissioner of finance shall establish and maintain a system of accounts which is in conformity with generally accepted municipal accounting principals, and such system of accounts shall be used in each office, department, board, commission and other expending agency, after approval thereof by the common council. He shall perform such other and further duties pertaining to his office, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act or of law, as may from time to time be prescribed by ordinance of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 1-1932, § 1; Laws 1943, Ch. 710, Pt. 3, Title 62, § 1042; L.L. No. 8-1961, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 7) 
Cross reference— Payment of taxes to commissioner of finance, § 85; sale of tax liens to be conducted by commissioner of finance, § 91. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy and collect taxes, General City Law, § 20(4); to spend money for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(5); to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 52. - Form, approval and presentation of claims. 
The commissioner of finance shall prescribe the form of all claims to be presented against the city, and the form and substance of any certification, or verification procedure to accompany the claim. Whenever any person intends to present for payment a claim against the city, he shall prepare and certify or verify it, in accordance with the prescribed procedure, if any and the same shall then be presented to the commissioner of finance, for his examination and audit. 
(Laws 1953, Ch. 878, § 316; L.L. No. 3-1960, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 8)  
Sec. 53. - Notice of claims; audit. 
The commissioner of finance shall, twice in every month, cause all claims which have been presented to him for audit, to be tabulated and numbered consecutively, and the number, date of presentation, name of claimant and brief statement of the character of each claim shall be entered in a book kept for such purpose, which shall at all times during office hours, be so placed as to be convenient for public inspection and examination. The commissioner of finance shall audit such claims, and shall cause a report thereof, listing the claims as to those approved and those rejected or disallowed, in whole or in part, with any reason for such action which he may have to give, to be sent to the common council, and if he has rejected or disallowed any claim or part of any claim he shall cause notice of such rejection or disallowance to be sent to the claimant. 
(L.L. No. 1-1962, § 1) 
Code reference— Corporation counsel to keep records of notices of claims, § 2-1-5. 
State Law reference— Filing of claims against city, General Municipal Law, § 50-e.  
Sec. 54. - Appeal from audit of claim. 
If the claimant be dissatisfied with the audit, or if the commissioner of finance refuses or neglects to audit, the claimant may appeal to the common council, by serving notice of appeal, in writing, upon the commissioner of finance and the common council at any time before the second stated meeting of the common council that is held after he received notice of the audit of the commissioner of finance, except in the case where the commissioner of finance has neglected or refused to audit such claim an appeal may be taken at any time. The common council shall make rules for the procedure upon the hearing of such appeals, and the decision and audit of the common council, after hearing upon the appeal by it, shall be final and conclusive as to the amount of the claim; but if there be no appeal from the original audit, it shall in like manner be final and conclusive. The commissioner of finance, and the common council, upon an appeal to it as herein provided, shall have authority to take evidence and examine witnesses in reference to the claim, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses. 
(L.L. No. 1-1962, § 2)  
Sec. 55. - Allowed claims to be filed. 
When a claim has been finally allowed, it, with the certificate of the commissioner of finance, or, in case of appeal, with the certificate of the common council indorsed thereon, shall be filed in the office of the commissioner of finance and remain a public record in his office, and the commissioner of finance shall pay such claim. 
(L.L. No. 1-1962, § 3)  
Sec. 56. - Custody of sinking funds. 
The commissioner of finance shall have, under the direction of the ordinances of the common council, the custody and management of any sinking fund. 
(Laws 1943, Ch. 710, Pt. 3, Title 62, § 1043) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish, maintain sinking fund, General City Law, § 20(6).  
Sec. 57. - Name of claimant; complaints against claims. 
(1)  All claims against the city shall be in the names of the claimants. No member of a board, or any officer of the city shall knowingly approve or pay any claim presented in a name other than that of the claimant. 
(2)  The commissioner of finance, upon receipt of a complaint under oath and in writing, signed by any citizen, stating that he has reason to believe that any illegal claim has been presented, shall withhold payment of the claim until satisfied of its legality. If he shall be satisfied of its legality, he shall approve the same, and give notice to the claimant and the citizen who made the complaint, and after fifteen (15) days after giving such notice, he shall pay such claim, unless such citizen shall have appealed to the common council in the manner hereinafter set forth. If the commissioner of finance shall not be satisfied of the legality of such claim, he shall disallow the claim, in whole or in part, or reject the claim. He shall give notice of his action thereon to the claimant and the citizen who made the complaint, and after fifteen (15) days after giving such notice, he shall pay the part of the claim which he allowed, if any, unless either the claimant or the citizen who made the complaint shall have appealed to the common council, in the manner hereinafter set forth. 
(3)  The appeals provided for in this section shall be taken within the time provided in paragraph two above, by serving notice of appeal in writing, upon the commissioner of finance and the common council. The common council may make rules for the procedure upon the hearing of such appeals, and the decision and audit of the common council, after hearing upon the appeal by it, shall be final and conclusive as to the amount of the claims. The commissioner of finance, and the common council, upon an appeal to it as herein provided, shall have authority to take evidence and examine witnesses in reference to the claim, and for that purpose may issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses. 
(4)  When a claim has been finally allowed, pursuant to this section, it, with the certificate of the commissioner of finance, or, in case of appeal, with the certificate of the common council indorsed thereon, shall be filed in the office of the commissioner of finance and remain a public record in his office, and the commissioner of finance shall pay such claim. 
(5)  A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(L.L. No. 1-1962, § 4) 
State Law reference— Punishment for violations, Penal Law, § 55.10.  
Sec. 58. - Annual financial statement of commissioner of finance. 
The commissioner of finance shall, as soon as practicable after the thirtieth day of June in each year, but in no event later than the stated meeting of the Common Council in December in the same year, publish in book or pamphlet form, verified by his or her oath or affirmation, and audited by a certified public accountant, a full and accurate report of the financial position of the city as of the thirtieth day of June in such year, and the result of operations of all of the several funds of the city for the fiscal year then ended; such publication to include, but not be limited to, the amount of receipts and expenditures for each fund, the sources from which the funds have been derived and for what purpose expended, and a listing of the several debts of the city, when the same are payable and the rate of interest on each. The commissioner of finance shall file a copy of every such report in the office of the state comptroller. 
(Laws 1916, Ch. 167, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1951, § 2; L.L. No. 8-1961, § 3; L.L. No. 2-2004, § 1) 
Cross reference— Annual report of departments, § 287.  
Sec. 59. - Commissioner of finance as custodian of certain city property; transfer to successor. 
The commissioner of finance shall keep maps, deeds, leases and all other evidence of title and debt, and other valuable papers belonging to the city. He shall pay or transfer to his successor all moneys belonging to the city in any bank or in his hands or control, and shall also deliver all books, vouchers, papers and property belonging to the city or appertaining to the affairs of the city held by him as commissioner of finance.  
Secs. 60, 61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1977, sec. 1, renumbered former secs. 60 and 61 as secs. 68 and 69, respectively. L.L. No. 1-1980, sec. 1, repealed L.L. No. 1-1977, thus reinstating the former numbering sequence. L.L. No. 7-1982, sec. 1, renumbered former secs. 60 and 61 as secs. 68 and 69 respectively. Secs. 60 and 61 have been reserved by the editors to maintain numerical sequence.  
Sec. 62. - State, county and special district taxes. 
When there has been received by the city from the county of Westchester a certificate of apportionment of state, county and special district taxes, together with a certified copy of the act of the county board of legislators as to such apportionment, the amount so certified shall be assessed on all real estate in the city (except property exempt by law) and shall be extended on the assessment roll by the commissioner of finance of the city of White Plains. Such assessment of taxes shall be extended on the assessment roll of the city which becomes final on March first immediately following the date of the certificate of apportionment referred to herein. The assessment roll so extended shall become the tax roll for the state, county and special district taxes which shall become due and payable on the first day of April immediately thereafter. The same fees and penalties shall apply to the collection thereof and the lien thereof may be sold the same as the lien of city taxes. Taxes so collected shall be paid by the city to the county in accordance with the real property tax law. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 2; L.L. No. 8-1961, § 10; L.L. No. 3-1967, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1977, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1982, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 9) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1977, sec. 4, renumbered former § 73 as § 62. L.L. No. 1-1980, sec. 1, repealed L.L. No. 1-1977, thus reinstating the former numbering sequence. L.L. No. 7-1982, sec. 4 renumbered former sec. 73 as sec. 62. See also Westchester County Administrative Code, Article 9, Title C, Sewers. 
State Law reference— Payment of taxes to county by cities in Westchester County, Real Property Tax Law, § 1512; levy and collection of taxes generally, Real Property Tax Law, Art. 9.  
Sec. 63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 63 is now § 73.  
Sec. 64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1977, sec. 1, renumbered former sec. 64 as sec. 70. L.L. No. 1-1980, sec. 1, repealed L.L. No. 1-1977, thus reinstating the former numbering sequence. L.L. No. 7-1982, sec. 1, renumbered former sec. 64 as sec. 70. The editors have reserved sec. 64 to maintain numerical sequence.  
Sec. 65. - Investment of capital funds. 
Unexpended balances in any funds of the city of White Plains for capital improvements financed other than by the issue of obligations may be invested in accordance with the investment policy of the city of White Plains. Such investment shall be made by the common council or by the mayor and the commissioner of finance if the common council shall delegate such duty to them. Such obligations shall be registered or inscribed in the name of the city of White Plains. Only such obligations shall be so purchased as shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the city of White Plains within such time as the proceeds shall be needed to meet expenditures for the object or purpose of the fund in which such moneys are contained, but such obligations, in any event, shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the city of White Plains within two (2) years of the date of purchase. Any interest earned or capital gain realized on the moneys so invested shall accrue to and become part of each such fund. The separate identity of each such fund shall be maintained at all times whether its assets consist of cash or investments or both. The commissioner of finance shall require each bank, trust company or other banking depositary in which the funds of the city are deposited, to provide collateral for such funds in accordance with the investment policy of the city of White Plains. 
(L.L. No. 3-1939, § 5; L.L. No. 11-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1961, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 10) 
State Law reference— Capital reserve funds generally, General Municipal Law, § 6-c; investment of moneys in reserve funds, General Municipal Law, § 6-f; temporary investments, General Municipal Law, § 11.  
Sec. 66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 66 was repealed by L.L. No. 3-1936, sec. 6. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain numerical sequence.  
Sec. 67. - Bonds not to be issued for certain purposes. 
No bonds shall be issued for current operating expenses, repairs or supplies, or for the city's share of the cost of curbs, gutters or sidewalks. 
(Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 2; Laws 1935, Ch. 146, § 1; Laws 1945, Ch. 839, § 72) 
Code reference— Budget notes, § 2-4-3.  
ARTICLE V-A. - DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET[7] 
Section 
68.
Budget. 
69.
Appropriation for hospital purposes; pavements; sewers, sidewalks and curbs; park purposes; celebrations. 
70.
Expenditures, debts or contracts in excess of appropriation. 
71.
Additional management control; duties of budget director. 
72.
Sinking funds. 
73.
Transfers of capital funds. 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Official and fiscal year of city defined, § 5; payment of judgments against city from tax budget, § 278. 
Code reference— Annual budget, § 2-14-16 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy and collect taxes for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(4); to spend money for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(5); annual budget defined, Local Finance Law, § 2.00(10). 
 
Sec. 68. - Budget. 
(1)  Description. The budget for the city of White Plains shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall set forth all proposed expenditures and all anticipated revenues according to the terms and conditions herein set forth. 
The terms used to designate different fiscal years mentioned hereinafter in paragraphs two to eight inclusive are defined as follows: 
(a)  The term "budget year" shall be used to describe the fiscal year for which the budget is being prepared. 
(b)  The term "current year" shall be used to describe the fiscal year during which the budget is being prepared. 
(c)  The term "preceding year" shall be used to describe the fiscal year immediately preceding that during which the budget is being prepared. 
(2)  Preparation of the Budget. Not later than February fifteenth in the current year, all heads of departments, officers and other spending agencies of the city shall prepare and submit to the budget director estimates of the expenditure requirements and their estimated revenues for the budget year, compared with the corresponding actual figures of the preceding year and the actual figures for the expired portion and their estimates of figures for the unexpired portion of the current year. Revenue and expenditure estimates shall be classified in a manner and in such detail as may be prescribed by the budget director. 
The budget director shall review the estimates, altering, revising, increasing or decreasing the items of said estimates as he shall deem necessary in view of the needs of the various spending agencies and the probable total available revenue of the city. The budget director may call upon the city officers, heads of departments and other spending agencies of the city for information and details of the estimates submitted by them and it shall be the duty of such officers, heads of departments and other spending agencies to furnish such information and details to the budget director. The budget director shall then prepare a proposed budget in the form required by law and he shall transmit this proposed budget in writing to the common council at the stated meeting of the common council in April of the current year. Copies of the proposed budget shall be available to the public immediately following such transmission to the common council. 
(3)  Budget Document. The budget document, setting forth the financial plan of the city for the budget year, shall embrace three (3) parts as follows: 
PART I 
A budget message prepared by the budget director shall outline the financial plan of the city for the budget year, to wit: the important features of the proposed budget, a general summary of the budget setting forth the aggregate figures in such manner as to show the balanced relations between the total proposed expenditures and the total anticipated revenues and other means of financing the budget for the budget year, contrasted with the budget figures for the current year, the actual figures for the expired portion of the current year and the actual figures for the preceding year. 
PART II 
The general budget summary shall be supported by explanatory schedules or statements, classifying the expenditures contained therein by organization units, objects and funds and the revenue by organization units, sources and funds. 
PART III 
There shall also be included a statement of the indebtedness of the city showing the debt redemption requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, the condition of any sinking funds and the borrowing capacity. In addition, there shall be included any statements relative to the financial plan which the budget director may deem pertinent. 
(4)  Budget Hearing. Final action shall not be taken on the proposed budget until a public hearing has been held thereon after notice of such hearing has been published in the official newspaper for three (3) days, the first publication of which shall be at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. It shall be the duty of the common council to arrange for and hold such a hearing. 
(5)  Adoption of the Budget. 
(A)  The common council shall consider the proposed budget as submitted to it. Such body may revise, alter, increase or decrease the items of proposed expenditures and may decrease the estimated amounts of revenues contained in the proposed budget. The common council may call upon the city officers, heads of departments and other spending agencies of the city for information and details of the estimates submitted by them and it shall be the duty of such officers, heads of departments and other spending agencies to furnish such information and details to the common council. 
(B)  On or before the thirtieth day of May in the current year, the common council shall adopt a budget for the budget year which shall include the following: 
(a)  The full amount required for interest on the indebtedness of the city and for sinking funds and for principal of bonds, bond anticipation notes and capital notes maturing during the budget year; 
(b)  The detailed amounts required during the budget year for the expense of conducting or operating each department, division, office or board and the subdivision of each; 
(c)  The amount of any estimated deficit at the close of the current year, and the plan for funding that deficit; 
(d)  The itemized amounts of revenues, which it is estimated by the budget director, will be recognized during the budget year, such estimates being made in the manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. 
(C)  In computing revenues estimated to be available during any budget year for the purposes of an annual budget, the following conditions shall be observed: 
(a)  With the exception of additional revenues resulting from increases of fees or intergovernmental assistance, or the additional revenue to be derived from sources other than those which furnish revenues in the current year, miscellaneous revenues from sources other than the property tax levy shall in no instance nor as to any item be estimated at an amount in excess of the amount of such miscellaneous revenues estimated to be recognized in the current year; 
(b)  An amount not to exceed the undesignated fund balance as of the close of the preceding fiscal year may be appropriated for use in the budget year. 
(D)  The common council shall annually cause to be levied and raised by general tax on all the taxable property in the city, according to the valuation upon the assessment roll for the budget year, such an amount as may be required to produce sufficient cash receipts necessary to balance the budget basing such levy upon the percentage of taxes estimated to be collected during the current year on account of the levy for the current year as hereinafter described. In computing the tax levy for the purposes of such annual budget the following conditions shall be observed: 
(a)  The sum necessary to balance such budget shall be ascertained by deducting from the total appropriations made under items (a), (b), (c) of subdivision (B) of this paragraph (numbered five) the total amount of receipts estimated under the limitations prescribed under subdivision (C) of this paragraph (numbered five); 
(b)  The tax levy for the budget year shall then be determined by dividing the sum necessary to be raised in order to balance the budget by a fraction the denominator of which shall be one hundred and the numerator of which shall be an amount not exceeding the percentage estimated to be collected in the current year on account of the levy for the current year; 
(c)  The several amounts specified in the ordinance adopting the budget as finally enacted shall be and become appropriated in the amounts and for the several departments, offices, boards and other spending agencies for the budget year. The revenue estimated in the budget and as provided for by the said ordinance shall be and become applicable in the amounts and according to the funds specified in the budget for the purpose of meeting the expenditures authorized by the said ordinance; 
(d)  Within thirty days after final action has been taken on the budget by the common council, it shall make public, by publication or otherwise, a summary statement which shall be in the form of the general budget summary provided for in paragraph numbered two in this section. The common council shall also make public, by publication or otherwise, at this time, the tax levy and rate necessary or estimated to be necessary to finance the budget as adopted. 
(6)  Allotments. Immediately before the beginning of the budget year, the budget director shall require the head of each spending agency to submit a work program for that year, which program shall include all appropriations for such spending agency and the required allotments of said appropriations by quarters for the entire year. The budget director shall have authority to revise, alter or change such allotments as he deems necessary. However, the aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriations available to said spending agency, except as otherwise provided in section seventy of this act. The budget director shall transmit a copy of the approved allotments to the head of the spending agency concerned. The budget director shall authorize expenditures to be made from the appropriation on the basis of such allotments, and not otherwise except as otherwise provided in section seventy of this act. 
The head of any spending agency of the government may submit a revised allotment program to the budget director at the beginning of any quarter during the fiscal year, with his request for a revision of the allotments for the remaining quarters of the fiscal year not to exceed the unexpended appropriation balance. The budget director may grant such revision by notifying the head of the spending agency. 
In order to provide funds for possible emergencies arising during the budget year in the various spending agencies, the budget director may at any time set aside up to twenty per centum of the total remaining amount appropriated as a reserve, or any portion of it, may be returned to the appropriation to which it belongs and be added to any one or more of the allotments, provided the budget director shall deem such action necessary. Any unused portion thereof shall remain at the end of the budget year as an unexpended balance of appropriation. 
(7)  Additional Appropriations. The council may, during a fiscal year, make additional appropriations or increase existing appropriations to meet emergencies such as epidemics, floods, fires or other catastrophes, the funds therefor, to be provided from unappropriated revenues or unappropriated surplus, if any, or from the proceeds of budget notes issued pursuant to the local finance law. 
(8)  Transfers. Each department, division, officer and board of the city and the subdivisions of each shall limit its or his expenditures for the various purposes set forth in the budget unless the common council shall prior to the indebtedness being incurred expressly authorize a transfer from one major object of expenditure to another major object of expenditure. The budget director upon the request of the appropriate department head, board or commission may transfer funds not exceeding five thousand dollars from one major object of expenditure to another major object of expenditure without the authorization of the common council. 
(Laws 1916, Ch. 167, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1939, § 1; Laws 1943, Ch. 710, §§ 1044, 1045; L.L. No. 3-1945, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 2-1949, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1951, §§ 3, 4; L.L. No. 3-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1953, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 8-1961, §§ 4, 5, 6, 7; L.L. No. 3-1967, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 5-1968, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1977, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1982, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 3-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1982, §§ 1, 2; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 11) 
Editor's note— Subdivision 2 amended by L.L. No. 3-1951 and L.L. No. 4-1953; subdivision 4 by L.L. No. 4-1953; subdivision 5 by L.L. No. 3-1945, L.L. No. 3-1951 and L.L. No. 3-1952; subdivision 7 by Laws 1943, Ch. 710; subdivision 9 as added by L.L. No. 2-1949, L.L. No. 5-1968. Section 1 of L.L. No. 1-1977 renumbered former sec. 60 as sec. 68; sec. 2 of said local law amended the section in its entirety. Section 1 of L.L. No. 1-1980 repealed L.L. No. 1-1977, thus renumbering this section sec. 60; L.L. No. 7-1982, renumbered former sec. 60 as sec. 68; sec. 2 of said local law amended the section in its entirety.  
Sec. 69. - Appropriation for hospital purposes; pavements; sewers, sidewalks and curbs; park purposes; celebrations. 
The common council may include in the tax budget such sums as they shall deem necessary and proper for the following purposes in addition to the purposes herein otherwise provided for: For the purpose of a city hospital; for the purpose of the city library; to defray the city's portion of the construction of pavements; to defray the city's portion of the construction of sewers; to defray the city's portion of the construction of sidewalks and curbs; for the maintenance of parks; for the decoration of public buildings and incidental expenses upon the occasion of any public celebration in which the officers of the city shall participate. 
(L.L. No. 1-1934, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1935, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1939, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1951, § 5; L.L. No. 8-1961, § 8; L.L. No. 1-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1982, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1977 renumbered former sec. 61 as sec. 69. L.L. No. 1-1982, sec. 1 repealed L.L. No. 1-1977, thus restoring the original numbering. L.L. No. 7-1982, sec. 1, renumbered former sec. 61 as sec. 69. 
State Law reference— Authority to spend money for any public or municipal purpose, General City Law, § 20(5).  
Sec. 70. - Expenditures, debts or contracts in excess of appropriation. 
The several officers, boards and departments of the city shall not incur any debts, expenses or liabilities, either in excess or independent of the several sums respectively allotted to them. It shall not be lawful for the city, or an officer, board or department thereof, to expend or contract to be expended, or to incur any liability in the current fiscal year for a greater sum than is so estimated for such officer, board or department, and so provided for by the common council in the final estimate and tax levy of such year as aforesaid. It shall not be lawful for any officer, board or department of the city to make or enter into any contract for work, labor or service, or the hiring of employees, or for the purchase of any supplies, materials or apparatus, or the making of improvements or repairs, which, by the terms of such contract, involves an expenditure of money or liability therefor, which, after taking into account the expenditure and liabilities already made or incurred, shall be in excess of the amount which has been estimated and allowed to such officer, board or department, in the final estimate adopted by the common council for the current fiscal year in which such contract shall be made. Any contract, oral or written, made in violation of this section, shall be null and void as to the city, and no money belonging to the city shall be paid thereon, but this section shall not prevent the making of contracts for light for periods exceeding one year, provided no such contracts shall be made for a longer period than three (3) years, nor the making of contracts for water supply for periods exceeding one year, providing no such contracts shall be made for a longer period than ten (10) years, nor the making of contracts for public improvements where the whole or any portion of the expense thereof is met by assessments, nor the making of contracts for insurance, fidelity bonds, servicing and professional services, for periods exceeding one year, provided no such contracts shall be made for a period longer than five (5) years. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the expenditure of such sums as may be necessary for unforeseeable public emergencies for which the issuance of budget notes is permissible pursuant to the local finance law. Any officer, or any member of any board or department of the city, making or voting for any contract prohibited by this section, or allowing any accounts or claims thereunder, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment, or by both, in the discretion of the court before which such conviction shall be had. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 2; Laws 1923, Ch. 570, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1925, § 2; Laws 1943, Ch. 710, § 1047; L.L. No. 1-1962, § 5; L.L. No. 1-1977, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1982, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1977, sec. 1, renumbered former sec. 64 as sec. 70. L.L. No. 1-1982, sec. 1 repealed L.L. No. 1, 1977, thus restoring the original numbering. L.L. No. 7-1982, sec. 1, renumbered former sec. 64 as sec. 70. 
State Law reference— Budget notes for unforeseeable public emergencies, Local Finance Law, § 29.00.  
Sec. 71. - Additional management control; duties of budget director. 
In addition to and in furtherance of the duties of the budget director with respect to the preparation of the city budget and the management of expenditures thereunder, the following duties and functions of said director are prescribed: 
(1)  Analyze the true condition of the city by balancing its management resources and physical and financial assets, against its statutory obligations and delivery of service commitments, and make recommendations for improved management of the city's operations. 
(2)  Prepare management control systems, including requirements for reports from any entity receiving funds from or through the city government so as to enable the mayor and common council to monitor compliance with legislative actions, and to assist the mayor in carrying out the mayor's duties. 
(3)  Prepare management studies of departmental organizations, functions, procedures, productivity and cost control as will tend to furnish information for the improvement of city operations or in effecting economy in operations. 
(L.L. No. 1-1977, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1980, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1982, § 3) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1980 repealed L.L. No. 1-1977; L.L. No. 2-1982 enacted a new section 71.  
Sec. 72. - Sinking funds. 
The common council may create a sinking fund or sinking funds to provide for the redemption of any bonded indebtedness heretofore existing or hereafter created, and if the amounts thus derived shall not be sufficient to provide for the sinking fund for that purpose may raise annually by taxation a sum which will produce at their maturity an amount equal to the sum of the principal of the bonds to retire which the sinking fund is created. 
A sinking fund created for the purpose of amoritizing an indebtedness covered on account of a waterworks system, light plant, or other property or means of accommodation through which a profit is realized by the city, may be maintained out of the surplus earnings of such system, plant or property, and if the revenues thus derived shall not be sufficient to provide for the sinking fund requirement said common council may provide for such deficiency and pay the same in the same manner as it may provide for the payment of the principal and interest on other bonded indebtedness of said city. 
The city of White Plains, in addition to the power which it possesses to raise money for all purposes by taxation, shall have power to raise by a general tax annually, upon the real and personal property assessed for taxation in said city, such sum as may be necessary to provide for the payment to meet such sinking fund requirements, as may have been authorized by the common council. All taxes collected and funds set apart for sinking fund requirements shall be kept in a separate fund and may be invested in such securities as the commissioner of finance and the common council may agree. The amount raised by taxation in any year, to be used for sinking fund payments, shall not exceed one-fourth of one per centum (¼ of 1%) of the total assessed valuation of said city. Sinking funds may be invested in bonds or other obligations of the city evidencing such debt. 
Cross reference— Custody and management of sinking fund, § 56. 
State Law reference— Authority to create, maintain sinking fund, General City Law, § 20(6).  
Sec. 73. - Transfers of capital funds. 
The common council may authorize the transfer to the credit of another capital fund of all or part of: 
(a)  The unexpended balance remaining in a fund established for a specific capital improvement or a specific item or specific items of equipment, which improvement has been completed or acquired, or which equipment has been acquired, after deducting from such balance a sum sufficient to satisfy all outstanding claims arising from the construction, reconstruction or acquisition of such capital improvement or the acquisition of such equipment. 
(b)  The unexpended balance remaining in a fund established for a specific item or specific items of equipment which have not been acquired or a specific capital improvement which has not been completed or acquired, or remaining in a fund established for a type of capital improvement or a type of equipment. 
(c)  No transfer shall be made to a capital fund established for a purpose other than that of the capital fund from which a transfer is proposed to be made unless prior thereto the proposed transfer shall be referred to the capital projects board for its recommendation and, if the amount proposed to be transferred exceeds twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), a public hearing shall be had on such proposed transfer, of which hearing public notice shall be given. 
(d)  The budget director upon the request of the appropriate department head, board or commission may transfer funds not exceeding seven thousand dollars ($7,000.00) to a capital fund from another capital fund, without reference to the capital projects board, providing the conditions of either subdivision (a) or subdivision (b) of this section are complied with. 
(L.L. No. 2-1949, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1949, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1956, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1968, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1982, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 12) 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative power of city vested in common council, § 32; capital projects board, § 238-p et seq. 
Code reference— Annual budget, § 2-4-16. 
State Law reference— Capital improvement defined, General Municipal Law, §§ 6-c(1b), 6-g(1); planning for future capital improvements, capital program, General Municipal Law, §§ 99-d, 99-g. 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1977, sec. 1, renumbered former sec. 73 as sec. 62. L.L. No. 1-1982, sec. 1 repealed L.L. No. 1-1977, thus restoring the original numbering. L.L. No. 7-1982, sec. 7, renumbered former sec. 73 as sec. 62. L.L. No. 1-1990, sec. 12, renumbered former sec. 63 as sec. 73.  
ARTICLE VI. - ASSESSMENT, LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAXES[8] 
Section 
74.
Powers and duties of the assessor and board of assessment review. 
74-a.
Filing requirements for income-producing properties. 
75.
Description of premises. 
76.
Assessment not invalidated by irregularities. 
77.
Right to review assessment for local improvement limited. 
78.
Procedure on review. 
79.
Consolidation of separate proceedings. 
80.
Map or description to be prepared by commissioner of public works. 
81.
Assessment of omitted real estate; reassessments. 
82.
Correction of errors in assessment rolls; reassessment of void tax. 
83.
Registry of premises. 
84.
Levy and collection of taxes. 
84-a.
Reserved. 
84-b.
Grant partial exemption from real property taxation for real property owned by cold war veterans. 
85.
Notice of receipt of tax roll; payment of taxes to commissioner of finance. 
85-a.
Payment of taxes in installments. 
86.
Notice to delinquents. 
87.
Reserved. 
88.
Reserved. 
89.
Sales of tax liens for taxes and assessments; proceedings. 
90.
Reserved. 
91.
Sales of tax liens to be conducted by the commissioner of finance. 
92.
Transfer of tax liens. 
93.
Record of transfer of tax liens. 
94.
Rights of purchaser of tax lien. 
95.
Discharge of tax liens. 
96.
Exemption from taxation. 
97.
Foreclosure of tax lien. 
97-a.
Appointment of receiver. 
98.
Pleading transfer of tax lien. 
99.
Judgment upon tax lien. 
100.
Judgment of foreclosure of tax lien. 
101.
Effect of judgment foreclosing tax lien. 
102.
Surplus. 
103.
Foreclosed tax lien not arrears. 
104.
Deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
105.
Sale of real estate; real estate committee. 
105-a.
Sale of real estate; common council approval and notice to adjoining owners. 
106.
Apportionment of taxes and assessments. 
107.
Reserved. 
108.
Corporation counsel to protect interest of city. 
109.
Reserved. 
110.
Lost, destroyed or mutilated transfer of tax lien; delivery of duplicate in case of. 
111.
Other remedies to collect taxes not affected. 
112.
Collection of taxes heretofore levied. 
113.
Statute of limitation not a defense. 
114.
Limitation of right to attack sales under tax foreclosure. 
115.
Collection of local assessments. 
116.
Collection of tax or local assessment by suit. 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— The city school district of the city of White Plains is a separate political entity created by Laws 1950, Ch. 762 and having its own taxing powers. 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city defined, § 4; official and fiscal year established, § 5; department of finance generally, § 51 et seq.; statement of cost; apportionment and assessment for local improvements; duties of assessor; payment of assessments; collection of assessments; appeals, etc. § 133 et seq.; apportionment, assessment, collection of expense for improvements to sidewalks, curbs, sidewalk drains and appurtenances, § 156-a et seq.; assessment roll for sanitary sewers and proceedings thereon, § 168 et seq.; streets or other improvements; expenses, apportionments and assessments, 180 et seq. 
Code reference— Taxation and financial affairs, Ch. 2-4. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy and collect taxes, General City Law, § 20(4); to spend money for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(5); to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11); property exempt or partially exempt from taxation, Real Property Tax Law, § 400 et seq.; procedure for assessment of taxes, Real Property Tax Law, § 500 et seq. 
 
Sec. 74. - Powers and duties of the assessor and board of assessment review. 
(a)  The assessor shall perform all of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this act, and also perform the duties, possess the powers and be subject to the same obligations as the assessors of the various cities of this state, except as necessarily modified by this act. 
(b)  Real property in the city shall be assessed according to its condition and ownership as of taxable status date (December 1st) for the ensuing year. The annual assessment of property shall be made during the preceding months and shall be completed by the assessor on or before the first day of January next following for the succeeding year. 
(c)  On or before the first day of January, the assessor shall enter the assessments on the tentative assessment roll of the city of White Plains for the ensuing year in the form reqired by the Real Property Tax Law. 
(d)  Immediately upon the completion of the tentative assessment roll the assessor shall deposit the roll in his office for examination, and have published in the official newspaper of the city, at least twice between the third and eighth days of January, a notice of completion of the tentative assessment roll, in accordance with the requirements of section fifteen hundred twenty-six of the Real Property Tax Law. 
(e)  Complaints with respect to assessments shall be heard by the board of assessment review at its annual meeting on January twenty-first, or at subsequent adjourned hearing dates, not later than the fifteenth day of February in each year. 
(f)  Pursuant to section fifteen hundred twenty-six of the Real Property Tax Law, the verified statement of the board of assessment review showing the changes determined to be made by them in the assessments shall be delivered to the assessor on or before the twenty-fifth day of February of the year in which the tentative assessment roll was prepared. 
(g)  The assessor shall, by the first day of March of that year, make the changes on the assessment roll in accordance with such verified statement, and shall certify on such verified statement that he has recorded on the assessment roll the changes set forth in such verified statement of the board of assessment review. 
(h)  On or before the first day of March of each year, said assessor shall make and file in the office of the city clerk the correct and complete assessment roll, in duplicate, identifying each volume, except the last, by his signature and the assessor shall attach to the last volume the oath required by law, signed by the assessor, whereupon the said assessor shall give the notice required by section five hundred sixteen of the Real Property Tax Law. The city clerk, on or before the first day of April next following, shall deliver the duplicate roll to the tax commission of the county of Westchester, and the city clerk shall, on or before the first day of May, next following, deliver the original of said roll to the commissioner of finance for the purpose of extending the tax thereon. 
(i)  In lieu of the provisions of section five hundred eight of the Real Property Tax Law, the owner of any parcel of assessable property in the city may file with the assessor a notice stating his name, residence and post office address, or, in the case of a corporation, its principal office, a description of the premises with its lot, block and ward numbers or other designation on the city tax map, which notice shall be valid and continue in effect until cancelled by such owner or his successor in interest. Such information shall be registered by the assessor in a record kept in his office for that purpose. The assessor shall within five (5) days from the first day of January mail to such owner at the address specified in such registry a notice of the amount of assessment on the property so registered. The failure of the assessor to mail such notice shall not invalidate the assessment on such property. The common council, in its discretion may, by ordinance or resolution, fix a fee for each notice, which fee shall be payable in advance. 
(Laws 1916, Ch. 167, § 3; Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 3; Laws 1923, Ch. 570, § 3; L.L. No. 2-1934, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1935, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1941, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1951, § 6; L.L. No. 1-1962, § 6; L.L. No. 6-1971, §§ 2, 3; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 13; L.L. No. 1-2000, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 6-1971, secs. 2 and 3, repealed former sec. 74 relative to the powers and duties of the assessor and board of review and enacted a new sec. 74 as herein set out. 
Code reference— Compensation of board of assessment review, § 2-4-51. 
State Law reference— Assessment procedure, Real Property Tax Law, § 500 et seq.  
Sec. 74-a. - Filing requirements for income-producing properties. 
(1)  Income and expense statement. Where real property is income-producing property, the owner shall be required to submit annually to the assessor, not later than the first day of October, 1996 for those statements due in 1996 and not later than the first day of August in all succeeding years, a statement of all income derived from and all expenses attributed to the operation of such property and the rent roll of the property for the first of the month in which the statement is filed as follows: 
(A)  Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of the property are maintained on a calendar-year basis, the statement shall be for the calendar year preceding the date the statement shall be filed. 
(B)  Where the owner's books and records reflecting the operation of the property are maintained on a fiscal-year basis for federal income tax purposes, the statement shall be for the last fiscal year concluded as of the first day of July preceding the date the statement shall be filed. 
(C)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions (A) and (B) of this section, where the owner of the property has not operated the property and is without knowledge of the income and expenses of the operation of the property for a consecutive twelve-month period concluded as of the first day of July preceding the date the statement shall be due, then the statement shall be for the period of ownership. 
(D)  The assessor may, for good cause shown, extend the time for filing an income and expense statement by a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Declaration. Such statements shall contain the following declaration: 
"I certify that all information contained in this statement is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that the willful making of any false statement of material fact herein will subject me to the provisions of law relevant to the making and filing of false instruments and will render this statement null and void." 
(3)  Form. The form on which such statement shall be submitted shall be prepared by the assessor, and copies of such form shall be made available at said assessor's offices in the city of White Plains. 
(4)  Failure to file statement; penalties; enforcement procedures. 
(A)  In the event that an owner of income-producing property fails to file an income and expense statement within the time prescribed in subsection (1) of this section (including any extension of time for filing), the board of assessment review shall deny any complaint in relation to the assessment of such property by such owner. 
(B)  In the event an income and expense statement required under the provisions of this section has not been timely filed, the assessor may compel by subpoena the production of the books and records of the owner relevant to the income and expenses of the property and may also make application to any court of competent jurisdiction for an order compelling the owner to furnish the required income and expense statement and the books and records to the income and expenses of the property. In the event such an order is issued, the assessor shall be entitled to recover from the owner the costs and expenses, including attorney's fees, incurred by the city in connection with the proceeding to obtain and enforce the order. 
(5)  Definition of "income-producing property." As used in this section, the term "income-producing property" means property owned for the purpose of securing an income from the property itself but shall not include residential property containing three (3) or fewer dwelling units or property classified in Class One as defined in article 18 of the real property tax law. 
(6)  Disclosure of information; penalties for. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the assessor or any official or employee of the city, any member of the board of assessment review, any person engaged or retained by the city, the assessor or the board of assessment review on an independent contract basis or any person who, pursuant to this section, is permitted to inspect any income and expense statement or to whom a copy, an abstract or a portion of any such statement is furnished to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income and/or expense or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any such statement required under this section. The officers charged with custody of such statement shall not be required to produce any income and expense statement or evidence of anything contained in said statement in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the city or the assessor. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to an owner or his or her duly authorized representative of a certified copy of any statement filed by such owner pursuant to this section or to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular statements and the items thereof or delivery of a copy to a legal representative or their professional retained by the city or the board of assessment review retained with respect to a proceeding to review the assessment of the property at issue for use solely with respect to the review of said assessment and for no other purpose. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or both, at the discretion of the court, and if the offender be an officer or employee of the city or a member of the board of assessment review, the offender shall be dismissed from office. 
(L.L. No. 2, § 1, 8-5-96)  
Sec. 75. - Description of premises. 
In the assessment of any lands in the city for any purpose it shall be sufficient to state the number of the ward, number of the lot and the block as subdivided into lots and blocks and so designated upon the maps last adopted before the passage of this act by the town boards of the towns of White Plains, Greenburgh and North Castle and upon any city map hereafter adopted for the city of White Plains by the common council. Whenever practicable the name of the owner or reputed owner thereof, as nearly as can be ascertained, shall be entered upon said assessment roll. No assessment hereafter made in said city shall be held to be invalid because the same may be made out in terms against owner or owners unknown or the estate of a deceased (naming such person) or the executor, administrator, heirs or devisees of a deceased person (naming such person) or any of them, or against a company of a firm name, or against a person in whom is the record title, though not the actual title of the property, or for any cause arising through ignorance or mistake as to the names of the owner or owners of the property assessed, whether individually or a corporation, provided such property is sufficiently described on the assessment rolls to reasonably identify and indicate to a person familiar with the same the particular property which it is intended to assess. Every assessment roll shall be considered as referring to the last adopted map, if there be one, unless it be otherwise stated herein. 
(L.L. No. 1-1962, § 7) 
State Law reference— Tax maps, Real Property Tax Law, § 568.  
Sec. 76. - Assessment not invalidated by irregularities. 
No assessment or tax shall be vacated, set aside, canceled, annulled, reviewed or otherwise questioned or affected by reason of any error, omission, irregularity or defect, not actually fraudulent, in any of the steps or proceedings required to be had or taken as preliminary to, or in the making of the assessment or in the levying or collection of the tax, nor in relation to or in connection with any proposal, designation or materials, contract, work or improvement for or on account of which such assessment was made or tax imposed. But all property shall be liable to assessment and all assessments shall be valid and of full force and effect notwithstanding any such error, omission, irregularity or defect.  
Sec. 77. - Right to review assessment for local improvement limited. 
No action or proceeding to set aside, vacate, cancel or annul any assessment for a local improvement shall be maintained, except for total want of jurisdiction to levy and assess the same on the part of the officers, board or body authorized by law to make such levy or assessment or to order the improvement on account of which the levy or assessment was made. No action or proceeding shall be maintained to modify or reduce any such assessment except for fraud or substantial error by reason of which the amount of such assessment is in excess of the amount which should have been lawfully levied or assessed. 
(L.L. No. 1-1962, § 8) 
State Law reference— Authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 78. - Procedure on review. 
No action or proceeding shall be maintained to set aside, vacate, cancel, annul, review, reduce or otherwise question, test or affect the legality or validity of any assessment for local improvement, except in the form and manner and by the proceedings herein provided. If, in the proceedings relative to an assessment, entire absence of jurisdiction on the part of the officers, board or body authorized by law to levy or assess the same or to order the improvement on account of which the assessment was made, is alleged to have existed, or in case any fraud or substantial error, other than the errors or irregularities specified in the preceding section, [section 77] by reason of which substantial damages have been sustained, are alleged to have existed or to have been committed, any party or parties aggrieved thereby, who shall have filed objections thereto within the time and in the manner specified by law therefor, may apply to the Supreme Court at any special terms thereof, held within the judicial district in which the city is situated, for an order vacating or modifying such assessment as to the lands in which he or they have an interest, upon the grounds in said objections specified, and no other, and upon due notice of such application to the corporation counsel. Each such application shall be made within twenty (20) days after the confirmation of the assessment. Thereupon such court may proceed to hear the proofs and allegations of the parties and determine the same, or may appoint a referee to take the proof and report thereon, or to hear, try and determine the same. If it shall be determined in such proceeding that the officers, board or body had no jurisdiction to make the levy or assessment complained of or to order the improvements, the court may order such assessment vacated. If it shall be determined therein that any such fraud or substantial error has been committed and that the party or parties applying for such relief have suffered substantial damages by reason thereof, the court may order that the assessment be modified as to such party or parties and as so modified that it be confirmed. A like application may be made to secure a modification or reduction of any such assessment on account of fraud or such substantial error occurring in the performance of the work of the improvement on account of which such assessment is made or levied, and it shall be determined in like manner. If, in any such proceeding, it shall be determined that such fraud or substantial error has been committed, by reason of which any such assessment upon the lands of any such aggrieved party has been unlawfully increased, the court may order that such assessment be modified by deducting therefrom such amount as is in the proportion to such assessment as the whole amount of such unlawful increase is to the whole amount of the assessment for the improvement. An order so made in any such proceeding shall be entered in the clerk's office of the county in which the city is situated, and shall have the same force and effect as a judgment. The court may, during the pendency of any such proceeding, stay the collection of any assessment involved therein as against the parties thereto. Costs and disbursements of any such proceeding may be allowed in the discretion of the court. No appeal shall be allowed or taken from the order made in any such proceeding, but the determination so made therein shall be final and conclusive upon all parties thereto. No assessment shall be modified otherwise than to reduce it to the extent that the same may be shown by the parties complaining thereof to have been in fact increased in dollars and cents by reason of such fraud or substantial error. In no event shall that proportion of any such assessment which is the equivalent of the fair value or fair cost of the improvement be disturbed for any cause. No money paid on account of any assessment shall be recovered for any cause, except the amount of the excess of such assessment over and above the fair value and cost of the improvement. In case of the failure of any assessment for any cause, the commissioner of finance shall certify such fact to the common council and it shall be its duty to forthwith cause the same to be relevied and reassessed in a proper manner. 
(L.L. No. 1-1962, § 9) 
State Law reference— Assessment procedure generally, Real Property Tax Law, Art. 5; judicial review, Real Property Tax Law, Art. 7.  
Sec. 79. - Consolidation of separate proceedings. 
Two (2) or more persons may unite in commencing and prosecuting the proceedings to vacate or modify assessments; and when two (2) or more persons have commenced separate proceedings to vacate or modify assessments for the same improvement, the court before whom the same are commenced or pending, or a judge thereof at special term or chambers may, by order, upon due application and notice, consolidate such separate proceedings into one proceeding.  
Sec. 80. - Map or description to be prepared by commissioner of public works. 
The common council may, from time to time, direct the commissioner of public works to prepare and furnish to the assessor, and file the same with the city clerk, for his use, a map or brief description of any real estate in the city, or to prepare a roll or rolls of any real estate in the city for the assessor, exclusive of valuation. 
State Law reference— Preparation of tax maps, Real Property Tax Law, § 568.  
Sec. 81. - Assessment of omitted real estate; reassessments. 
If any taxable real estate has been omitted in any of the general tax rolls for any of the three (3) preceding years, the assessor may insert, or cause to be inserted, in the roll for the current year, in addition to its share of the tax for such year, the proportion of the tax it should have borne in such preceding years, or either thereof, stating such additional taxes separately, and such addition shall be collected as part of the tax for the current year, and in case any taxes levied on any real estate in said city shall remain unpaid or uncollected for any year, said assessor is hereby empowered to reassess such real estate, and the same shall be collected as part of the tax of the current year and in the same manner. But such taxes shall not be reassessed for a longer period than six (6) years from the time they became due and payable. 
State Law reference— Omitted real property, Real Property Tax Law, § 550.  
Sec. 82. - Correction of errors in assessment rolls; reassessment of void tax. 
Whenever there is a manifest error in copying any assessment rolls, or levying or extending any tax or assessment, the common council may, at any time within three (3) months after the completion of said assessment rolls, and upon ten (10) days' written notice to the person interested, by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all the members elected, correct, cancel, remit or add to the same, but shall have no power to alter any valuation made by the assessor; nor shall such amended assessments, if greater than the original assessment, be a lien on the real estate for the amount added, as against purchasers or mortgagees in good faith. In case any tax or assessment shall be void, or shall have failed for want of jurisdiction, or for any irregularity in the levying or assessing thereof, it shall be the duty of the common council to cause the same to be reassessed in a proper manner; if any person shall have paid on the former assessment, the amount so paid shall be credited on the new assessment, and in case the payment exceeds the amount reassessed, the surplus shall be refunded.  
Sec. 83. - Registry of premises. 
The owners of lots or premises in the city may cause a true description of the same to be registered in a book kept by the commissioner of finance for that purpose, with the name of the owner, if a resident of the city, and if not, with the name of any resident of the city as an agent for said property; and in the assessment of real estate for local improvements, all papers or notices required to be served on the owners or resident occupants of lots shall be served on such owner or agent, with the same effect as if such lots were occupied. Service of any notice provided for in this act shall be deemed sufficient when a copy of such notice shall be delivered personally to the person or corporation to be served or shall be mailed to such person's or corporation's last address known to or furnished to the commissioner of finance. 
(Laws 1923, Ch. 570, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1962, § 9) 
State Law reference— Registration by owner or mortgagee, Real Property Tax Law, § 1158.  
Sec. 84. - Levy and collection of taxes. 
All sums adopted by the common council in the tax budget for any year shall be assessed on all the real estate in the city (except city property and property exempt by law) and shall be extended by the commissioner of finance. Such assessment shall be according to the valuation of such real estate in the assessment rolls for said year and the amount thus extended shall be recorded and known in all proceedings as "tax." One-half (½) of all taxes upon real estate shall be due and payable on the first day of July and the remaining and final one-half (½) of taxes on real estate shall be due and payable on the second day of January next following. All taxes shall be and become liens on the real estate affected thereby on the respective days when they become due and payable as hereinbefore provided and shall remain such liens until paid. The second half of the tax on real estate which is due as hereinbefore provided on the second day of January following the payment of the first half, may be paid on the first day of July or any time thereafter, providing the first half shall have been paid or shall be paid at the same time. The commissioner of finance shall complete the roll and deliver it to the city clerk on or before the twenty-ninth day of May in each year. The city clerk shall redeliver said roll to the commissioner of finance on or before the first day of June in each year with a warrant annexed to each volume under the corporate seal signed by the mayor and clerk of said city, commanding him to receive, levy and collect from the owners of the several lots and plots and from the several persons, companies, corporations and associations named in the roll, the several sums mentioned in such roll opposite the property owned by them, in the manner provided in this act. The commissioner of finance shall each year receive and collect the relative proportion of the installments payable on the first day of July and the second day of January respectively, as hereinafter provided. 
(Laws 1916, Ch. 167, § 4; Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 4; L.L. No. 2-1931, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1939, § 7; L.L. No. 5-1942, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1951, § 7) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to levy, collect taxes, General City Law, § 20(4); property exempt or partially exempt from taxation, Real Property Tax Law, § 400 et seq.; levy and collection of taxes generally, Real Property Tax Law, § 900 et seq.  
Sec. 84-a. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 7-1971, § 1, repealed § 84-a pertaining to real estate tax exemption for certain persons 65 years of age or over. Said section was derived from L.L. No. 4-1966, § 1 and L.L. No. 1-1970, § 1. On Oct. 18, 1971 an ordinance was adopted providing for the tax exemption which had been the subject matter of § 84-a.  
Sec. 84-b. - Grant partial exemption from real property taxation for real property owned by cold war veterans. 
Pursuant to Section 458-b of the New York State Real Property Tax Law for assessment rolls prepared on the basis of a tax status date occurring on or after March 1, 2009, real property in the City of White Plains owned by a person or persons who qualify under said law and meet the requirements for obtaining an exemption set forth in said law shall be exempt from general taxes levied under Section 84 of the Charter of the City of White Plains to the extent set forth in Section 458-b (2) (a) (ii) and (2)(b) of said law. 
(L.L. No. 1-2008, § 1)  
Sec. 85. - Notice of receipt of tax roll; payment of taxes to commissioner of finance. 
After receiving said tax roll and beginning on the first weekday of July in each year, the commissioner of finance shall cause notice of the receipt thereof by him to be published in the official newspaper once a week for three successive weeks, that the same has been left with him for collection, and that for thirty days thereafter the first installment of tax may be paid to said commissioner of finance without an additional charge. If not so collected within said thirty day period, interest from the expiration of said thirty day period to the date of payment shall be added to the amount of such installment at the rate of one per centum for each one month period, or any part thereof, until the installment is paid. No further notice than that herein required shall be deemed necessary either in the case of property owned by a resident or a nonresident. The failure of the commissioner of finance to mail any tax bill shall not invalidate any taxes, nor prevent the accruing of any interest or penalty imposed for the nonpayment of taxes, nor prevent the sale of any property for the nonpayment of any taxes nor prevent the sale of a tax lien for the nonpayment of taxes, as provided in this act. 
Beginning on the first weekday in January following New Year's Day or the day observed as such, the commissioner of finance shall publish and collect the second installment of taxes in the same manner as that provided for in the procedure outlined for the first installment of tax. 
The commissioner of finance shall give receipts for taxes in the manner provided by law. 
(Laws 1916, Ch. 167, § 5; Laws 1920, Ch. 151, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1935, § 1; L.L. No. 13-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1951, § 8; L.L. No. 4-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 8-1961, § 11; L.L. No. 2-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1983, § 1; L.L. No. 1-2001, § 1)  
Sec. 85-a. - Payment of taxes in installments. 
Notwithstanding any provision of any general or special law to the contrary, any unpaid city tax may be paid in installments of not less than one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the semiannual proportion thereof; provided, however, that such installment payments shall in no instance be less than the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and provided further that this section shall not apply to any tax for which a tax lien shall have been sold by the commissioner of finance, except where a tax lien is held by the city. Interest on unpaid balances on said taxes shall be charged at the same rate as upon semiannual proportions of such taxes. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the sale of tax liens for any unpaid balances on said taxes. 
(L.L. No. 2-1933, § 1; L.L. No. 14-1950, § 1)  
Sec. 86. - Notice to delinquents. 
If any tax, or installment thereof, shall remain uncollected at the expiration of one hundred and fifty days from the date the same became a lien the commissioner of finance shall give a written or printed notice to the person, corporation or association against whom such tax, or installment thereof, stands charged. Said notices shall bear even date, and shall require said persons, corporations or associations to pay such unpaid tax, or installment thereof, to said commissioner of finance at his or her office within the term of thirty days thereafter with interest thereon at the rate of one per centum for each one month period, or any part thereof, from a date thirty days subsequent to the date the tax became a lien to the date of payment thereof. Such notice may be served personally or by leaving the same at the residence or place of business of such person, corporation or association or by mail. The person or persons serving such notice, if served by a person other than the commissioner of finance, shall be designated by him or her, and an affidavit by such person or persons of the service of such notice shall be deemed evidence in all courts and places; said notice so served shall be deemed a full compliance with the statute, which requires a collector of taxes to call at least once on the person taxed or at the place of his or her usual residence and demand the payment of taxes charged on his or her property. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require such notice to be given to unknown owners or nonresidents of the city, whose residence or reputed place of residence is not known and who have no registered agent residing in said city. 
(Laws 1916, Ch. 167, § 6; L.L. No. 1-1935, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1954, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1979, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1983, § 2; L.L. No. 1-2001, § 2) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 2-1983 raised the interest rate to one and one-half (1½) percent. Section 4 of such local law provided that it applies only to taxes which became a lien after January 1, 1984. 
Code reference— Collection of delinquent taxes, § 2-4-41.  
Sec. 87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 87 was repealed by L.L. No. 2-1931, sec. 3. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 88. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 88 was repealed by L.L. No. 2-1931, sec. 4. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 89. - Sales of tax liens for taxes and assessments; proceedings. 
The right of the city to receive taxes, assessments and water rents and other water charges and the lien thereof, may be sold by the city, and after such sales shall be transferred, in the manner provided by this title. The right and lien so sold shall be called "tax lien" and the instrument by which it is assigned shall be called "transfer of tax lien". Once in each year during the month of May, whenever any tax on lands or tenements, or any assessments on lands or tenements for local improvements, shall remain unpaid for the term of sixteen (16) months from the time the same shall have become liens on the real estate affected thereby, so as to be due and payable, and also whenever any water rents or other water charges in said city shall have been due and unpaid for the term of sixteen (16) months from the time the same shall have been due, the commissioner of finance shall advertise the tax liens on the said lands and tenements or any of them for sale, including in such advertisement the tax lien for all items up to a day named in the advertisement, and by such advertisement the owner or owners of such lands and tenements respectively shall be required to pay the amount of such tax, assessment or water rents or other water charges, with the said penalties thereon so remaining unpaid, together with the interest thereon at the rate of one (1) per centum for each one month period, or any part thereof, to the time of payment, with the charges of such notice and advertisement, to the said commissioner of finance and notice shall be given by such advertisement that if default shall be made in such payment the tax lien on such lands and tenements will be sold at public auction at a day and place therein to be specified, for the lowest rate of interest, not exceeding twelve per centum per annum, at which any person or persons shall offer to take the same in consideration of advancing the said tax, assessment and water rents or other water charges and penalties as the case may be, the interest thereon as aforesaid to the time of sale, the charges of the above mentioned notices and advertisement and all other costs and charges accrued thereon; and if, notwithstanding such notice, the owner or owners shall refuse or neglect to pay such tax, assessment, water rents or other water charges and penalties, with the interest as aforesaid, and the charges attending such notices and advertisement, then it shall and may be lawful for the said commissioner of finance to cause such tax lien on such lands and tenements to be sold at public auction, for the purpose and in the manner expressed in the said advertisement, and such sale shall be made on the day and at the place for that purpose mentioned in the said advertisement, and shall be continued from time to time, if necessary, until all the tax liens on the lands and tenements so advertised shall be sold. But the tax lien on houses or lots, or improved or unimproved lands, in the city of White Plains, shall not be hereafter sold at public auction for the nonpayment of any tax, assessment or water rents or other water charges which may be due thereon, unless notice of such sale shall have been published once in each week successively for one month in the official newspaper of the city, which advertisement shall contain, appended to said notice, a statement and description of the property the tax lien on which is to be sold. Or the said statement and description, instead of being published in the official newspaper of the city, shall, at the option of the said commissioner of finance, be printed in a pamphlet, in which case copies of the pamphlet shall be deposited in the office of the said commissioner of finance and shall be delivered to any person applying therefor. And the notice provided for in this section to be given of the sale of tax liens on houses and lots and improved and unimproved lands shall also state that the statement of the taxes, assessments or water rents or other water charges and the property taxed, assessed, or on which the water rents or other water charges are unpaid, is published, in the official newspaper of the city, or in a pamphlet, as the case may be, and that copies of the pamphlet are deposited in the office of the said commissioner of finance and will be delivered to any person applying for the same. No other notice or demand of the tax, assessment or water rent or other water charges shall be required to authorize the sale of tax liens on any lands and tenements as hereinbefore provided. The commissioner of finance may cancel any certificate or lease for unpaid taxes, assessments and water rents or other water charges, held by the city of White Plains, or to which the city has acquired the right, and upon such cancellation the lien of such tax, assessment or water rent or other water charges shall be the same as if no sale for such unpaid tax, assessment or water rent or other water charges had been made. 
(Laws 1916, Ch. 167, § 7; Laws 1920, Ch. 151, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1935, § 5; L.L. No. 3-1944, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1954, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1966, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1979, § 3; L.L. No. 2-1983, § 3; L.L. No. 1-2001, § 3) 
State Law reference— Sale of tax liens by cities, Real Property Tax Law, § 1060.  
Sec. 90. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 90 was repealed by L.L. No. 3-1944, sec. 2. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 91. - Sales of tax liens to be conducted by the commissioner of finance. 
The commissioner of finance or his deputy shall conduct the sales hereinbefore provided to be made, and no auctioneer other than said commissioner of finance or his deputy shall be employed to make such sale, and no auctioneer's fees shall be charged thereon. The commissioner of finance shall require from each purchaser of a tax lien at the time of such sale a deposit on account of ten per centum of the amount of the tax lien purchased by him, and not later than thirty days from the date of the sale the balance shall be paid to the commissioner of finance at his office. If no bid shall be received for a tax lien offered for sale the commissioner of finance for and on behalf of the city of White Plains may bid in the said tax lien, and upon such bid no deposit or payment in cash shall be required from the city. When the city has bid in any tax lien, a transfer of tax lien to the city shall be executed by the said commissioner of finance in the form and manner prescribed for other transfers of tax liens, and the city shall have the same rights in, to and under such transfer of tax lien as if the same had been bought by any other person. Transfer of tax lien shall be made and delivered to the purchaser without charge upon payment of the amounts therein shown to be due. In case any purchaser shall not complete his purchase in accordance with the terms prescribed as herein provided, then the amount deposited by him at the time of the sale shall be forfeited to the city, and the entire tax lien upon the lands affected by such purchase shall be sold again. Such resale shall be held at such time as the commissioner of finance may direct, and shall be advertised in the official newspaper of the city in such manner and for such time, not less than two (2) weeks, as the commissioner of finance may direct. All deposits forfeited as aforesaid shall be paid into the general fund of the city of White Plains.  
Sec. 92. - Transfer of tax liens. 
A transfer of tax lien shall operate to transfer and assign the tax lien upon the lands or tenements described therein for the taxes, assessments and water rents and penalties and interest thereon, and the charges of the notices and advertisement given pursuant to section eighty-nine of this act, and all other costs and charges, so advertised for sale, free of all taxes, assessments and water rents which accrued before the day of the date mentioned in the advertisement of the sale as stated therein, and to create a lien upon the property affected thereby for the interest to which the purchaser may be entitled under his bid, but subject to the lien for and right of the city to collect and receive all taxes, assessments and water rents which accrued or which became a lien on and after the day of the date of the first advertisement of such sale as stated therein. A transfer of tax lien shall contain a transfer and assignment by the city of the tax lien sold to the purchaser, the date of the sale, the aggregate amount of the tax lien so transferred, and the items of taxes, assessments, water rents, penalties and interest composing the tax lien, the annual rate of interest which the purchaser has bid and will be entitled to receive, the date when the amount of the tax lien will be due, and a description of the real property affected by the tax lien, and shall refer for certainty to the designation of said lot on the official city map, by its lot number and the number of the block and ward in which it is contained, and such other identifying description as the commissioner of finance may deem proper to add. Each transfer of tax lien shall be subscribed by or in behalf of the commissioner of finance making the sale, or a successor in office of such commissioner of finance and shall be acknowledged by the officer subscribing the same in the manner in which a deed is required to be acknowledged to be recorded in the county in which the real property affected is situated. The commissioner of finance may assign any transfer of tax lien made and delivered to the city upon payment of the amount thereof, with interest at the rate bid to the time of such assignment. 
(Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 3)  
Sec. 93. - Record of transfer of tax liens. 
The commissioner of finance shall keep in his office a public record of sales of tax liens, and a copy of each transfer of tax lien issued by him. Assignments of transfer of tax lien duly acknowledged may be filed and recorded in the office of the commissioner of finance. A transfer tax lien and any assignment thereof, duly acknowledged, shall be deemed conveyances under article eight of the real property law, and may be recorded in the office of the recording officer of any county in which the real property which it affects is situated. Transfers of tax lien and all assignments thereof shall be recorded by recording officers in the same manner as mortgages and assignments thereof, but without payment of tax under article fourteen [9] of the tax law. The record in the office of the commissioner of finance of sales of tax liens, of a transfer of tax lien, and a copy of a transfer of tax lien, and of an assignment of a transfer of tax lien; a record of a transfer of tax lien in the office of a recording officer, and of an assignment of tax lien, duly acknowledged, in the office of a recording officer, shall be evidence in any court in the state without further proof. A transcript of any record enumerated in this section, duly certified, shall be evidence in any court in the state with like effect as the original instrument of record. Neither the tax lien nor the rights transferred or created by a transfer of tax lien shall be impaired by failure of a recording officer to record a transfer of tax lien made by the city through the commissioner of finance. Unless a contrary intent appears, a tax lien shall be presumed to be satisfied and discharged whenever it shall appear from recorded instruments that the tax lien has been transferred or assigned to the owner of such lands or tenements, notwithstanding other intervening estates or liens. 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— So in original, probably intended as Article 11, Tax Law. 
 
Sec. 94. - Rights of purchaser of tax lien. 
The aggregate amount of each tax lien transferred pursuant to this title shall be due three (3) years from the date of the sale. Until such aggregate amount is fully paid and discharged, the holder of the transfer of tax lien shall be entitled to receive interest on such aggregate amount from the day of sale at the rate which the purchaser shall have bid. Interest shall be due and payable on the first day of January next ensuing the date of sale and semiannually thereafter. At the option of the holder of any transfer of tax lien the aggregate amount thereof shall become due and payable after default in the payment of interest for thirty (30) days or after default for six (6) months after the delivery of the transfer of tax lien in the payment of any taxes, assessments or water rents, which became a lien on and after the day of the date mentioned in the advertisement of the sale as stated therein, of the tax lien transferred by such transfer of tax lien. Any person having a legal or beneficial interest in property affected by a transfer of tax lien may satisfy the same before maturity upon giving thirty (30) days' notice in writing to the holder thereof of the day on which payment will be made and upon payment of the principal with interest at the rate bid to a time three (3) months after the date so fixed for payment, except that where a tax lien is held by the city notice and additional three (3) months' interest are not required. If notice of intention to make payment be given as herein provided, and such payment be not made, then the whole amount of any tax lien concerning which such notice shall have been given shall become due and payable at the option of the holder thereof. Or any such person may pay to the commissioner of finance such principal with interest at the rate bid up to a day six (6) months after such payment. In case such payment be made to the commissioner of finance he shall receive the same for the benefit of the holder of the tax lien thus discharged, and shall give notice thereof to the purchaser or the personal representative or assignee of the purchaser, by mail, addressed to such address as may have been furnished to the commissioner of finance. Upon receiving surrender of such transfer of tax lien the commissioner of finance shall pay the amount thus deposited to the person who, according to the records in his office, appears to be entitled thereto, or to the personal representative of such person, except when any party to an action to foreclose a tax lien or any purchaser or person having an interest in the premises may file a written notice that an action for that purpose is pending with the commissioner of finance, and thereafter said commissioner shall not be authorized to discharge said lien or receive any sum or sums of money for that purpose unless the party desiring to satisfy the same shall pay the amount of such lien, with interest to the date of payment, and interest for thirty (30) days additional, and all other taxes, tax liens or charges against the premises, and also all costs, charges and disbursements in the foreclosure action to date of payment, the amount of which shall be determined as in an action for the foreclosure of a mortgage; or shall file with the said commissioner the original transfer of tax lien and a satisfaction thereof duly executed by the plaintiff in the action. 
(Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 4; L.L. No. 4-1944, § 1; L.L. No. 15-1950, § 1)  
Sec. 95. - Discharge of tax liens. 
A tax lien sold pursuant to the provisions of this title must be discharged upon the record thereof by the commissioner of finance, when payment is made to him of the principal and interest as provided in the last preceding section [§ 94], and also when the transfer of tax lien is surrendered to him for cancellation and there is presented to him a certificate executed by the purchaser, or the personal representative or assignee of the purchaser, acknowledged so as to be entitled to be recorded in the county in which the real property affected by such tax lien is situated, certifying that the tax lien has been paid or has been otherwise satisfied and discharged. The transfer of tax lien thus surrendered and such certificate of discharge must be filed by the commissioner of finance and he must note upon the margin of the record of such sale, upon such transfer of tax lien and upon the copy of the transfer of tax lien kept in his office, a minute of such discharge and the date of filing thereof. If the transfer of tax lien shall have been lost or destroyed or mutilated, and if payment of the amount due thereon be made to the commissioner of finance, such amount shall not be paid to the alleged holder or owner of such transfer of tax lien, except on an order of the supreme [court] or Westchester county court, after notice of application to the party or person paying such amount due and on due proof that such transfer of tax lien has been lost, destroyed or mutilated. The filing of a certified copy of such order with the commissioner of finance shall be taken in the place and stead of the transfer of tax lien so lost, destroyed or mutilated. The commissioner of finance shall upon demand issue his certificate showing the discharge of any tax lien which may have been duly discharged as provided in this section, and such certificate may be filed in any office where the transfer of tax lien is recorded, and any recording officer with whom such a certificate is filed shall record the same, and upon the margin of the record of such transfer of tax lien in his office shall note a statement that the same has been discharged with a reference to the record of such certificate in his office. 
(L.L. No. 8-1961, § 12)  
Sec. 96. - Exemption from taxation. 
Tax liens and transfers of tax liens shall be exempt from taxation by the state or any local subdivision thereof, except from the taxes imposed by article ten of the tax law. The real property affected by any tax lien shall not be exempt from taxation by reason of this section.  
Sec. 97. - Foreclosure of tax lien. 
If the amount of any tax lien which shall have been transferred by a transfer of tax lien shall not be paid when under its terms and provisions of this title such amount shall be due, the holder of such tax lien may maintain an action in the supreme court to foreclose such tax lien. In an action to foreclose a tax lien any person shall be a proper party of whom the plaintiff alleges that such person has or may have or that the plaintiff has reason to believe that such person has or may have an interest in or claim upon the real property affected by the tax lien. Except as otherwise provided in this title an action to foreclose a tax lien shall be regulated by the provisions of the civil practice act, and by all other provisions of law, and rules of practice applicable to actions to foreclose mortgages on real property. The people of the state of New York may be made party to an action to foreclose a tax lien in the same manner as a natural person. Where the people of the state of New York or the city of White Plains is made a party defendant the complaint shall set forth, in addition to the other matters required to be set forth by law, detailed facts showing the particular nature of the interest in or the lien on the said real property of the people of the state of New York or the city of White Plains, and detailed facts showing the particular nature of the interest in or the lien on said real property which plaintiff has reason to believe that the people of the state of New York or the city of White Plains has or may have in the said real property, and the reason for making the people of the state of New York or the city of White Plains a party defendant. Upon failure to state such facts the complaint shall be dismissed as to the people of the state of New York or the city of White Plains. 
(Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 5)  
Sec. 97-a. - Appointment of receiver. 
At any time after the commencement of an action brought, as provided in section ninety-seven of this act, by and on behalf of the city of White Plains to foreclose tax lien or liens, the city of White Plains shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to the appointment for its benefit of a receiver of the rents and profits of the real estate affected by the lien or liens being foreclosed. Application for the appointment of such receiver shall be to the court in which such action is pending. Such application may be made ex parte. On every such application the court shall designate the commissioner of finance of the city of White Plains as such receiver, and said commissioner of finance shall serve as such receiver without any additional fees or compensation. The commissioner of finance shall file no bond or undertaking in connection with any receivership granted hereunder, other than the official bond required by him to be filed pursuant to section eighteen of this act. 
(Laws 1941, Ch. 276, § 1)  
Sec. 98. - Pleading transfer of tax lien. 
Whenever a cause of action, defense or counter-claim is for the foreclosure of a tax lien, or is in any manner founded, upon a tax lien or a transfer of tax lien, the production in evidence of an instrument executed by the commissioner of finance in the form prescribed in section ninety-two for a transfer of tax lien subscribed by or in behalf of the commissioner of finance shall be presumptive evidence that the lien purported to be transferred by such an instrument was a valid and enforceable lien, and that it has been duly assigned to the purchaser, and it shall not be necessary to plead or prove any act, proceeding, notice or action, preceding the delivery of such transfer of tax lien nor to establish the validity of the tax lien transferred by such transfer of tax lien. If a party or person in interest in any such action or proceeding claims that a tax lien is irregular or invalid, or that there is any defect therein or that a transfer of tax lien is irregular, invalid or defective, such invalidity, irregularity or defect must be specifically pleaded or set forth, and must be established affirmatively by the party or person pleading or setting forth the same. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 5)  
Sec. 99. - Judgment upon tax lien. 
In every action for the foreclosure of a tax lien, and in every action or proceeding in which a cause of action, defense or counterclaim is in any manner founded upon a tax lien or transfer of tax lien, such transfer of tax lien and the tax lien which it transfers shall be presumed to be regular and valid and effectual to transfer to the purchaser named therein a valid and enforceable tax lien. If an answer is interposed in such action or proceeding and any of the defenses provided for in the preceding section [§ 98] are specifically pleaded or set forth the court shall hear and determine the issues and validity of each item contained in the transfer of tax lien which is questioned and ascertain the amount due thereon. Unless in such an action or proceeding such tax lien or transfer of tax lien be found to be invalid, they shall be adjudged to be enforceable and valid for the amount thereof or found due thereon as aforesaid and the interest to which the holder may be entitled, and a tax lien transferred by a transfer of tax lien effectual to transfer such tax lien to the purchaser named therein. 
(Laws 1923, Ch. 570, § 6)  
Sec. 100. - Judgment of foreclosure of tax lien. 
In an action to foreclose a tax lien, unless the defendants obtain judgment, the plaintiff shall be entitled to a judgment establishing the validity of the tax lien so far as the same shall not be adjudged invalid and of the transfer of tax lien, and directing the sale of the real property affected thereby, or such part thereof as shall be sufficient to discharge the tax lien, or such items thereof as shall not be judged invalid and the interest thereon and all other accrued taxes, assessments and water rents affecting the real property, together with the expenses of the sale and the costs of the action, except that the fees and/or allowances to a referee or other official appointed to compute shall not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) unless there are five (5) or more tax parcels in the action, in which event the allowance shall not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00), and the fee and/or allowance to the referee or other official appointed to sell shall be at not to exceed the rate allowed to the referee appointed to compute. Costs in any foreclosure action brought under the provisions of this act shall be in the discretion of the court, but in no event shall such costs exceed the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) unless there are five (5) or more separate tax parcels included in one action in which event the costs shall not exceed forty dollars ($40.00). The award of costs in any action shall carry with it the right to recover taxable disbursements, together with such amount as the court shall allow for authorized searches not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) for each tax parcel included in the action. The judgment of foreclosure shall direct the payment of: 
(a)  The costs, disbursements and expenses of the foreclosure action and of the sale thereunder; 
(b)  All taxes, assessments, water rates, tax liens or transfers of tax liens for the same, which are a lien against the premises so sold subsequent to the taxes or assessments covered by the lien so foreclosed; 
(c)  All taxes, assessments and water rates or interest acquired from the sale or lease of the premises for the same, which are still unpaid and due and owing to the city as of the date of the taxes for which the tax lien was sold, with all interest, penalties and charges thereon; 
(d)  The amount of the tax lien foreclosed or so much thereof as the balance of the proceeds of sale will pay the same; 
(e)  The surplus, if any there be. 
In the event that the owners of one or more parcels are joined as defendants, the judgment of foreclosure and sale shall provide for an equitable division of the costs and disbursements as against each parcel to be sold as in said judgment provided. 
(Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 6; L.L. No. 3-1933, § 1)  
Sec. 101. - Effect of judgment foreclosing tax lien. 
Every final judgment in an action to foreclose a tax lien shall be binding upon, and every conveyance upon a sale pursuant thereto shall transfer to and vest in the purchaser all the right, title, interest and estate in claim upon the real property affected by such judgment of the plaintiff, each defendant upon whom the summons is served, each person claiming from, through or under such a defendant by title accruing after the filing of notice of pendency of the action or after the entry of judgment and filing of the judgment roll in the proper county clerk's office, and each person not in being when the judgment is rendered, who afterwards may become entitled to a beneficial interest attaching to, or an estate or interest in such real property or any portion thereof, provided that the person presumptively entitled to such beneficial interest, estate or interest is a party to such action or bound by such judgment. So much of Section two hundred and seventeen of the Civil Practice Act as requires the court to allow a defendant to defend an action after final judgment shall not apply to an action to foreclose a tax lien. Delivery of the possession of real property affected by a judgment to foreclose a tax lien may be compelled in the manner prescribed in Section nine hundred and eighty-five of the Civil Practice Act. 
(Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 7) 
Editor's note— The references above to sec. 217 and sec. 985 of the Civil Practice Act are obsolete as such act has been repealed. Successor provisions may be found in sec. 317 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules and sec. 221 of the Real Property Administration and Practice Law, respectively.  
Sec. 102. - Surplus. 
Any surplus of the proceeds of the sale, after paying the expenses of the sale, and all taxes, assessments and water rents, which accrued or became a lien on and after the day of the date mentioned in the advertisement of the sale as stated therein, under which the foreclosed transfer of tax lien was issued and satisfying the amount of the tax lien and interest and the costs of the action, must be paid into court for the use of the person or persons entitled thereto. If any part of the surplus remains in court for the period of three (3) months, and no application has been made therefor, the court must, and, if an application therefor is pending, the court may direct such surplus to be invested at interest, for the benefit of the person or persons entitled thereto, to be paid upon the direction of the court.  
Sec. 103. - Foreclosed tax lien not arrears. 
Any party to an action to foreclose a tax lien or any purchaser or any party in interest may give notice of such foreclosure to the commissioner of finance and after such notice the items which constituted the tax lien thus foreclosed shall not be entered by the commissioner of finance in any yearly assessment roll, so long as the judgment of foreclosure of such lien remains in force.  
Sec. 104. - Deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
The common council, at any time either before or after the institution of a foreclosure action, in lieu of prosecuting such action, may accept on behalf of the city a deed of conveyance of premises affected by a tax lien, conveying to the city the fee of said premises; but such premises shall not be taken subject to any mortgage, lien, judgment or other encumbrance, except current taxes, leases and restrictive covenants of record, and no actual consideration shall be paid by the city for such conveyance. 
(L.L. No. 3-1941, § 1) 
Editor's note— The material contained in sec. 104 was originally added to the charter as sec. 104-a. Sec. 104 was repealed by L.L. No. 3-1966, sec. 2 and sec. 104-a was renumbered sec. 104 by sec. 3 of said local law.  
Sec. 105. - Sale of real estate; real estate committee. 
The commissioner of finance is hereby authorized to sell any or all of the real property acquired by the city upon the foreclosure of any transfer of tax lien or by deed in lieu of such foreclosure, either at private sale or public auction, for the best price that can be obtained. He shall not, however, sell the same at private sale for a price less than the amount fixed and determined by a committee consisting of the commissioner of finance, the corporation counsel, the assessor, the commissioner of public works and the commissioner of planning, which determination must be in writing, shall be approved by the common council, and shall be filed in the office of the commissioner of finance. If the purchaser at private sale shall have been procured by a real estate broker, such broker shall be entitled to receive a commission from the city. A broker's commission shall be earned, due and payable only if, as and when title is closed with and deed of conveyance delivered to the purchaser procured by such broker or by the assignee of such purchaser. A real estate broker's commission, as provided in this section, shall be paid out of monies received by the city from the sale of the particular parcel of property. As a part of the purchase price for the sale of real property acquired by the city upon the foreclosure of any transfer of tax lien or by deed in lieu of such foreclosure the city, when so authorized by ordinance of the common council, shall have the right and it is hereby authorized to take, in the name of the city, a purchase money bond and mortgage or bonds and mortgages in an amount or amounts not to exceed sixty per centum of the sale price, due as to principal not more than five (5) years from the date of the closing of title, to bear interest at a rate to be stated in said ordinance, and upon such other terms and conditions as may be authorized and fixed by ordinance of the common council. The purchaser or purchasers on any such sale shall pay the mortgage recording tax and recording fees and pay for and affix to such instruments any and all revenue stamps that may be necessary. In enforcing the lien of any such mortgage, the city shall have and be entitled to all the same rights and remedies as an individual or private corporation. The city shall not permit the subordination of any such mortgage it may hold. The city shall have and be entitled to the same rights as an individual or private corporation to sell and assign any such bond and mortgage. The said committee, consisting of the commissioner of finance, the corporation counsel, the assessor, commissioner of public works and the commissioner of planning shall be known and designated as [the] real estate committee. Said real estate committee shall have the custody, control and management of all real property acquired by the city upon the foreclosure of any transfer of tax lien or by deed in lieu of such foreclosure, shall recommend to the common council properties so acquired which are available and should be held for public use and shall recommend to said common council what, if any, buildings on such properties should, in the interest of public health and safety, be demolished. Said real estate committee may lease in the name of the city, for a term not to exceed one year, any real property so acquired and shall have the authority to institute and maintain, in the name of the city, summary proceedings to recover possession thereof. The committee shall elect annually a chairman from its members. The members of the committee shall meet upon the call of the chairman or as directed by the committee and may act by a majority vote. The committee shall have power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with law or the directions of the common council for the transaction of its business. It may appoint such employees, as are authorized by the common council, which it may deem necessary for the transaction of its business. The expense of the real estate committee shall be defrayed out of monies appropriated by the common council. Said real estate committee shall have such further power and duties as may be provided by ordinance of the common council. 
(Laws 1923, Ch. 570, § 7; L.L. No. 3-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1941, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1942, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1944, § 4; L.L. No. 6-1979, § 1) 
State Law reference— How powers granted to city regarding sale or lease of city real estate, etc., to be exercised, General City Law, § 23(2)(b).  
Sec. 105-a. - Sale of real estate; common council approval and notice to adjoining owners. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no real property may be sold by the city, either privately or by public auction, unless and until such sale has been approved by the common council. No private sale may be so approved unless written notice of the proposed sale is mailed by the city clerk, at least one (1) week prior to said approval, to all owners of property within the city of White Plains, as shown by the tax assessment roll, within five hundred (500) feet of the property to be sold. No sale by public auction may be so approved unless written notice, as set forth above, is mailed at least one (1) week prior to the date of the public auction. In the event the property to be sold is adjoined by any city-owned unimproved property, the aforesaid five-hundred foot dimension shall be calculated from the perimeter of such contiguous unimproved property. 
(L.L. No. 2-1986, § 1)  
Sec. 106. - Apportionment of taxes and assessments. 
A committee consisting of the commissioner of finance, the corporation counsel and the assessor is hereby authorized and empowered to apportion any tax, assessment or water rents (excepting city school district taxes prior to their inclusion in a transfer of tax lien) covering more than one lot or portion of a lot, if so requested, upon the consent of the owner or owners of all of the land to be apportioned, or upon five days' written notice served upon such owner or owners, either personally or by depositing such notice in the post office addressed to the last known address of the owners not consenting and not personally served, specifying the time and place of hearing on such apportionment, and the amount apportioned to each lot or parcel and shall be and remain a lien on such lot or parcel the same as if originally so assessed against the owner. The apportionment shall be stated in writing and shall be filed in the office of the commissioner of finance. Such statement of apportionment shall be signed by a majority of the committee. If any of the taxes, assessments or water rents so apportioned are included in a transfer of tax lien, the commissioner of finance shall execute a release from the transfer of tax lien of any lot or parcel apportioned upon the payment to him of the sum so apportioned to that lot or parcel and the residue may be sold to satisfy the balance due on said lien. 
(Laws 1923, Ch. 570, § 7; L.L. No. 2-1951, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 8-1961, § 13)  
Sec. 107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 107 was repealed by L.L. No. 7-1961, sec. 1. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 108. - Corporation counsel to protect interest of city. 
It shall be the duty of the corporation counsel to protect the interest of the city in all matters, actions and proceedings relating to tax liens and transfer of tax liens; to intervene on behalf of the city or of the holder of a transfer of a tax lien in, or to make the city a party to any action in which he believes it to be to the interest of the city so to do, by reason of any matter arising under or relating to any tax lien or transfer of tax lien, or advertisement of sale of tax liens. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 7)  
Sec. 109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 109 was repealed by Laws 1919, Ch. 124, sec. 8. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 110. - Lost, destroyed or mutilated transfer of tax lien; delivery of duplicate in case of. 
Whenever any transfer of tax lien given by the commissioner of finance as in this title provided, shall be lost, destroyed or mutilated, the holder or owner thereof may apply to the supreme court or to the county court of the county of Westchester, on due proof of such loss, destruction or mutilation, for an order directing the commissioner of finance to execute and deliver a duplicate to such holder or owner. The filing of a certified copy of such order with the commissioner of finance shall be taken in the place and stead of the transfer of tax lien so lost, destroyed or mutilated. 
(L.L. No. 8-1961, § 14)  
Sec. 111. - Other remedies to collect taxes not affected. 
The actions to enforce personal liability, the supplementary proceedings and the foreclosure actions herein provided for, are in addition to the other methods provided for the collection of taxes in the city of White Plains, and not dependent upon them or any of them or any step thereof.  
Sec. 112. - Collection of taxes heretofore levied. 
All annual taxes, local assessments and all other assessments whatsoever heretofore taxed, assessed or charged by the village of White Plains, or by its officers, may be collected in the name of the city by the corporation counsel, by supplementary proceedings or foreclosure of tax liens, as provided herein for the collection of taxes, and such methods are in addition to other methods provided for the collection of taxes and assessments, and not dependent upon them or any of them; and in such actions, supplementary proceedings and foreclosures all items inserted in the annual tax rolls must be collected as a part of the annual taxes upon the same property against which such items were inserted, with interest, penalties and fees, the same as upon the annual taxes. No action, supplementary proceedings or foreclosure action may be commenced to collect taxes heretofore levied until after the expiration of one year from the date when the same shall have become due and payable.  
Sec. 113. - Statute of limitation not a defense. 
In any action or proceeding to which the city of White Plains or any of its officers is a party, and in which it is claimed that annual taxes, local assessments or other charges, or assessments whatsoever, hereafter taxed, assessed or charged, are due and owing the city, or in which it is sought to collect the same, the statute of limitations is not a bar or defense to the right of the city or its officers to recover or offset such taxes, local assessments or other assessments.  
Sec. 114. - Limitation of right to attack sales under tax foreclosure. 
An action cannot be maintained to recover real estate thereafter sold under a judgment or in an action brought to foreclose the lien of a tax, or to foreclose the equity of redemption remaining after the sale thereof for a tax, or to recover any right, title, interest or equity of redemption in or to real estate so sold, unless the action therefor is commenced within one year after the entry of judgment of foreclosure and sale in case of sales hereafter had, and within one year from the time this act takes effect in case of sales heretofore had. The limitations herein provided apply to and bar nonresident persons, persons temporarily absent from the state, minors, insane persons, persons in prison and all other persons and corporations whether under disability or not.  
Sec. 115. - Collection of local assessments. 
Whenever an assessment roll for local improvements shall be delivered to the commissioner of finance he shall forthwith give notice in the official paper, one insertion; and within ten (10) days from the date of the notice so published he shall cause a written or printed notice to be given to every person, owner, occupant or agent of real estate assessed for the local improvement, within the city, from whom an assessment may be due, specifying the amount and for what purpose the assessment was made, and when payable. Such notice may be served personally or by leaving the same at the residence or place of business of such person, owner, occupant or agent, or may be served by depositing it in the post office with the postage prepaid thereon, properly folded and directed to such owner, occupant or agent, stating that an assessment roll for local improvement has been left with him for collection, and that the same may be paid to him within the times and with interest at the rate of one and one-half per centum (1½%) per month after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the confirmation by the common council of the assessment. If any assessment or installment shall remain unpaid at the expiration of the time mentioned for the payment thereof, the commissioner of finance shall, without further notice, proceed to collect by the sale of tax liens as directed for the collection of the city taxes. 
(L.L. No. 2-1931, § 5; L.L. No. 6-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 14)  
Sec. 116. - Collection of tax or local assessment by suit. 
Whenever any tax or local assessment levied or assessed upon any person, copartnership or property, with the fees, interest, additions and expenses which have by law been added thereto, shall remain unpaid for one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date the same became a lien the commissioner of finance shall, when directed by the common council, maintain an action in his name of office for the amount of such tax, fees, additions and expenses remaining unpaid and uncollected, against any person, copartnership or corporation liable for such tax, or local assessment, or the representatives of such corporation, copartnership or person, in any court of competent jurisdiction in which the proceedings, costs, judgments, supplementary proceedings thereon (which supplementary proceedings are hereby authorized and given, irrespective of the amount of the judgment recovered) and executions shall be the same, and with like effect as in actions between public officers and individuals and in civil actions generally under the code of civil procedure; the amount collected by any such action or proceeding shall be used and applied by said commissioner of finance, in the same manner as though the same had been collected by the sale of real estate under the provisions of this act, relating to the collection of unpaid taxes, and the same costs and disbursements may be allowed against the person examined in such supplementary proceedings, but none shall be allowed against the city. The warrant delivered to the commissioner of finance shall be presumptive evidence that all the previous proceedings, including the assessing and levying of the tax or local assessment, were regular and according to law. A judgment in such action in favor of the city shall not release or in any manner affect the lien of any tax or assessment until satisfied, and nothing in this section contained shall be construed or held to repeal or abridge any other remedy or power given for the collection of taxes or local assessments in the city of White Plains. 
(L.L. No. 2-1931, § 7)  
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS; COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS; STREETS; SIDEWALKS; SEWERS; PAVEMENTS; WATERWORKS[10] 
Section 
117.
Duties of commissioner of public works. 
118.
Jurisdiction of commissioner of public works over streets. 
119.
Rules and regulations for discipline of employees. 
120.
What deemed public streets. 
121.
Streets deemed abandoned. 
122.
Dedication of streets and parks. 
123.
Acceptance of dedication. 
124.
Survey and description of streets dedicated. 
125.
Record of streets, parks and squares. 
126.
Power of common council as to street improvements. 
127.
Reserved. 
128.
Procedure for land acquisition. 
129.
Notice of proposed improvement; hearing and action thereon by common council. 
130.
Acquisition of land by contract. 
131.
Acquisition of land by legal proceedings. 
Section 
Section 
132.
Report to be filed. 
133.
Statement of cost; apportionment and assessment. 
134.
Reserved. 
135.
Duties of assessor; report. 
136.
Notice of filing report; objections; confirmation; reapportionment. 
137.
Payment of assessment. 
137-a.
Collection of assessments for local improvements. 
138.
Recovery of payment erroneously paid. 
139.
Appeals from assessments for benefits. 
140.
Notice of appeal; undertaking or bond. 
141.
Stay of proceedings. 
142.
Return on appeal. 
143.
Hearing on appeal; rehearing before common council. 
144.
Costs on appeal. 
145.
Payment of awards; deposit in certain cases. 
146.
Payment or deposit of excess of award over assessment. 
147—149.
Reserved. 
150.
City's share; how paid. 
151.
Establishment and alteration of grades and names of streets; damages for change of grade. 
152.
Discontinuance of streets. 
153.
Sidewalks, curbs, sidewalk drains and appurtenances; how to be constructed, repaired and maintained; cutting grass and weeds. 
154.
Commissioner of public works to order work to be done. 
155.
Notice and service; proof of service. 
156.
If owner fails, commissioner of public works to cause work to be done. 
156-a.
Apportionment and assessment of expense. 
157.
Expense thereof; how collected. 
158.
List of unpaid charges for sidewalks, curbs, etc.; assessment roll therefor. 
158-a.
Disposition of excess of assessments for sidewalks and curbs; city to pay deficiency. 
159.
Cleaning streets. 
160.
Cleaning snow and ice from walks. 
161.
Sanitary sewers; preliminary ordinance for construction; power of city to enter private lands. 
162.
Survey and plan. 
163.
Notice of intention. 
164.
Objections; hearing; order for construction. 
165.
Advertisement for proposals. 
166.
Council may temporarily borrow funds. 
167.
Frontage assessment; amount: lien of. 
168.
Assessment roll for sanitary sewers and proceedings thereon. 
169.
Payment of assessment. 
170.
Disposition of excess of assessment; city to pay deficiency. 
171, 172.
Reserved. 
173.
Sanitary sewer through private lands; cost of, how paid. 
174.
Proceedings to obtain right of way. 
175.
Reserved. 
176.
City's share; how paid. 
177.
Council may compel connection. 
178.
Procedure to compel connection. 
179.
Procedure to collect expense of connection. 
180.
Street or other improvements; common council may direct construction or improvement. 
181.
Ordinance and notice to be published; hearing; action thereon. 
182.
Sewer, water mains and conduits in streets to be improved. 
183.
Expenses of improvement; how apportioned and assessed. 
183-a.
Assessment of cost of sidewalks and curbs in connection with improvements. 
184.
Assessment roll for improvements. 
185.
City's share of cost of improvement. 
186.
[Street improvements and special assessments—Generally.] 
187.
[Same—Apportionment of special assessment costs.] 
188.
Waterworks; powers of commissioner of public works. 
189.
Extension or improvement of waterworks system; increase in supply. 
190.
Reserved. 
191.
Acquisition of lands and water rights. 
192.
Use of streets and highways. 
193.
Extension of mains in streets. 
194.
Willful injury to waterworks system a misdemeanor. 
195.
Hydrants. 
196.
Connecting of supply lines. 
197.
Establishment of water rates and charges. 
198.
Record of water rates and other water charges. 
199.
Collection of water charges. 
200.
Enforcement of collection of water charges. 
201.
Sewer rents. 
202.
Establishment of boundaries of watercourses; publication of description; hearing. 
203.
Manner of acquisition of lands when not otherwise provided. 
204.
Correction of errors in assessments. 
205.
Evidence of assessments generally. 
206.
Lien of assessments. 
206-a.
Installment payments of assessments. 
207.
Condemnation; when title vests; interest on awards; excess condemnation. 
207-a.
Sale of excess property acquired by the city. 
208.
Preparation of assessment map for local improvements not required. 
209.
Reserved. 
210.
Partial payments. 
211.
Partial completion of public work to be certified; partial estimates; semi-final estimates. 
212.
Completion of work to be certified; final estimate. 
212-a.
Period of maintenance; acceptance of work. 
213.
Contracts to be let. 
214.
Contracts to be based upon estimates. 
215.
Bid security. 
216.
Opening of bids. 
217.
Bonds for performance of contract. 
218.
Reserved. 
218-a.
Reserved. 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Annual reports of departments, § 287. 
Code reference— Public works, Tit. VII. 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire real property for public works, General City Law, § 20(2); to lay out, establish, maintain, vacate, etc., streets; to construct, maintain, operate sewers and drainage systems and water supply systems, General City Law, § 20(7); authority to provide for control over filling, diversion of streams, watercourses, General City Law, § 20(8-a); provisions as to plumbing, drainage, General City Law, § 40 et seq.; authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11). 
 
Sec. 117. - Duties of commissioner of public works. 
The commissioner of public works, subject to the supervision and control of the common council, shall manage and have charge of the construction, improvement, repair and maintenance and the cleaning and lighting of streets, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public highways; of the municipal waterworks; of sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, streams and watercourses; the collection and disposal of waste and garbage; and, except as otherwise provided by law, of all public buildings and public places, boulevards, playgrounds, recreation centers, public parks, parklands, squares and grounds belonging to the city or dedicated to public use and of all public utilities of the city; he shall have charge of the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans, drawings and estimates for said public works; the preservation of all tools and appliances belonging to the city and pertaining to his department. Except as otherwise provided by law, he shall make all contracts for the construction of all public improvements for payment of which the city shall be liable. He shall have such further power and duties as may be provided by ordinance of the common council. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 10; L.L. No. 8-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1961, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 1; L.L. No. 2-2003, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to construct, maintain, operate sewers and drainage systems, authority as to streets, sidewalks, public places, General City Law, § 20(7); authority as to other public works, General City Law, § 20(2), (7-a), (11).  
Sec. 118. - Jurisdiction of commissioner of public works over streets. 
The commissioner of public works shall have the superintendence of highways and bridges within the city and within the limits thereof, shall have all the powers of town boards and superintendents of highways of towns, subject to the provisions of this charter, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 2)  
Sec. 119. - Rules and regulations for discipline of employees. 
The commissioner of public works shall establish and promulgate rules and regulations for the employment and dismissal of employees of the department, and for the discipline and government of the same. 
State Law reference— For civil service provisions, see Civil Service Law.  
Sec. 120. - What deemed public streets. 
The following shall be deemed public streets within the city: 
(1)  All streets in public use within said city laid out as streets or public highways under any law of this state, or under any proceedings authorized by the statutes of this state. 
(2)  All streets not laid out or recorded under any statute of this state, or by proceedings authorized by such statutes, but which have been worked or improved by the city and shall have been used as public streets or highways for ten (10) years or more. 
(3)  All such streets heretofore dedicated to the public use in pursuance of law or hereafter dedicated and accepted by the common council as provided in this title. 
(L.L. No. 1-1991, § 15)  
Sec. 121. - Streets deemed abandoned. 
Every street that shall not have been used by the public as a street for six (6) years, and every street that shall not have been opened and worked within six (6) years from the time it shall have been dedicated to the use of the public, or laid out as a street, shall cease to be a street; but the period during which any action or proceedings shall have been or shall be pending in regard to any such street shall form no part of such six (6) years.  
Sec. 122. - Dedication of streets and parks. 
Whenever any lands are sold or conveyed within the city of White Plains and described in the deed or conveyance thereof as abutting upon or bounded by any street, park or square, which is owned wholly or partly by the grantor in such deed or conveyance, and such street shall not be one of the public streets of said city, as defined in the preceding section but one, or such park or square shall not be one of the public parks or squares of said city, the fact of such sale or conveyance of lands so described shall be deemed a dedication to the public use by the grantor of the street, park or square, as so described, in the description of the land so sold or conveyed or in any map, plan or survey referred to in such description, and filed in the office of the clerk of the county of Westchester, division of land records. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 3)  
Sec. 123. - Acceptance of dedication. 
Whenever any street, park or square shall have been dedicated to the public use, the common council may, by ordinance, adopted by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all its members, taken by ayes and nays and recorded in its minutes, accept such dedications. Thereupon the street so dedicated and accepted shall be a public street within said city, and the park or square so dedicated and accepted shall be one of the public parks or squares of said city.  
Sec. 124. - Survey and description of streets dedicated. 
Whenever any street, park or square shall have been accepted, as in the preceding section [§ 123] provided, the common council shall cause a survey, map and description thereof to be made by the commissioner of public works and by him reported to the common council, stating the course, distance, width and boundaries of the street, park or square so accepted. Such survey shall be entered at length in the minutes of the common council, and a copy thereof duly certified by the city clerk shall be presumptive evidence in any proceeding, of the location of said street, park or square.  
Sec. 125. - Record of streets, parks and squares. 
The common council may, by ordinance, cause such streets, public parks or squares in said city as shall have been used for twenty (20) years, and are not sufficiently described, or have not been duly recorded, to be ascertained, described and entered of record in its minutes, and the record thereof, and of such as shall hereafter be laid out, or of such as have been dedicated and accepted by the common council, or a copy thereof, certified by the city clerk, shall be evidence of the existence and location of such streets, parks and squares, as therein described.  
Sec. 126. - Power of common council as to street improvements. 
Under the restrictions and limitations hereinafter prescribed the common council may, by ordinance, provide for: 
(1)  The laying out, opening, constructing and making of streets, public grounds, squares, parks, drains, culverts, arches and bridges in said city. 
(2)  Widening, narrowing, altering or discontinuing of any street, public ground, square or park or any part thereof in said city. 
But no street, or any part thereof, shall be discontinued, except upon the written petition, duly signed, and acknowledged, of all persons owning the lands fronting upon the street, or upon the part thereof so discontinued or on motion of the common council. The discontinuance of any street shall be subject to the applicable provisions of section one hundred fifty-two of this charter and no street, or any part thereof, shall be discontinued by the common council except upon compliance with said section one hundred fifty-two. 
(Laws 1927, Ch. 653, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 4) 
Cross reference— Corporate powers defined, § 4; legislative power of city vested in common council, § 32. 
State Law reference— Authority to lay out, establish, maintain, vacate, etc., streets, General City Law, § 20(7).  
Sec. 127. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 127 was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1967, sec. 5. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 128. - Procedure for land acquisition. 
Whenever the common council shall consider it proper and expedient to acquire land, including buildings, if any, to lay out, open, widen, alter or construct any street, public ground, square, park, culvert, arch or bridge, it shall proceed as follows: the common council shall cause the commissioner of public works to make a map and survey, showing the location of such proposed improvement, and the particular lots or parcels of land, if any, required therefor, and the names of the owners or occupants thereof, so far as the same can be ascertained, and report to the common council his opinion as to the propriety of the proposed improvement, with an estimate, in items, of the probable cost and expense of such acquisition, including the amount of damages which, in his judgment, will be sustained in consequence thereof, by the owners and occupants of lands and buildings, if any, required to be taken for such improvement. Such report shall also designate the district of assessment, including that portion of the city which, in his judgment, will be benefited by such improvement, and should be assessed for the cost and expense thereof. Such survey and map shall be presented with such report. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 6) 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire property for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(2); Statute of Local Governments, § 10(2).  
Sec. 129. - Notice of proposed improvement; hearing and action thereon by common council. 
The common council, upon the presentation of such report, [provided for in section 128] unless it shall determine not to proceed with such proposed improvement, shall direct the city clerk to give notice by publication thereof, for at least four (4) successive days in the official newspaper of the time and place at which the common council will consider the matter of such proposed improvement, which time shall be not less than ten (10) days from the first publication of such notice. At the time and place mentioned in such notice, the common council shall meet, and then, or at such other time as a majority of its members then present may appoint, shall hear all persons desiring to be heard upon the matter of said proposed improvement and with reference to the district of assessment, and shall take such action as it shall deem proper. No such improvement shall be ordered except by an ordinance, adopted by the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all the members of the common council. The ordinance directing such improvement shall require and direct that the cost and expense thereof shall be defrayed by local assessment, unless said ordinance requires and directs that all or a portion of such cost and expense shall be charged to the city at large, and the remainder thereof defrayed by local assessment, and shall designate that portion if any of the city which shall be assessed therefor. The ordinance shall also contain a description of the lots or parcels of land, if any, required for such improvement. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 7)  
Sec. 130. - Acquisition of land by contract. 
After the adoption of such ordinance [§§ 128, 129] the commissioner of public works may contract with the owner or owners of any of the lands required for said improvement for the sale thereof, to said city, at a price to be stated in said contract, which price shall be approved by the common council, and shall be payable at such time or times as shall be determined by the common council, provided that the lands conveyed by the deeds shall be in fee and shall be free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, except as may be otherwise determined by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 3-1963, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire property for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(2); Statute of Local Governments, § 10(2).  
Sec. 131. - Acquisition of land by legal proceedings. 
Whenever any lands are required for such improvement, for the purchase of which no contract shall be made, as provided for in the last preceding section, [§ 130] the city of White Plains shall have the right to acquire fee title to the same by condemnation. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 8) 
Cross reference— Manner of acquisition of lands when not otherwise provided, § 203; condemnation, § 207. 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire property for municipal purposes by condemnation, General City Law, § 20(2), General Municipal Law, § 74; Condemnation proceedings, Eminent Domain Procedure Law, § 1 et seq.  
Sec. 132. - Report to be filed. 
Whenever any report of commissioners appointed in any condemnation proceedings shall be confirmed in whole or in part, the corporation counsel shall cause a copy thereof, and of the order confirming the same, each duly certified by the clerk of the court, to be filed in the office of the commissioner of finance and a duplicate thereof in the office of the city clerk. Thereupon the said report, or so much thereof as has been confirmed, and the confirmation thereof, shall be final and conclusive, unless an appeal be taken therefrom within the time and in the manner provided by law.  
Sec. 133. - Statement of cost; apportionment and assessment. 
Whenever an ordinance directing such improvement shall have been adopted, and the necessary land including buildings, if any, has been acquired, the commissioner of public works shall file with the common council an itemized statement of the actual and complete cost thereof which shall include the amount of compensation to be paid for such land including buildings, if any, and including the amount of damages which have been sustained in consequence of said land acquisition, by the owners and occupants of such land and buildings, if any, all costs incurred by the city for surveyors', printers', commissioners' and witnesses' fees, and the costs and disbursements of the corporation counsel for and on account of such land acquisition, and all other expenses incidental thereto. Such statement shall thereupon be entered in full in the minutes of the common council, and the common council shall thereupon consider the said statement presented by the commissioner of public works and shall by ordinance direct the city assessor to apportion and assess said actual and complete cost, or such portion as has been determined by the common council, pursuant to section one hundred twenty-nine of this charter, upon the several lots or parcels of land within the district of assessment designated in such ordinance in proportion to the benefits derived by such lots or parcels respectively from the making of such improvement. Said actual and complete cost, or such portion thereof as has been determined by the common council, shall be borne by the owners or occupants of the lots or parcels of land benefited thereby and shall be apportioned, assessed and collected according to the provisions herein contained and shall be a lien upon such property from and after the time of the confirmation of the apportionment and assessment thereof. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 9) 
Cross reference— Right to review assessment for local improvement limited, § 77; procedure on review, § 78; consolidation of separate proceedings, § 79; collection of local assessments, § 115; collection of local assessment by suit, § 116. 
State Law reference— Authority to assess for improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 134 was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1967, sec. 10. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 135. - Duties of assessor; report. 
The assessor shall thereupon give five (5) days' notice, in the official newspaper, of the time and place at which he will attend to enter upon his duties, at the time and place so appointed, or at any other time within thirty (30) days to which he may adjourn, he shall view the location of the land which has been acquired, and the lands upon which said land acquisition cost is to be apportioned and assessed, and apportion and assess the amount so fixed and determined as aforesaid, upon the several lots or parcels of land within the district of assessment in proportion, as near as may be, to the benefit which each of said lots or parcels of land shall be deemed by him to acquire thereby, and make a written report hereof to the common council. Such report shall contain his apportionments and assessments and a designation or description of the several lots or parcels of land assessed and the names, if known, of the owners thereof, or if such owners be unknown, that fact shall be so stated; and the amount by him assessed upon each of such lots or parcels. Such lots or parcels may be designated by their numbers upon any city map adopted by the common council, or by any other definite description thereof. Such report shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 11)  
Sec. 136. - Notice of filing report; objections; confirmation; reapportionment. 
The common council shall give notice, to be published in the official newspaper, that such report is filed with the city clerk, and that at a time to be specified therein, which shall not be less than ten (10) days from the first publication thereof, it will proceed to a consideration of such report. Prior to said day any person may file with the city clerk written objections to such report, or any part thereof, which objections shall be read before the common council before any action shall be taken on such report. At the time so appointed, or at such other time, to which it may adjourn, for that purpose, the common council may hear the allegations of any person interested, who shall have filed such objections, and may take proof in relation thereto. Such allegations and proofs shall be confined to the matters stated in such written objections. The common council may thereupon confirm such report, without alterations, or with such alterations therein as they may deem proper. The confirmation of such report by the common council shall be final and conclusive unless an appeal be taken therefrom, as hereinafter provided, and the common council shall direct the proper warrant for collection to be attached to a certified copy of such report.  
Sec. 137. - Payment of assessment. 
The city clerk shall deliver a copy of such report, together with a copy of the ordinance of the common council confirming the same, each duly certified by him, with the proper warrant attached thereto, to the commissioner of finance, and such certified copy of report and ordinance of confirmation shall be deemed the assessment roll for said land acquisition, and the amounts stated therein, as chargeable to the respective persons or properties, shall be collected by the commissioner of finance in the same manner as other local assessments are directed to be collected by the provisions of this charter relating to the collection of assessments for local improvements as set forth in section one hundred thirty-seven-a and sections one hundred thirty-eight to one hundred forty-four inclusive of this charter. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 12)  
Sec. 137-a. - Collection of assessments for local improvements. 
Assessments for local improvements shall be collected by the commissioner of finance at the times, in the manner, and in the amounts, together with interest if any, as provided in the ordinance adopted by the common council either levying the assessment or confirming the assessment or the assessment roll. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 13) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 138. - Recovery of payment erroneously paid. 
When any such assessment shall be paid by or collected of any person, and by agreement or law the same ought to have been borne or paid by any other person, it shall be lawful for the person so paying to sue for and recover of the person bound to pay the same the amount so paid with interest and costs.  
Sec. 139. - Appeals from assessments for benefits. 
Any person affected by any assessment report apportioning and assessing the cost and expense of any such local improvement, or by the confirmation thereof by the common council, as herein provided, may, at any time, within ten (10) days after the confirmation thereof, appeal to the special term of the supreme court from such assessment, report and confirmation, as hereinafter provided. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 14)  
Sec. 140. - Notice of appeal; undertaking or bond. 
Any appeal mentioned in the last preceding section [§ 139] shall be made by serving upon the corporation counsel, or the mayor, and upon the city clerk, a notice of appeal to the special term of the supreme court from the report and determination appealed from, with an undertaking to said city, duly executed and acknowledged by two (2) or more individual sureties or with a surety bond from a company authorized to do business in the state of New York, to be approved by the mayor, corporation counsel, or a justice of the supreme court in Westchester county, in a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00), conditioned for the diligent prosecution of said appeal and for the payment of all damages, costs and charges which may be awarded against him on such appeal; and by payment to the city clerk of his fees for making returns on such appeal, which fees shall be ten cents ($0.10) per folio of the matter to be returned. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 11; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 15)  
Sec. 141. - Stay of proceedings. 
The service of such notice of appeal and undertaking or bond, with payment of the fees as aforesaid, shall stay all further proceedings by the common council and by the officers of said city in relation to the subject-matter of such appeal until decision thereon. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 16)  
Sec. 142. - Return on appeal. 
The city clerk shall forthwith, after any such appeal is perfected as aforesaid, make a copy of the report and determination appealed from, copies of all papers on file in his office, and of all the proceedings of the common council relating to the subject-matter of such appeal. The city clerk shall attach such papers to the notice of appeal and affix thereto his certificate that they are true and correct copies of all such papers, and file the same in the office of the clerk of Westchester county. Such papers shall constitute the return on appeal.  
Sec. 143. - Hearing on appeal; rehearing before common council. 
Either party may bring such appeal to a hearing before special term of the supreme court held in the county of Westchester, upon a notice of eight (8) days. Such court shall hear and consider the appeal, and examine all questions of law and fact that may be presented by the return of such appeal, and may by its order, confirm, reverse or modify such report and determination in whole or in part. In case of a reversal, the court may direct a rehearing before the common council. Upon such rehearing the same proceedings shall be had as hereinbefore provided for upon the original hearing of the matter. If upon such appeal it shall appear to the said court that any party, other than the appellant, has an interest in the subject-matter of such appeal, which will be affected by the determination thereof, such court may direct that such party be given an opportunity to be heard on such appeal in such manner as it shall direct, before the decision thereof.  
Sec. 144. - Costs on appeal. 
In case the court shall affirm the report and determination appealed from, the obligors in the undertaking or bond on appeal above mentioned shall be liable to pay to the city the same costs as are allowed upon appeals to the appellate division of the supreme court from a judgment in a civil action, and the necessary disbursements upon such appeals, to be adjusted by the clerk of Westchester county. In case of a determination of such appeal, other than an affirmance, the court shall direct the costs to be awarded, and to and against whom. If such costs be awarded against the city, they shall be paid by the city after adjustment and entry of judgment in the same manner as other judgments against the city are paid under the provisions of this charter. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 17)  
Sec. 145. - Payment of awards; deposit in certain cases. 
Whenever the amount of compensation for lands, if any, required to be taken for such land acquisition shall be finally ascertained and fixed, and the assessment for such land acquisition shall have been finally made and confirmed, the common council may, and within four (4) months after such assessments have been so finally fixed and determined, shall cause the compensation and damages so ascertained and fixed to be paid or tendered to the respective parties to whom they are awarded. But if any of such parties are infants, idiots, lunatics or persons judicially declared to be incompetent to manage their affairs, or unknown, or non-residents of the county of Westchester, or if the right of any person to the compensation or damages awarded to him shall, in the opinion of the common council, be in doubt, the common council, instead of paying or tendering to such parties the compensation or damages so awarded to him or them, may deposit the same with the commissioner of finance of Westchester county to the credit of whomsoever may be entitled thereto accompanied with the description of the land, for the taking of which such compensation or damages were awarded, and a statement of the facts in each case. The moneys so deposited shall be held by said commissioner of finance as moneys paid into court, and as to such moneys he shall be subject to all the duties imposed upon him by law or by the rules of the supreme court in relation to moneys paid into court and held by him. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 18)  
Sec. 146. - Payment or deposit of excess of award over assessment. 
Whenever the compensation for lands acquired for a street improvement has been finally determined and awarded and an assessment has been finally levied in connection with said lands, the city may offset said assessment against said award and pay the excess to the parties entitled thereto or may deposit the same as provided for in section one hundred forty-five of this charter. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 19)  
Secs. 147—149. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Secs. 147—149 were repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1967, sec. 20. Said section numbers are retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 150. - City's share; how paid. 
The remainder of said expense not collected by local assessments as hereinbefore provided may be paid from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law as may be determined by the common council. 
(Laws 1943, Ch. 710, § 1048; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 21) 
Cross reference— Budget generally, § 60.  
Sec. 151. - Establishment and alteration of grades and names of streets; damages for change of grade. 
The common council may, by ordinance, establish the grade of any street, and may, by vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all its members change the grade of any street theretofore established whenever, in its opinion, the public interest will be promoted by such change, but where such change shall involve the raising or lowering of any walk or curb which shall have been placed on the former grade, the expense incident to such change shall be borne by the city and paid out of funds made available therefor. The common council shall not alter the name of any street, except by ordinance adopted after a public hearing thereon. 
A person claiming damages from a change of grade must present to the common council a verified claim therefor within sixty (60) days after such change of grade is effected. The common council may agree with such person upon the amount of damages to be allowed him. If no agreement be made within thirty (30) days after the presentation of the claim, the person presenting it may apply to the supreme court for the appointment of three (3) commissioners to determine the compensation to which he is entitled. Notice of the application must be served upon the mayor at least ten (10) days before the hearing thereof. All proceedings subsequent to the appointment of commissioners shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of the condemnation law so far as applicable. The common council or such commissioners shall, in determining the compensation, consider the fair value of the work done or necessary to be done, in order to place the claimant's lands or buildings, or both, in the same relation to the changed grade as they stood to the former grade, and make awards accordingly, except that said common council or said commissioners may make an allowance for benefits derived by the claimant from such improvement. The amount agreed upon for such damages, or the award therefor, together with the cost, if any, allowed to the claimant, shall be a charge against the city and shall be paid out of funds made available therefor. 
This section shall not apply to the change of grade of a street which is under the control, supervision or jurisdiction of the state, nor to the change of grade of a street which is under the control, supervision or jurisdiction of the county of Westchester. 
No proceeding or action under this section shall be maintained against the city unless the same shall be commenced within one year after the change or alteration of grade is effected. 
(L.L. No. 1-1929, § 1; L.L. No. 11-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 22) 
State Law reference— Authority to lay out, establish, maintain, vacate, etc., streets, General City Law, § 20(7).  
Sec. 152. - Discontinuance of streets. 
Whenever the common council shall contemplate the discontinuance of any street, it shall cause a notice to be published for ten days in the official newspaper of the city of its intention so to do, and that all persons interested may be heard in reference thereto at a time stated in such notice. If it shall be determined to discontinue the street, and any person shall claim to be damaged by such discontinuance, such alleged damages, unless agreed to by the commissioner of public works and approved by the common council, must be ascertained and determined in the manner provided by law for ascertaining damages for lands taken for the opening of streets. An ordinance discontinuing any street shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of all the members of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 23)  
Sec. 153. - Sidewalks, curbs, sidewalk drains and appurtenances; how to be constructed, repaired and maintained; cutting grass and weeds. 
Except as hereinafter provided, the construction, repairing and maintaining in good order of all sidewalks, curbs and sidewalk drains, the grading and trestling therefor, and the building of necessary retaining walls to prevent the earth from caving from underneath said walks, and piers for the support thereof, and the grading, maintenance and repair of the area between curb line and property line, including the cutting of grass, weeds and other rank growth exceeding six inches in height, shall be done at the expense of the premises adjoining thereto, or at the expense of the owners thereof. 
(L.L. No. 1-1931, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1947, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1953, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 153)  
Sec. 154. - Commissioner of public works to order work to be done. 
Whenever in the opinion of the commissioner of public works any of the work specified in the foregoing sections shall be necessary to be done, he shall order the same to be done within a specified time, and in case said premises shall be in actual occupation of any person, such person, or the owner of the premises, shall be served with a notice in which shall be stated in general terms what has been ordered to be done and the time within which it has been required. Such notice shall state that unless the order is complied with within the time required, the commissioner of public works shall cause it [such work] to be done and the expense thereof will be charged or assessed against the property as provided in this charter. Whenever the construction of a sidewalk shall be ordered, said sidewalk shall be constructed of concrete, except that sidewalks constructed in front of properties in the R-0, R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts, as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, may be constructed of concrete or bituminous type material in the discretion of the commissioner of public works. 
(L.L. No. 3-1958, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 25)  
Sec. 155. - Notice and service; proof of service. 
The notice specified in the foregoing section [§ 154] shall be signed by the commissioner of public works, and shall be served personally or by leaving it with some person of suitable age at the place of residence of such occupant or owner, or it may be served by depositing it in the post office properly enclosed in a postpaid wrapper and directed to such occupant or owner, at his place of residence, if known, or if not, then at White Plains, New York. An affidavit stating the time and manner of the service of such notice shall be made by any person having knowledge thereof, and filed in the office of the commissioner of public works, which affidavit, when so filed, shall be presumptive evidence in all courts of the facts therein contained. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 26)  
Sec. 156. - If owner fails, commissioner of public works to cause work to be done. 
If any work shall not be done within the time limited therefor, the commissioner of public works shall, by contract or otherwise, cause it to be done, and the expense thereof to be paid as hereinafter set forth. 
(L.L. No. 1-1931, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 27)  
Sec. 156-a. - Apportionment and assessment of expense. 
Upon the completion of the work specified in section one hundred fifty-three of this charter when the cost thereof shall be ascertained, the premises adjoining the streets where the work shall have been done shall be subject to charges to be fixed and determined by the commissioner of public works with the approval of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 1-1931, § 5; L.L. No. 2-1947, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1953, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1958, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1958, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 28; L.L. No. 3-1971, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 3-1971, sec. 1, amended sec. 156-a by substituting provisions that the commissioner of public works shall fix and determine the charges, for provisions prescribing the amounts of the assessments based upon the types of improvements. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 157. - Expense thereof; how collected. 
The commissioner of public works shall enter in a book to be kept for that purpose the name of the owner or occupant of the adjoining premises, a brief description of said premises and the amount of such charges apportioned against each owner or occupant, and a bill or statement of the amount of such charges shall be sent by mail or be presented personally to such owner or occupant, if his address be known, otherwise the same shall be mailed to such owner or occupant, at White Plains, New York. Any person or the owner of any premises so charged may pay such charges and upon such payment the record of such charges shall be cancelled. 
(L.L. No. 7-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 29)  
Sec. 158. - List of unpaid charges for sidewalks, curbs, etc.; assessment roll therefor. 
During the month of January in each year the commissioner of public works shall make up a list of all unpaid charges to the time of the making of said list, and shall thereupon give public notice in the official newspaper for one week of the completion of said list, and that the same will remain in the office of the commissioner of public works for the term of ten (10) days from the date of the notice, during which time any person interested may examine said list; and at the expiration of said ten (10) days, and on a day and hour and at a place to be specified in said notice, the commissioner of public works will attend and hear any objections to said charges, and shall decide upon all objections, and shall, if need be, alter and correct said list, and when complete, the said commissioner of public works shall sign said list and file the same with the city clerk. Thereupon and within one week any party deeming himself aggrieved may file with the clerk a written appeal therefrom to the common council, briefly stating therein the grounds of such appeal. Whereupon the common council shall proceed to hear and determine such appeal or appeals. In case such appeal is denied, or if there is no appeal, the common council shall, by ordinance, order said list to be filed with the city clerk which list shall thereupon be deemed to be the confirmed assessment roll, and the proper warrant shall be attached by the city clerk and the assessment roll shall be delivered to the commissioner of finance for the collection of the assessments thereon in the same manner as other assessments for local improvements are directed to be collected under the provisions of this charter. In the event such appeal is sustained, the commissioner of public works shall proceed to make out a new list in accordance with the determination of the common council and file the same with the common council for further action. The common council may thereupon, by ordinance, order that said list be filed with the city clerk or it may take such other action as it may deem proper and expedient. In the event such ordinance directs the filing of said list with the city clerk, said list shall be deemed to be the confirmed assessment roll and the city clerk and the commissioner of finance shall proceed in the same manner as hereinbefore directed where there is no appeal or where an appeal is denied. Every assessment made as aforesaid upon lands and buildings, together with the fees for the collection thereof, shall be and remain a lien and charge on such lands or buildings on which or in respect to which such assessment shall have been made from the time such assessment roll shall have been deemed to be confirmed. 
(L.L. No. 7-1950, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 30) 
Cross reference— Right to review assessments for local improvement limited, § 77. 
State Law reference— Authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 158-a. - Disposition of excess of assessments for sidewalks and curbs; city to pay deficiency. 
In case the assessments so collected shall exceed the total cost of the sidewalks and curbs for which the assessments are made, the excess shall be paid into the general funds of said city. In case the assessments so collected shall fall short of the amount necessary to defray the total cost of constructing such sidewalks or curbs, the deficiency may be paid from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law as may be determined by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 1-1931, § 6; Laws 1943, Ch. 710, § 1049; Laws 1945, Ch. 839, § 73; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 31)  
Sec. 159. - Cleaning streets. 
The cleaning and keeping clean of streets, alleys, public squares, crosswalks and gutters may be done by contract, if the commissioner of public works deems proper, in which case the work shall be let annually. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 32)  
Sec. 160. - Cleaning snow and ice from walks. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any lot fronting upon any public street, alley, park or place within the city (irrespective of the street the buildings, structures or other improvements may front upon) to clean and keep free from snow and ice in such manner as the ordinances of the city shall provide the entire width of the sidewalk in front of or adjoining the premises of such owner or occupant. Upon failure of said owner or occupant so to do within the time prescribed by the said ordinances, the commissioner of public works shall cause the same to be done and shall charge such expense as hereinafter set forth. Upon the completion of the cleaning under the direction of the commissioner of public works of snow and ice from sidewalks, the premises in front of which such work shall have been done (irrespective of the street the building, structures or other improvements may front upon) shall be subject to a charge to be fixed and determined by the commissioner of public works with the approval of the common council. During the month of May in each year the commissioner of public works shall make a list of all such charges and file the same in his office, and give public notice of such filing by publication in the official paper, two (2) insertions, that said list has been made and filed and that for ten (10) days from the date of the first publication of said notice said list may be examined by any person interested therein, and that upon a day and hour stated in such notice, and at least ten (10) days after the first publication thereof, he will attend at his office to hear any objections to said list, and pass upon all objections, and, if need be, alter and correct said list. After said hearing and making the necessary corrections, if any, he shall attach thereto his certificate that such hearing has been had and that such list is now complete, and file the same with the commissioner of finance, whereupon the commissioner of finance shall mail to each owner of real property included in such list whose name and address he is able to ascertain a statement of the amount of charges against his property. Upon the filing of the said list with the commissioner of finance the several sums mentioned in said list shall be deemed to be assessed against the several persons named therein, and the commissioner of finance shall, when extending the next general tax upon the city assessment roll, place unpaid amounts thereon as against the property of the person named in said list, and such amounts shall be collected at the same time, in the same manner and by the same proceedings as other taxes on said roll. The failure to mail any statement or failure of the addressee to receive the same shall not in any manner affect the validity of the assessment or the penalties imposed by law with respect thereto. 
(L.L. No. 1-1946, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 6-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1961, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1963, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1964, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 33; L.L. No. 4-1971, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 4-1971, sec. 1, amended sec. 160 by substituting provisions that the commissioner of public works shall fix and determine the charges, for provisions fixing a basic charge of $0.20 per lineal foot, subject to adjustment, with a minimum charge of $3.00. 
Code reference— Duty of abutting property owner to remove snow, § 7-2-1. 
State Law reference— Power of city to fix levy, impose, collect and administer fees, charges, etc., and liens on local property in connection therewith, Statute of Local Governments, § 10.  
Sec. 161. - Sanitary sewers; preliminary ordinance for construction; power of city to enter private lands. 
Whenever the common council shall, by ordinance, declare its intention to construct a sanitary sewer or sewers, it shall specify in such ordinance the size and points between which the same is or are intended to be made for the purpose of sewering any street or streets in said city, whether said street or streets have been dedicated to the city or accepted or not, it shall have the power to cause the same to be sewered, and the said council is empowered and authorized, when necessary for the purpose of sewering any street or streets, to construct a sewer upon and through the land of any owner in said city, and for that purpose the common council, and those acting by its direction, shall have power to enter upon any grounds in said city. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 34) 
Code reference— Amount in annual budget for snow removal, § 2-14-16. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority as to construction, operation, maintenance of sewer and drainage system, General City Law, § 20(2), (7), (26), (26-a); supervision, regulation of plumbing, drainage, General City Law, § 40 et seq.  
Sec. 162. - Survey and plan. 
By direction of the common council, the commissioner of public works shall make a survey and plan for the proposed sanitary sewer, which survey and plan shall be submitted to the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 35)  
Sec. 163. - Notice of intention. 
The city clerk shall forthwith give notice in the official newspaper of the intention to construct such sanitary sewer or sewers, and of the size, length and the points between which such sanitary sewer or sewers is or are intended to be constructed. The first publication of such notice shall be at least ten (10) days before the work shall be ordered. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 36)  
Sec. 164. - Objections; hearing; order for construction. 
At any time after the first publication, provided in the last preceding section [§ 163], any person interested, aggrieved or liable to be assessed for the construction of said sewer, may present, in writing, objections to the common council against the construction of such sewer or sewers. The common council shall hear all objections so presented with the evidence which may be offered, and after such hearing, if it shall dismiss such objections, or if no objections are presented, it may order the construction of such sewer or sewers, with all necessary connections, to the curb line.  
Sec. 165. - Advertisement for proposals. 
The city clerk shall deliver a copy of the ordinance of the common council determining to construct such sewer, to the commissioner of public works, who shall advertise for proposals for the construction of such sewer, as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 166. - Council may temporarily borrow funds. 
In case there shall not be sufficient of said funds for the purpose aforesaid [of constructing sanitary sewers] then the common council may temporarily borrow, upon the certificates of indebtedness of said city, the necessary moneys, said certificates of indebtedness to be paid out of the moneys raised in the annual tax budget for paying deficiencies on sewers or from the proceeds of bonds to raise such deficiencies. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 12; Laws 1943, Ch. 712; Laws 1945, Ch. 339)  
Sec. 167. - Frontage assessment; amount: lien of. 
Upon the completion of the construction of a sanitary sewer, whether by contract or days' work, the lands fronting upon the street where such sewer is constructed and the lands fronting upon a strip where such sewer is constructed through private lands, (irrespective of the street the buildings, structures or other improvements may front upon), and which lands are provided with sewage facilities by the construction of such sewer shall be subject to a frontage assessment per lineal foot upon the line of such street or strip of land upon or in which said sewer shall be constructed at the rate of the average cost per lineal foot for the construction of such sewer, as determined and certified by the commissioner of public works except however that the common council, in the event it shall deem it equitable, may direct in said ordinance that all or a portion of the cost and expense of the construction of said sewer shall be charged to the city at large and the remainder, if any, be assessed against the owners of the said lands fronting upon the street or strip of land upon or in which said sewer shall be constructed, except that corner lots shall be credited with any frontage assessment previously paid for the construction of a sanitary sewer in one intersecting street or strip of land in the event that a frontage assessment is levied for the construction of a sewer in the other intersecting street or strip of land; and where lands fronting upon any street (irrespective of the street the buildings, structures or other improvements may front upon) are furnished with sewer facilities by the construction of a sewer through private lands, the said lands shall be subject to the same frontage assessment upon the street upon which said lands front, as in the case of the construction of a sanitary sewer along such street for the accommodation of said lands. In the case of a sanitary sewer constructed through or terminating in the turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac street, the frontage of a parcel of land facing on such turnaround portion shall be considered as the distance measured along a line within said parcel twenty-five (25) feet from, and concentric with, the street line of such parcel of land. Only one frontage assessment shall be levied upon any lands, except as aforesaid for corner lots, and except that any lot extending through from street to street and exceeding one hundred (100) feet in depth shall be subject to a frontage assessment upon each street at the average cost per lineal foot computed as aforesaid. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 6; Laws 1921, Ch. 322, § 3; L.L. No. 2-1946, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1947, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 9-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1951, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1953, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1957, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 37; L.L. No. 5-1971, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1972, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 168. - Assessment roll for sanitary sewers and proceedings thereon. 
The commissioner of public works shall, upon the order of the common council, proceed to make out an assessment roll of said frontage assessment, and shall set forth on said roll the ward, block and lot numbers, the name of the owner, the number of front feet, the rate per foot and the total assessment for each of the parcels involved and shall file the same in his office, and shall thereupon give public notice in the official paper for one week, that the same has been filed in his office, and will remain in his office for the term of ten (10) days from the date of such notice, during which time any persons interested may examine said roll, and at the expiration of said ten (10) days, and on a day and hour and at a place to be specified in said notice, he shall attend and hear any objections to said assessment, and shall decide upon all objections, and shall, if need be, alter and correct said roll, and when complete the said commissioner of public works shall sign and file the same with the city clerk; thereupon and within one week any party deeming himself aggrieved may file with the clerk a written appeal therefrom to the common council briefly stating therein the grounds of such appeal. Whereupon the common council shall proceed to hear and determine such appeal or appeals. In case such appeal is denied, or if there is no appeal, the common council shall, by ordinance, confirm said assessment roll and order the same filed with the city clerk. In the event such appeal is sustained, the common council shall direct that such assessment roll be referred to the commissioner of public works to make out a new assessment roll in accordance with the determination of the common council, which said new assessment roll shall, upon completion thereof by the commissioner of public works, be submitted to the common council for further action. The common council may thereupon confirm said assessment or take such further action as it may deem proper or expedient. In the event such assessment roll is confirmed the same shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(L.L. No. 17-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 38) 
Cross reference— Right to review assessments for local improvement limited, § 77. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 169. - Payment of assessment. 
The city clerk shall deliver a copy of such assessment roll, together with a copy of the ordinance of the common council confirming the same, each duly certified by him with the proper warrant attached thereto, to the commissioner of finance, and such certified copy of report and ordinance of confirmation shall be deemed the assessment roll for said improvement, and the amount stated therein as chargeable to the respective persons or properties shall be collected by the commissioner of finance in the same manner as assessments for local improvements are directed to be collected by the provisions of this charter. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 39)  
Sec. 170. - Disposition of excess of assessment; city to pay deficiency. 
In case the assessments so collected shall exceed the total cost of the sanitary sewer or sewers for which the assessments are made, the excess shall be paid into the general funds of the city. In case the assessments so collected shall fall short of the amount necessary to defray the total cost of constructing such sanitary sewer or sewers, the deficiency may be paid from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local Finance Law, as may be determined by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 40)  
Secs. 171, 172. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Secs. 171, 172 were repealed by Laws 1943, Ch. 712, as amended by Laws 1945, Ch. 339. Said section numbers are retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 173. - Sanitary sewer through private lands; cost of, how paid. 
When, in the opinion of the common council, it shall become necessary in order to abate a nuisance, or the public interests require, said council may order that a sanitary sewer or sewers be constructed through the private lands of any person, persons, corporations or associations, upon the assessment and payment of damages, if any, as in the case of taking of private lands for streets, and where such sewer or sewers do not furnish sewage facilities for street lots along its routes, the whole expense of the construction of such sewer shall be borne by the city, and shall be paid from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law, as may be determined by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 41)  
Sec. 174. - Proceedings to obtain right of way. 
Whenever the common council shall order a sanitary sewer to be made through the lands of any person, corporation or association, such proceedings shall be had to appoint commissioners to ascertain and assess the damage to the parties interested as is provided by the sections of this title relating to the taking of private lands for streets, and said sections are hereby declared to apply to proceedings under this section, and by such proceedings the city of White Plains shall acquire a permanent right of way for a sanitary sewer of any size or depth, with the right to repair or relay such sewer at any time. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 42)  
Sec. 175. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 175 was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1967, sec. 43. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 176. - City's share; how paid. 
The remainder of said expense [in construction of sanitary sewers] not collected by local assessments as hereinbefore provided, shall be paid from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law, as may be determined by the common council. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 14; Laws 1943, Ch. 710, § 1051; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 44) 
Cross reference— Budget, generally, § 60.  
Sec. 177. - Council may compel connection. 
The common council may, whenever deemed expedient, order any person whose property has been provided with sewage facilities, by the construction of any sanitary sewer, to make connections of such property with such sewer, and whenever it shall be necessary to do any such work, the common council shall order it done within a time specified and pursuant to the requirements of the plumbing code of the city of White Plains and in case said premises shall be in the actual occupation of any person, such person, or the owner of the premises, shall be served with a notice in which shall be stated in general terms what has been ordered to be done, and the time in which it has been required; such notice shall be signed by the city clerk, and shall be served personally or by leaving it with some person of suitable age at the place of residence of said occupant or owner, or it may be served by depositing it in the post office, properly enclosed in a postpaid wrapper and directed to such owner or occupant at his last known address. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 15; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 45)  
Sec. 178. - Procedure to compel connection. 
An affidavit stating the time and manner of the service of such notice [to connect to a sanitary sewer] shall be made by any person having knowledge thereof, and filed with the clerk, which affidavit, when so filed, shall be presumptive evidence in all courts of the facts therein contained. If any work shall not be done within the time limited therefor, the commissioner of public works shall, by contract or otherwise, cause the same to be done, and for that purpose he or those designated by him shall have the right to enter such premises. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 46)  
Sec. 179. - Procedure to collect expense of connection. 
Upon the completion of such connection, [connection to a sanitary sewer], the commissioner of public works shall forthwith present a statement of the expense thereof, with a description of the premises upon which the work was done, to the common council, which shall assess the expense of said work, with ten per centum (10%) additional, upon said premises, or upon the owner thereof. The assessment roll shall be made and the same proceedings as to objections to and appeals from said assessments shall be had as in this charter provided, in the case of assessments for the construction of sewers and the same proceedings as to collection of said assessments shall be had as in this charter provided in the case of assessments for local improvements. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 47) 
Cross reference— Right to review assessment for local improvement limited, § 77.  
Sec. 180. - Street or other improvements; common council may direct construction or improvement. 
The common council may, by ordinance, direct and require any street or public ground, square, park, culvert, arch or bridge in said city, or any part of either of them, to be graded, paved, surfaced, constructed, regraded, repaved, resurfaced, reconstructed or otherwise improved or repaired at the cost and expense of the owners of the lots or parcels of land adjacent to such street or public ground, square, park, culvert, arch or bridge, or part thereof so graded, paved, surfaced, constructed, regraded, repaved, resurfaced, reconstructed or otherwise improved or repaired, and at the expense of the city at large except, however, that the common council, in the event it shall deem it equitable, may direct in said ordinance that all or a portion of the cost and expense of such grading, paving, surfacing, constructing, regrading, repaving, resurfacing, reconstructing, improving or repairing, which portion shall be not less than one-half (½) of such entire cost and expense, shall be charged to the city at large, and the remainder, if any, be assessed against the owners of such adjacent lots or parcels of land, which cost and expense shall be determined, apportioned, assessed and collected as hereinafter provided and shall be a lien upon such property from and after the time of the confirmation of the apportionment and assessment thereof. 
(L.L. No. 12-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 48) 
State Law reference— Authority as to sewers and drainage systems, water supply systems, streets, etc., General City Law, § 20(7); as to other public works, General City Law, § 20(2), (7-a), (11).  
Sec. 181. - Ordinance and notice to be published; hearing; action thereon. 
If it is proposed to levy an assessment for the work to be done under an ordinance to be adopted pursuant to the last preceding section [§ 180] the common council shall cause the proposed ordinance for an improvement specified in the last preceding section [§ 180] to be published for at least five (5) successive days in the official newspaper with a notice that at the time and place to be stated therein, which shall not be less than five (5) days from the first publication thereof, it will meet to consider such ordinance, and that at such meeting all parties interested may be heard. The common council at the time and place stated in such notice, or at such other time and place as shall be then appointed for such purpose, shall hear all parties interested in the matter of such ordinance who shall desire to be heard, and by a majority of the members then present may adopt, modify or reject such proposed ordinance. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 49)  
Sec. 182. - Sewer, water mains and conduits in streets to be improved. 
When the common council shall determine to construct, pave, surface, reconstruct, repave, resurface, or otherwise improve one or more streets, pursuant to the provisions of this title, it shall cause a notice to be published for five (5) days in the official newspaper of said city, particularly specifying the street or streets, or part thereof, intended to be so improved, and requiring all persons, corporations and companies, and city departments, within the time limited in said notice, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, to do excavating, lay new mains, sewers and pipes and make such repairs to, and connections with, existing gas and water mains, sewers and pipes as may be necessary or liable to be required, within a period of two (2) years next thereafter, in and through the street or streets, or parts thereof, to be so improved, and the actual paving, surfacing, repaving or resurfacing thereof shall not be commenced until the expiration of the time stated in such notice. Copies of such notice shall be served by mail, within five (5) days from the date of the first publication of said notice, upon all companies and municipal departments owning or having charge of pipes, mains or conduits laid in said street or streets, or parts thereof, to be so improved. After such improvement is completed, no person, corporation or company, shall be authorized, permitted or allowed, for the period of two (2) years, to excavate for any purpose whatever in the street or streets, or part or parts thereof, so improved, except under such conditions and restrictions as the common council may provide by ordinance or otherwise. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 50)  
Sec. 183. - Expenses of improvement; how apportioned and assessed. 
Upon the completion of any work of construction or improvement provided for in section one hundred eighty of this charter and the entire cost and expense thereof, including but not limited to assessing, printing, advertising, surveying, engineering, inspecting and superintending, and the cost resulting from the construction or improvement of spaces within street intersections, including incidental construction and improvement within such intersecting street, and any increased cost of such construction and improvement incident to guaranty, shall be computed and ascertained by the commissioner of public works. One-half (½) of such entire cost and expense or such part as may have been determined by the common council pursuant to section one hundred eighty of this charter shall be charged to the city at large and the remainder thereof, if any, shall be assessed by the commissioner of public works upon and among the owners of the lots or parcels of land adjoining such street or public ground or part thereof so constructed or improved in proportion to the number of feet front which each owns thereon. 
When the cost to the city of any state or county highway constructed or improved under the provisions of the Highway Law shall be ascertained, one-half (½) of such cost or such part thereof as may have been determined by the common council pursuant to section one hundred eighty of this charter shall be charged to the city at large and the remainder thereof, if any, shall be assessed by the commissioner of public works upon and among the owners of the lots or parcels of land adjoining such state or county highway or part thereof so constructed or improved in proportion to the number of feet of frontage which each owns thereon. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 322, § 4; Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 8; L.L. No. 12-1950, § 3; L.L. No. 2-1954, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 51) 
State Law reference— Authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 183-a. - Assessment of cost of sidewalks and curbs in connection with improvements. 
Where the construction or improvement provided for in section one hundred eighty of this charter requires the relaying or reconstruction of existing sidewalks or the resetting or reconstruction of existing curbs, in new locations, no assessment shall be made against the lands fronting thereon, or against the owners of said lands, for such relaying, resetting or reconstruction, provided that such existing sidewalks and/or curbs were substantially in compliance with the standards of the department of public works, anything to the contrary contained in section one hundred fifty-three or any other section of this charter notwithstanding. No assessment shall be made against lands fronting on a county road, or against the owners of said lands, for the construction of new curbs in connection with the construction or improvement of a county road, as provided for in section one hundred eighty of this charter, anything to the contrary contained in section one hundred fifty-three or any other section of this charter notwithstanding. 
(L.L. No. 2-1956, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1960, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 52) 
State Law reference— Authority to assess for public improvements, General City Law, § 20(11).  
Sec. 184. - Assessment roll for improvements. 
The commissioner of public works shall make out an assessment roll, and when so made out shall give public notice in the official paper for one week that the same is on file in his office and will remain with him for the term of ten (10) days, during which time any persons interested may examine said roll, and at the expiration of said ten (10) days, and on a day and hour and at a place to be specified in said notice, said commissioner of public works will hear any objections to said assessment and shall decide upon all objections, and shall, if need be, alter and correct said roll, and when complete shall sign the same and file it in the office of the city clerk, and the same proceedings as to objections to and appeals from said assessments shall be had as in this charter provided in the case of assessments for the construction of sewers, and the same proceedings as to collection of said assessments shall be had as in this charter provided in the case of assessments for local improvements. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 53)  
Sec. 185. - City's share of cost of improvement. 
The remainder of said expense [for improvements] not collected by local assessments as hereinbefore provided, may be paid from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law, as may be determined by the common council. 
(Laws 1921, Ch. 322, § 5; Laws 1943, Ch. 710, § 1052; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 54)  
Sec. 186. - [Street improvements and special assessments—Generally.] 
The common council may, by ordinance, direct and require a program of street improvements for designated streets or portions thereof in the city of White Plains which may include, but is not limited to, the installation of sidewalks, lighting fixtures, street furnishings, passageways, parking lot improvements, at the expense of the city at large, except that the common council may, in the event that it shall deem it equitable direct in said ordinance that all, or a portion of the cost of the aforesaid improvements, which portion shall not be less than twenty-five percent of such entire cost and expense, shall be charged to the city at large to be financed from current revenues, and the remainder, if any, shall be financed by bonded indebtedness, the annual amount for redemption of which shall be assessed against the owners of adjacent lots or parcels of land; or by special assessment of said adjacent lots or parcels for said remainder in a single year. The annual assessment or special assessment shall be determined, apportioned, assessed and collected as hereinafter provided and shall be a lien upon such adjacent lots or parcels of land from and after the time of the confirmation of the apportionment and assessment thereof. Any program of street improvements directed pursuant to this section shall include a listing of streets in precedence which shall be used in determining the annual assessment or special assessment as hereinafter set forth. Any program of street improvements directed pursuant to this section shall not be subject to section sixty-seven of this charter. Any ordinance adopted pursuant to this section shall be subject to the procedures set forth in sections one hundred eighty-one, one hundred eighty-two and one hundred eighty-four of the city charter. 
(L.L. No. 1-1979, § 1) 
Editor's note— Sec. 186 as originally enacted was repealed by Laws 1943, Ch. 712, as amended by Laws 1945, Ch. 339. L.L. No. 1-1979, sec. 1, enacted a new sec. 186.  
Sec. 187. - [Same—Apportionment of special assessment costs.] 
The annual assessment or special assessment provided for in section one hundred eighty-six of this charter shall be assessed by the commissioner of public works upon and among the owners of the lots or parcels of land adjoining the streets directed to be improved by the common council, by assessing one-half of the said assessment against the aforesaid parcels in proportion to the number of feet of frontage which each owns on the streets to be improved, except that where a lot or parcel of land has frontage on two or more streets, then the frontage on the street of higher precedence as determined by the common council pursuant to section one shall be considered to be the number of feet of frontage on said streets, and the frontage of the street or streets of lower precedence shall be considered one-half the number of feet of frontage; and by assessing one-half of the annual assessment against the aforesaid parcels in the proportion that the assessed valuation for each lot or parcel of land bears to the assessed valuation of all such lots or parcels of land adjoining the street to be improved. 
(L.L. No. 1-1979, § 1) 
Editor's note— Sec. 187 as originally enacted was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1967, § 55. L.L. No. 1-1979, sec. 1, created a new sec. 187.  
Sec. 188. - Waterworks; powers of commissioner of public works. 
The commissioner of public works, subject to the provisions of this act, the other laws of the state and the ordinances of the common council, has the direction and control of the operation, construction, maintenance, extension and repair of the city waterworks; he shall see that the city has abundant supply of pure and wholesome water for public and private use; he shall devise the plans and sources of water supply, plan and supervise the distribution of water through the city, protect it against contamination and prescribe rules and regulations for its use, which, when ratified and approved by the common council, shall have the same force and effect as ordinances enacted by the common council. 
Code reference— Waterworks, Ch. 7-8. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to establish, construct, maintain water supply system, General City Law, § 20(7), (7-a).  
Sec. 189. - Extension or improvement of waterworks system; increase in supply. 
The commissioner of public works may adopt plans and specifications for the extension or improvement of the waterworks system, or for the acquisition of an additional supply of water for public and private use. A plan so adopted by him shall be submitted to the common council for its approval. If such plan is approved by the common council, the commissioner of public works shall cause such work to be done, and necessary lands and water rights to be acquired, in accordance therewith. The contracts for such work shall be let in accordance with such plan, in the same manner as other contracts for public improvements. Subject to the approval of the common council, the commissioner of public works may contract for water supply, provided no such contract shall be made for a longer period than ten (10) years. 
(L.L. No. 1-1925, § 3)  
Sec. 190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 190 was repealed by Laws 1943, Ch. 712 as amended by Laws 1945, Ch. 339. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 191. - Acquisition of lands and water rights. 
The commissioner of public works or those designated by him may enter into or upon any land or water for the purpose of making surveys. The commissioner may agree, subject to the approval of the common council, with the owner of any property which in his judgment may be required for such extension, improvement or increase in supply, or which may be injuriously affected by such work connected with such improvement, as to the amount of compensation to be paid to such owner. If the commissioner of public works shall agree with any owner for the purchase of any lands or easement in the same, or for the taking of any water or water rights, all such agreements and conveyances shall be made and taken in the name of the city of White Plains. When any lands are required for such improvement, for the purchase of which no contract shall be made, as provided herein, the city of White Plains shall have the right to acquire title to the same by condemnation. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 56) 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire property for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(2); Statute of Local Governments, § 10(2); condemnation proceedings, Eminent Domain Procedure Law, § 1 et seq.; limitation on acquisition of water rights in Westchester County, General Municipal Law, § 76.  
Sec. 192. - Use of streets and highways. 
The commissioner of public works or those designated by him may use the grounds or soil under any street, highway or road, in the county of Westchester, for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits and introducing water in and through any portion of the city of White Plains, on condition that he shall cause the surface of said street, highway or road to be restored to its former state, or to such state as shall not unnecessarily have impaired its usefulness. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 57)  
Sec. 193. - Extension of mains in streets. 
The common council may, by ordinance, direct the commissioner of public works to cause the line of water mains or pipes for the city waterworks to be extended in any street in such city. The expense may be paid from funds available in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law, as may be determined by the common council. 
(Laws 1943, Ch. 710, § 1054; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 58)  
Sec. 194. - Willful injury to waterworks system a misdemeanor. 
Any person who shall willfully do or cause to be done any act whereby any work, material or property erected or used by the said city or by the commissioner of public works or by any person acting under his authority, for the purpose of procuring or furnishing water, shall in any way be injured, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Penalty for violations, Penal Law, § 55.10.  
Sec. 195. - Hydrants. 
The commissioner of public works shall procure and set hydrants for the supply of water for the extinguishment of fires, of such kind, in such manner and at such places in the public streets of said city as the common council shall direct.  
Sec. 196. - Connecting of supply lines. 
The connecting of supply pipes leading from the mains or distributing pipes to dwellings or other private property shall be inserted and kept in repair at the expense of the owners or occupants of the premises and shall not be inserted or connected with the main pipe until a permit therefor shall be obtained from the commissioner of public works. All such connecting or supply pipes and fixtures shall be constructed and placed under and according to the direction of the commissioner of public works.  
Sec. 197. - Establishment of water rates and charges. 
The commissioner of public works, with the approval of the common council, is hereby authorized and empowered to make such rules and regulations in relation to the use of water as he may from time to time deem to be necessary, and shall have the right, with the approval of the common council, to fix and determine the price to be paid by the consumer for water and the time and manner of such payment; to fix and determine charges and rates for "stand by" service, hydrant rental and fire line charges, and the said commissioner of public works, with the approval of the common council, shall have full power to establish all charges for the use of water, including meter charges, and stop the use thereof upon any premises when the use of the water shall not have been paid for and when any rules and regulations provided in this section have not been complied with, and the common council shall have the power, upon the recommendation of the commissioner of public works, to enforce the penalties for the violation of any rules and regulations established, as provided in this section. The commissioner of public works, with the approval of the common council, shall have power to enter into contracts for the sale of water to individuals, corporations or municipalities outside the limits of the city of White Plains, which contracts shall provide that the water sold shall be metered at the city line through a meter approved by the commissioner of public works and provided and maintained by the individual, corporation or municipality purchasing said water, provided, however, that all such contracts which, by their terms exceed a period of one year, shall contain a provision that the same may be terminated by the city, at its option, upon one year's notice of its intention so to do. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 7; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 59) 
Code reference— Water rates and charges, § 7-8-121.  
Sec. 198. - Record of water rates and other water charges. 
The commissioner of public works shall cause to be entered in an appropriate record information relative to water rates and other water charges, which said record shall contain: 
(1)  Location of the property to be charged, stating such location by ward, block and lot number as shown on the tax assessment map of the city and also stating such location by street and by street number, if any; 
(2)  The name of the owner of such property according to the latest information in the department of public works; 
(3)  Description of meter and identification number for billing purposes; 
(4)  Last previous reading and current reading of the meter and net consumption of water for the period for which the charge is to be made; 
(5)  Other water charges which may be applicable against such property; 
(6)  Such other information as the commissioner of public works may deem advisable. 
At least fifteen days prior to the dates fixed for the collection of water charges as determined by the rules and regulations made and adopted pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven of this charter, the commissioner of public works shall cause to be delivered to the commissioner of finance the aforesaid record. Based on the information set forth in said record, the commissioner of finance shall thereupon cause to be prepared and mailed, individual water bills, setting forth for each consumer the information set forth in the record of water charges prepared by the commissioner of public works, as aforesaid, and the water charges applicable thereto and shall simultaneously or otherwise cause to be prepared a water charges assessment record, which record shall include: 
(a)  A complete listing of all billings for the applicable period, readily identifiable as to each consumer by account number. 
(b)  Such other information or data as the commissioner of finance may deem advisable. 
(L.L. No. 1-1953, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 60; L.L. No. 1-1971, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1971, sec. 1, amended sec. 198 by adding reference to the identification number in (3), deleting reference to the amount due in (4), changing the time for delivering the record from 10 to 15 days prior to the dates fixed for collection and revising the billing procedure in the second unnumbered paragraph, and deleting reference to a summary of billings in (a).  
Sec. 199. - Collection of water charges. 
Beginning with the dates fixed for the collection of water charges, as determined by the rules and regulations made and adopted pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven of this charter, the commissioner of finance shall proceed to collect the water charges as shown on the aforesaid record in the office of the commissioner of finance. The commissioner of finance shall give public notice in the official newspaper on receiving such record, the first publication of which notice shall be prior to or on the dates fixed for the collection of water charges, as determined by the rules and regulations made and adopted pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven of this charter. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 8; Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 17; L.L. No. 2-1931, § 9; L.L. No. 1-1953, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 61)  
Sec. 200. - Enforcement of collection of water charges. 
All water charges which shall remain unpaid at the expiration of thirty (30) days from the dates fixed for the collection of water charges, as determined by the rules and regulations made and adopted pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven of this charter, shall have added to them one per centum (1%) of the amount for each month or part of a month that the same shall remain unpaid after thirty (30) days, the collection of which shall be enforced with the original assessment. All water charges are hereby declared to be a lien from the date when the water is furnished and a tax upon the premises in connection with which said water is used, and water charges which shall remain unpaid on the first day of December in each year shall be collected in the same manner or manners as are provided herein for the collection of a general tax, and all preceding remedies herein provided for the collection of such general tax shall be applicable and apply to the collection of water charges. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of finance on or before the first day of December in each year to make out a list or roll in which he or she shall set out the amount of water charges accrued or chargeable upon each lot, part of lot or building and which shall not have been paid or collected in a preceding like list or roll, and file the same in his or her office, and he or she shall, in the preparation of the next tax roll for the general city taxes, in a separate column thereof, assess such amount upon such property, and the same shall be levied, enforced and collected in the same manner, by the same proceedings, at the same time, under the same penalties and having the same lien upon the property assessed as the general city tax and as a part thereof. The commissioner of finance at such other times as he or she may be requested, shall report to the commissioner of public works all water charges and special rates uncollected. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 9; L.L. No. 2-1931, § 11; L.L. No. 1-1953, § 3; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 62; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 16; L.L. No. 1-2001, § 4)  
Sec. 201. - Sewer rents. 
A.  Purpose, applicability. A scale of rents, to be called "sewer rents," is hereby levied and assessed against every lot, parcel of land, building or premises now or hereafter having any connection with the sewer system of said City or otherwise discharging domestic sewage, commercial and industrial waste, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of such City, based on the metered consumption of water to the premises connected with and served by said sewer system or any part or parts thereof, the revenue from which rents shall be used for the payments of costs of operation, maintenance and repairs of the sewer system or such part or parts thereof for which sewer rents have been established and imposed, the interest on and amortization of or payment of indebtedness which has been or shall be incurred for the construction of the sewer system or such part or parts thereof for which sewer rents have been established and imposed (other than indebtedness and the interest thereon, which is to be paid in the first instance from assessments upon benefitted real property) and for the construction of sewage treatment and disposal works with necessary appurtenances, including pumping stations, or for the extension, enlargement or replacement of or additions to such sewer systems or part or parts thereof. 
B.  Duty of owner. In addition to any and all fees and charges provided by law, the owner of any parcel of real property within the City limits connected with the sewer system of the City of White Plains shall pay a sewer rent for the use of such sewer system based upon the metered consumption of water to said premises in an amount to be fixed and determined from time to time by the Commissioner of Public Works of the City of White Plains with the approval of the Common Council by resolution after a public hearing on five days notice. In order that property lying outside the corporate limits of the City of White Plains being served by its sewage disposal system shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such system, the charge made for such property shall be apportioned by the Commissioner of Public Works in addition to the base rate charged to property located within the City, such charge to be collected and the collection enforced as herein provided for other sewer rental charges. For the purpose of determining the charge to be rendered premises using the sewerage system whereon the water used is derived in whole or in part from sources independent of the City, the water used thereon supplied from private sources shall be measured by a City water meter or by a meter acceptable to the Department of Public Works, to be installed and maintained by the owner or occupant thereof at his/her own cost and subject to supervision and inspection by said Department of Public Works. The sewer rental charged against such property shall be determined by the metered consumption of water used on said premises, regardless of the source from which supplied, according to the schedule herein and hereinafter adopted by the Commissioner of Public Works. Whenever the owner or occupant fails to install such meter and in cases where the Commissioner of Public Works finds it impractical to insist upon a special meter, said Commissioner may accept the report of said property owner as to the amount of water used on said premises or said Commissioner may fix and determine the amount ordinarily consumed upon said premises by such method as it may find practicable in the light of the conditions and attendant circumstances of the case in order to determine the sewer rental charge, all in accordance with corresponding rates assessed against other similar property. 
C.  Collection. In the case of premises whereon the water used is supplied by the City of White Plains through its Commissioner of Public Works, the sewer rental charge herein provided shall be added to the water bills rendered to the owners, lessees or occupants of such property and shall be paid at the time the water bill is payable at the office of the Commissioner of Finance and shall be collected with and in addition to the water charge for water service, and no part of the charge for water service shall be accepted without including therewith the sewer rental charge. Such sewer rental charge shall be subject to the same penalty provided for delinquent water bills as provided in section two hundred of this charter, and it is hereby made the duty of said Commissioner of Finance to collect such penalty for failure to pay the sewer rental charge when due. In cases of premises whereon water used is not supplied by the City, said Commissioner of Public Works will render quarterly to the owners, lessees or occupants of such property bills for the amount of the sewer rental charged as herein set forth. All sewer rental charges are hereby declared to be a lien upon the premises from the first date of the period for which the rental charges are incurred and a tax upon the premises which utilities the sewer system. If such charge is not paid when due, it shall be subject to said same penalty as is provided for delinquent water bills, and the Commissioner of Finance is hereby required to collect such penalty. In the event that said bills for sewer rentals rendered for premises whereon water is supplied by the City of White Plains are not paid within 30 days and remains due on the first day of December in each year after the rendering thereof, the Commissioner of Finance shall proceed to collect said unpaid sewer rental in the same manner as detailed for unpaid water charges in section two hundred of this charter. The Commissioner of Finance at such times as may be requested shall report to the Commissioner of Public Works all sewer rental charges uncollected. 
D.  Effect of nonpayment. All sewer rents for premises using City water shall be payable, collectible and enforceable in the manner provided by law for the payment, collection and enforcement of water charges and, if unpaid, shall be collected in the same manner provided for the collection of water charges and City taxes and, when remaining unpaid, shall be added to the annual City tax in a separate column on the property to and for which sewer service was furnished and rendered as provided for in section two hundred of this charter. 
E.  Authority of Commissioner. The Commissioner of Public Works shall have the power to make and enforce such general rules and regulations, both as to Public and private water supply, for the collection, rebating, refunding or adjustment of such charges for any reason, including diversion of water from the sewer system, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid injustice, to the end that all property discharging sewage in the sewer system will bear its equitable proportionate share with other property of the cost of operation, maintenance and repairs of said sewerage system or any extension, enlargement, replacement or additions to such sewer system or any part or parts thereof. 
F.  Sewer Rent Fund. Pursuant to section 453 of the general municipal law, all revenues derived from the sewer rents imposed hereunder, together with all penalties and interest thereon, shall be kept by the Commissioner of Finance of the City of White Plains in a separate account to be known as the "Sewer Rent Fund" and disbursements therefrom shall be made pursuant to said section of the general municipal law. 
G.  Existing contracts. The provisions of this Charter shall be subject in any event to any and all existing contracts between the City of White Plains and present contract users of its sewer system and to any and all renewals, extensions and modifications, if any, of said contracts. 
H.  The section is enacted pursuant to subdivision 26-a of section 20 of the General City Law and Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law. 
(L.L. No. 1-2010, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, Sec. 201 was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1967, sec. 63. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 202. - Establishment of boundaries of watercourses; publication of description; hearing. 
The common council may, by ordinance, determine, fix and establish the boundaries, limits and grade at the bed thereof, of the natural streams or watercourses within said city, or of any part of such streams or watercourses. Whenever any such boundaries, limits or grade of such stream or watercourse shall be so fixed or established, the common council shall make such description thereof as shall definitely describe and locate the boundaries and grade as so fixed and established, and enter the same at length in their minutes, and cause the same to be published in the official newspaper of the city for at least once a week for two (2) successive weeks, which publication shall be due and sufficient service upon the owners, occupants and other persons interested therein, of all the lands through which such stream shall pass or which abut thereon. If such owner, occupant, or other persons interested, shall within fifteen (15) days after the first publication of such ordinance, file with the city clerk his objections thereto in writing, he shall be entitled to be heard by and before said common council at its next meeting after the filing of such objections or at such other time as the common council may appoint in reference to such ordinance or the determination therein stated, or the facts upon which it was based. Upon such hearing, the common council shall receive such legal evidence as may be offered which is relevant to the matter. The common council shall thereupon pass upon the objections so filed, and may confirm the ordinance previously adopted, or modify or rescind the same. The ordinance as confirmed or modified shall be final and conclusive upon all parties interested therein, and the boundaries, limits and grade of such stream as thereby and therein described and designated shall thereafter be the legal boundaries, limits and grade of said stream or watercourse, but none of the riparian rights of any of the owners of land abutting on such watercourse or stream shall be impaired or affected. Nothing contained in this section shall supersede the provisions of chapter eight hundred fifty-three of the laws of nineteen hundred fifty-six, entitled "An act to amend the Westchester county administrative code in relation to the power of the county commissioner of public works with respect to stream control", and which is known as title D, article nine of the Westchester county administrative code, but the provisions of this section shall be considered to be in addition thereto. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 64)  
Sec. 203. - Manner of acquisition of lands when not otherwise provided. 
(a)  Whenever any real estate or interest therein shall be required by the city of White Plains for any municipal purpose, when the manner of the acquisition is not otherwise provided for in this charter, the commissioner of public works may acquire for the city the necessary lands and real estate by gift or by purchase at a price approved by the common council, or if no contract for the purchase of the same shall be made, the city of White Plains shall have the right to acquire title to the same by condemnation. 
(b)  Anything in this charter to the contrary notwithstanding, the commissioner of public works, with the approval of the common council, may acquire for the city at the expense of the city at large, lands or real estate or any interest therein, necessary for any municipal purposes, by gift or by purchase, provided that the purchase price thereof shall not exceed the sum of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for any one parcel. 
(L.L. No. 2-1929, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1961, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 65) 
State Law reference— Acquisition of property for municipal purposes, General City Law, § 20(2); condemnation proceedings, Eminent Domain Procedure Law, § 1 et seq.  
Sec. 204. - Correction of errors in assessments. 
Every assessment authorized by this article shall be valid and effectual notwithstanding any irregularity, omission or error in any of the proceedings relating to the same, and the common council may, in its discretion, correct any such irregularity, error or omission, or any error or mistake in the description of the lands assessed, or intended to be assessed, or in the designation of the owners or occupants thereof; and the original assessment upon such lands, after such corrections are made, may be enforced and collected in the same manner as though no error, irregularity or mistake had been made. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 66)  
Sec. 205. - Evidence of assessments generally. 
Every assessment authorized by the common council under this article or a copy of the ordinance making the same, certified by the city clerk, or the minutes of the common council containing such ordinance, or a printed copy of such minutes, published under authority of the common council, shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places that such assessment was legally imposed, and that all the notices and proceedings required for such assessment were duly given and taken, and that the lands thereby assessed are legally subject to the lien of such assessment. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 67)  
Sec. 206. - Lien of assessments. 
Every assessment made as provided in this article upon lands or buildings, together with the fees for the collection thereof and interest thereupon, shall be and remain a lien and charge on such lands or buildings on which or in respect to which such assessment shall have been made, from the time the confirmation of the assessment report or roll shall become final and conclusive until the same shall be paid, unless otherwise herein provided.  
Sec. 206-a. - Installment payments of assessments. 
Whenever assessments for local improvements are authorized by this article to be levied to pay the cost or a portion of the cost of land acquisition for street or other improvement, for construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, etc., for sanitary sewers and for street or other improvements, at the time of or before the confirmation of the assessments, the common council, at its option, may, by resolution or ordinance, provide that the owner of any property assessed therefor may pay said assessment in five (5) equal installments, the first installment to be payable on a date to be fixed by the common council not more than three (3) years after the date of such confirmation, the next installments to be payable annually thereafter, whereupon the city clerk shall file such notice and subdivide such assessment upon the assessment roll accordingly, and said five (5) installments of assessments shall bear interest at the rate of one per centum (1%) per month or any part thereof from the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date that the first installment is due and payable as fixed by the common council. Said assessments and installments together with such interest thereon and fees for the collection thereof shall be and remain a lien and charge on such lands or buildings on which or in respect to which such assessment shall have been made from the time the confirmation of the assessment report or roll shall become final and conclusive until the same shall be paid. 
In case of default in payment of any installment within thirty (30) days after the same becomes due and payable as above provided, the whole amount of such assessment then remaining unpaid with all accrued interest shall at once become due and collectible, and the commissioner of finance shall, without further notice proceed to collect by the sale of tax liens as directed for the collection of the city taxes, and such tax lien shall be subject to the same fees, charges and penalties as in the case of city taxes. 
In the event that the common council determines to permit the payment of such assessments in installments the notice as to amount and purpose of the assessment provided for in section one hundred fifteen of the charter of the city of White Plains, shall, in addition to other requirements, state that such privilege will be granted and the times when such installments will be payable and the rate of interest such deferred assessments will bear. 
(L.L. No. 3-1931, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1933, § 1; L.L. No. 8-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 68; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 17; L. L. No. 1-2001, § 5) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate manner of conducting its affairs, General City Law, § 20(19).  
Sec. 207. - Condemnation; when title vests; interest on awards; excess condemnation. 
In any case in which the city of White Plains shall begin a proceeding for the condemnation of any land or easement therein, the city of White Plains shall upon the filing of the oaths of the commissioners appointed in any such condemnation proceeding in the office of the clerk of the county of Westchester be and become seized in fee title of all such parcels of real estate and easements and the said city of White Plains may immediately or at any time thereafter take possession of the same, or of any part or parts thereof, and the said city or any officer or employee thereof may enter upon and use and occupy in perpetuity all the parcels of real estate described in the proceedings for the acquisition thereof. Interest upon any award made for the acquisition of real estate or any easement therein shall be computed from the date of the filing of the oaths of such commissioners in the office of the county clerk of Westchester county, and shall be paid to the owner or owners of such real estate when the award for the acquisition of the land or easement shall be paid. The city is authorized to take more land and property than is needed for actual construction in the laying out, widening, extending or relocating parks, public places, highways or streets; provided, however, that the additional land and property so authorized to be taken shall be no more than sufficient to form suitable building sites abutting on such park, public place, highway or street. 
(Laws 1953, Ch. 64, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 69) 
State Law reference— Condemnation proceedings, Eminent Domain Procedure Law, § 1 et seq.  
Sec. 207-a. - Sale of excess property acquired by the city. 
When the city has acquired more land and property than is needed for the actual construction in the laying out, widening, extending or relocating parks, public places, highways or streets, and the common council shall by ordinance determine that such land so acquired is not needed for public use, the common council may direct that such land or property be sold at private sale to an adjoining property owner for a stipulated sum determined by the common council as a fair and reasonable price and upon such terms and conditions as the common council may deem appropriate, provided, however, that the additional land and property so authorized to be sold is not of sufficient size to create a suitable building lot in compliance with the zoning ordinance of the city of White Plains in those districts which impose minimum lot size requirements and in districts which have no minimum lot size requirements, such additional land or property to be sold shall not have a street frontage in excess of fifteen (15) feet, except that corner lots shall not have a street frontage in excess of fifteen (15) feet on one street but may have a street frontage in excess of fifteen (15) feet on the other street. 
(L.L. No. 7-1968, § 1) 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Intro. L.L. No. 7-1968 provided that any provision of General City Law, § 23, subdivision 2, paragraph (b) in conflict with said local law be superseded.  
Sec. 208. - Preparation of assessment map for local improvements not required. 
Whenever any assessment for a local improvement is to be levied upon the city of White Plains at large, or upon any part thereof, a separate assessment map shall not be required to be made, notwithstanding any provisions of this charter, but in such case, the official city map shall be and it shall be construed as being such assessment map and such assessment shall be made according to the ward, block and lot numbers shown upon the tax map authorized by this charter or by the real property tax law. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 70)  
Sec. 209. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 209 was repealed by sec. 18 of L.L. No. 1-1990.  
Sec. 210. - Partial payments. 
The commissioner of finance, upon the certification of the commissioner of public works pursuant to section two hundred eleven of this charter, of the value of the work done from time to time during the construction, may pay the contractor, to apply upon the contract price of the work, not to exceed the following percentages of the total value of the work done: seventy-five per centum (75%) when the total value of the work done is not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), eighty per centum (80%) when such value is more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), eighty-five per centum (85%) when such value is more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), and not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), ninety per centum (90%) when such value is more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) and not more than one hundred thousand dollars and ninety-three per centum (93%) when such value exceeds one hundred thousand dollars; but such payment shall not be used as evidence against the city that the work already done has been completed according to contract, nor shall it preclude the city from contesting the claims of the contractor that the work has been completed according to contract. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 73; L.L. No. 2-1971, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 2-1971, sec. 1, amended sec. 210 by establishing an upper limit of $100,000.00 for the 90% payment, and adding the 93% payment.  
Sec. 211. - Partial completion of public work to be certified; partial estimates; semi-final estimates. 
Before the claim of a contractor for the doing of any portion of any public work for the city of White Plains shall be paid, the engineer designated by the commissioner of public works, or other representative of such commissioner, shall certify to the commissioner of public works the amount of work performed and the value thereof and the commissioner's partial estimate shall state the amount of work performed by the contractor and also the value of the work according to the terms of the contract and he shall certify the same. Whenever, in the opinion of the engineer designated by the commissioner of public works, or other representative of such commissioner, a contractor furnishing public work to the city of White Plains shall have substantially performed his contract, such engineer, or representative, shall so certify to the commissioner of public works and the commissioner may issue a semi-final estimate which shall state the amount of work performed and to be performed and shall provide for withholding a sufficient sum of money to cover the value of any incompleted work and such other monies as, by the terms of the contract, are to be retained during the period of maintenance if any such maintenance is required. The date of the semi-final estimate shall be the date of substantial completion of the work, and, in the discretion of the commissioner of public works, shall be the date upon which the period of maintenance shall begin. Within ten (10) days after certification of a partial or semi-final estimate, the commissioner of public works shall file such certificate of partial or semi-final estimate with the commissioner of finance. Such certificate of partial or semi-final payment and any payment pursuant thereto shall in no wise conclude and bind the city in any action or proceedings against the contractor, or his sureties, to recover for damages on account of the failure of the contractor to perform said contract according to its true intent and meaning. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 75)  
Sec. 212. - Completion of work to be certified; final estimate. 
Whenever in the opinion of the engineer designated by the commissioner of public works, or other representative of such commissioner, a contractor furnishing public work to the city of White Plains shall have completely performed his contract except maintenance, such engineer, or representative, shall so certify to the commissioner of public works and the commissioner's final estimate shall state from actual measurements the whole amount of work performed by the contractor and also the total value of work performed under and according to the terms of the contract, and he shall certify the same. All prior certificates upon which partial or semi-final payments have been made, being merely approximate estimates, shall be subject to correction in the final estimate, which final estimate may be made without notice to the contractor or of notice of the measurements upon which it is based. The final estimate shall act as and have the same force and effect as the engineer's or representative's certificate of completion. The date of the final estimate shall be the date of completion of the work and shall be the date upon which the period of maintenance shall begin, except as otherwise provided in section two hundred eleven for a semi-final estimate. Within ten (10) days after certification of the final estimate, the commissioner of public works shall file such certificate of final estimate with the commissioner of finance. Such certificate of final estimate, and any payment pursuant thereof, shall in no wise conclude and bind the city in any action or proceedings against the contractor or his sureties to recover for damages on account of the failure of the contractor to perform said contract according to its true intent and meaning. The acceptance of payment by the contractor of the final estimate shall operate as and shall be a release to the city and the commissioner of public works and his agents from all claims and liability from anything done or furnished for or relating to the work, or from any act or neglect of the city, or of any agent, relating to or affecting the work, excepting a claim against the city for the remainder, if any, of the amounts kept or retained. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 77)  
Sec. 212-a. - Period of maintenance; acceptance of work. 
Any contractor furnishing public work to the city of White Plains shall be responsible for the entire work until the time of its acceptance as hereinafter provided and shall also keep and maintain every portion of it in perfect order and repair for a period of six (6) months after the completion of said work or, in the discretion of the commissioner of public works, after substantial completion of said work, excepting in regard to such damages as may be directly caused by the city of White Plains, its agents or servants, and excepting in cases where in the opinion of the commissioner of public works, by the nature of the work, no maintenance is involved. If the termination of said six (6) month period shall fall within the months of December, January, February, March or April, the period of maintenance shall extend to the first day of May next thereafter. At the conclusion of the said period of maintenance or, if there be no period of maintenance as provided hereinabove, then upon the completion of the work as provided hereinabove the work may be accepted provided it be then in good order and repair, that it conform entirely with the required lines, grades, and dimensions, and if all other obligations on the part of the contractor under his contract have been fulfilled. If at any time during the period of maintenance the contractor, after notice by the engineer, shall fail to promptly repair and/or make good any defect or damage in the work, then and in that case the commissioner of public works shall have the right to cause such defect or damage to be repaired and made good by the city's own forces or by such other parties as may be selected by said commissioner, and to charge to the contractor the cost of all labor, materials, plant, equipment and other incidental expenses necessary to such repair and making good. Said cost shall be deducted from the contractor's retained percentage. All questions or disputes in regard to repairs required during the period of maintenance shall be resolved by the commissioner of public works, whose determination shall be conclusive. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 78)  
Sec. 213. - Contracts to be let. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, all contracts for public work involving an expenditure of more than thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) and all purchase contracts for any city department, board or officer involving an expenditure of more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, who will give adequate security for the performance of his contract, after public notice, and in accordance with the regulations to be prescribed by general ordinances of the common council unless by an ordinance passed by a vote of at least five (5) members of the common council, it is determined, for the reason set forth in such ordinance, for the best interests of the city, to procure the work or materials by contract, or, unless in case of accident or other injury, by which the heating or plumbing system of any of the public buildings, or by which any of the fire engines or hook and ladder trucks, or any machinery used in connection with the department of public works, shall become disabled, or unless a severe snow fall shall occur, in which emergency the commissioner of the appropriate department shall cause such repairs thereto to be made, or hire trucks and other equipment for snow removal, upon filing with the mayor a certificate, showing such emergency and the necessity for such repairs or the hiring of equipment for snow removal; provided, however, that the mayor endorses his approval on such certificate. The officer or employee of the city receiving bids shall reject all bids if, in his opinion, the lowest bid is excessive. Should the commissioner of public works deem bids for the construction of the public improvements excessive he may readvertise or, if he deems it best for the interests of the city to reject all bids offered and undertake said work by day labor, he shall withhold action on said bids and refer the matter to the common council for further consideration and in case said common council shall deem it best for the interests of the city that said bids be rejected and the work done by day labor, it may do so, and in such case the work shall be done by the commissioner of public works. The public notice above mentioned must describe the work and materials for which contracts will be let, and the day, hour and place of such letting. Specifications for every public improvement must be prepared and set forth with such detail as will adequately inform all persons proposing to bid, of the nature of the work to be done and of the materials to be supplied, and the same shall be printed or typewritten, and copies thereof shall be delivered to applicants therefor. All materials and supplies required in any office, court, board or department, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be called for in writing and shall be contracted for in the manner above provided, but where any work or repairs needed to be done or materials or supplies to be furnished shall not exceed the limitations heretofore specified in this section in cost, the officer or employee of the city in charge of purchasing such materials and supplies may authorize the head of the department, or officer, as the case may be, to give written orders therefor, and the bills so incurred shall be presented to the commissioner of finance for examination and audit accompanied with such orders. But no work or repairs to be done or materials or supplies to be furnished as above provided shall be subdivided so as to make the cost not to exceed the limitations heretofore specified in this section, if the total of such works or repairs needed to be done or materials or supplies to be furnished shall exceed the limitations heretofore specified in this section in cost. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 18; L.L. No. 6-1951, § 1; L.L. No. 8-1952, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1956, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1972, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1973, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1978, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1992, § 1; L.L. No. 2-2010, § 1) 
State Law reference— Public contracts, General Municipal Law, § 100 et seq.; letting of contracts, General Municipal Law, § 103.  
Sec. 214. - Contracts to be based upon estimates. 
Every contract for public improvement within the city shall be based upon estimates of the whole cost of such improvement furnished by the proper officer, board or department having charge of the improvement. No contract shall be let except after the receipt of bids, except as otherwise provided by law. All bids must in addition be endorsed with the title of the work to which they relate, the name of the bidder and his residence. 
(L.L. No. 5-1933, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 79)  
Sec. 215. - Bid security. 
Each bid shall be accompanied by a certified check or draft accepted by a New York state bank, payable to the city of White Plains, and by such other security, in the form and in the amount which shall be specified in the advertisement therefor and which instruments shall be held by the city as security that the person or persons to whom the contract shall be awarded shall enter into a contract therefor and give security required for the performance thereof. All such instruments shall be in a form acceptable to and approved by the commissioner of finance. 
(L.L. No. 4-1967, § 81; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 19) 
State Law reference— Security required, General Municipal Law, § 103.  
Sec. 216. - Opening of bids. 
Bids shall be received by the commissioner of public works at the place and up to the time mentioned in the public notice required by this charter. At such time and place all bids shall be opened by the commissioner of public works and shall be read aloud, and an abstract of all of them, with the prices and security offered, shall be copied in a book kept for that purpose without any change, correction or addition whatever in the bids as received. All bidders shall have the privilege of being present when the bids are opened. The commissioner of public works may refuse all bids received and may advertise again for new bids to be received at another date as above provided. No bidder shall have the right to withdraw or cancel his bid until the commissioner of public works shall have awarded the contract for which such bid is made and the same shall have been duly executed, except that the check or draft of all bidders, except the three (3) lowest, shall be returned within three (3) business days after the formal opening of bids, and the check or draft of the three (3) lowest bidders shall be returned within two (2) business days after the city and accepted bidder have executed the contract or if no contract has been so executed within forty-five (45) days after the opening of bids, upon demand of the bidder at any time thereafter, so long as he has not been notified of the acceptance of his bid. 
(L.L. No. 1-1951, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 82) 
State Law reference— Opening of bids, General Municipal Law, § 103(2); disposition of deposit accompanying bid, General Municipal Law, § 105.  
Sec. 217. - Bonds for performance of contract. 
The bonds to be given for the performance of any contract for any public work awarded under the provisions of section two hundred thirteen of this charter shall be: (a) a performance bond and a labor and material payment bond and each bond shall be in the penalty of one hundred per centum (100%) of the contract price, and shall be executed by the party to whom the work is awarded, and by a solvent fidelity, insurance or surety company authorized by the laws of this state to transact such business, or (b) such other performance security in like amount in a form acceptable to and approved by the commissioner of finance. All such performance security shall meet with the approval of the corporation counsel of the city of White Plains as to adequacy, form and correctness, provided however that the common council may, in its discretion waive said security requirements for contracts which are not in excess of fifteen thousand dollars in amount. If said security requirement is waived, no monies shall be paid by the city under the contract until the Commissioners of Public Works and Finance take reasonable steps in accordance with the provisions of the Labor Law to ascertain that the labor and material expenses as incurred pursuant to the performances of the contract are paid. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 19; L.L. No. 4-1967, § 83, L.L. No. 1-1978, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 20)  
Sec. 218. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 218 was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1967, sec. 84. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 218-a. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 218-a as added by Laws 1928, Ch. 425 was repealed by L.L. No. 9-1952, sec. 1. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY[11] 
Section 
219.
Commissioner of public safety. 
220.
Powers and duties of commissioner of public safety. 
221.
Constitution of fire department and the police department. 
222.
Election and approval of officers of the volunteer fire division. 
223.
Powers and duties of the chief of the fire department. 
224.
City not liable for acts or omissions. 
225.
Destruction of buildings to prevent spread of fire. 
226.
Powers of the commissioner of public safety over abandoned vehicles. 
Secs. 227—229.
Reserved. 
Secs. 230—238.
Reserved. 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative powers of city vested in common council, § 32; traffic commission, § 238-j et seq.; department of planning and traffic, § 238-x et seq.; annual reports of departments, § 287; city fire and police pension funds, §§ 300—305. 
Code references— Police assistance form and to other local governments, § 2-1-8 et seq.; tours of duty of firemen, § 2-5-10 et seq.; overtime pay for police, § 2-5-13 et seq.; animals and fowl, § 5-2-1 et seq.; traffic and street regulation, § 8-1-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Firemen and policemen generally, General Municipal Law, Art. 10; for coverage, benefits, etc., to volunteer firemen, see Volunteer Firemen's Benefit Law; New York state employees' retirement system, special retirement plans applicable to specified classes of members, Retirement and Social Security Law, Art. 2. 
 
Sec. 219. - Commissioner of public safety. 
The commissioner of public safety shall have charge and supervision of the fire and police departments and the bureaus of control of animals, bus terminal and weights and measures of the said city and shall provide in all ways possible for the safety, care, comfort and protection of the inhabitants of the city and of their property; and he shall have such further powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance of the common council. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 10; L.L. No. 2-1932, § 3; L.L. No. 7-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 1)  
Sec. 220. - Powers and duties of commissioner of public safety. 
The commissioner of public safety shall have jurisdiction, supervision and control of the government, administration, disposition and discipline of the officers and members of the fire and police departments; and shall possess and exercise fully and exclusively all powers and perform all duties pertaining to the government, maintenance and direction of the fire department, and the apparatus and property thereof, and buildings furnished therefor and of the police department and equipment furnished therefor, and shall have the general direction and supervision of the expenditure of all moneys appropriated to the department of public safety. He shall have authority to administer oaths and take evidence, affidavits and acknowledgments in all matters and proceedings pertaining to the department of public safety. He shall have the power to make rules and regulations, approved by the common council in regard to the government, administration, disposition and discipline of the fire department and the police department. Such rules and regulations may provide for the hearing, examination, investigation, trial and determination of charges made or prepared against any officer or member of said departments for neglect of official duty or incompetency or incapacity to perform his official duties, or some delinquency seriously affecting his general character or fitness for the office, and may, in his discretion, punish any officer or member found guilty thereof by reprimand, imposition of fines or by the forfeiture and withholding pay for a specified time, suspension during a fixed period or dismissal from office; but no officer or member of said departments shall be removed or otherwise punished for any other cause, until specified charges in writing have been preferred against and served upon him and he shall have been found guilty thereof, after reasonable notice and upon due trial by the aforesaid commissioner of public safety in the form and manner prescribed by the rules and regulations of his department. He shall have power to appoint all officers and members of the fire department and the police department, subject to civil service rules and regulations, to such positions in said departments as are established by the common council, either by special ordinance or by incorporation in the city budget and to fill all vacancies therein and to remove the officers and members thereof for cause, pursuant to law. He may also appoint special police officers for such purposes and upon such occasions as may seem to him proper and not inconsistent with this charter. The persons so appointed shall exercise their powers in accordance with the rules and regulations of the police department of the city of White Plains. He shall have general supervision over the records of the department of public safety and its officers and employees and shall possess such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or by resolution of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 2-1932, § 5; L.L. No. 7-1952, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1990, § 21)  
Sec. 221. - Constitution of fire department and the police department. 
The fire department shall consist of the paid division and the volunteer division, and shall be supervised by the chief of the fire department and such other officers as the common council shall authorize. The police department shall consist of the paid division and the auxiliary police division and shall be supervised by the chief of the police department and such other officers as the common council shall authorize. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 3)  
Sec. 222. - Election and approval of officers of the volunteer fire division. 
The volunteer fire division shall be constituted of the existing volunteer fire companies and with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, shall have the power to elect a first assistant chief and a second assistant chief, to be elected from the several companies. Each company shall have power to elect a captain, lieutenants, a president and such other officers as are necessary and to select members to fill any vacancies which may occur in their ranks. They may adopt by-laws, subject to the approval of the commissioner of public safety for the government of their respective companies, and may impose fines and forfeits for the violation of the same. The commissioner may remove any member on the ground of incompetence or misconduct after a hearing upon due notice and upon stated charges with the right of such officer and member to a review pursuant to article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1981, § 1)  
Sec. 223. - Powers and duties of the chief of the fire department. 
The chief of the fire department, under the direction and control of the commissioner of public safety, shall have the supervision and management of the officers, employees and members of the department. He shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by law, by the direction of the commissioner or by ordinance of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 5)  
Sec. 224. - City not liable for acts or omissions. 
The chief of the fire department, officers, employees and members of the fire department are not officers or agents of the municipal corporation known as the city of White Plains, for whose acts or omissions the said corporation shall be held liable in a civil action for injuries to person or property. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 6)  
Sec. 225. - Destruction of buildings to prevent spread of fire. 
The commissioner or deputy commissioner of public safety, or the chief or a deputy chief of the fire department, may cause to be pulled down or destroyed any building which he shall, in relation to such fire, deem hazardous or likely to communicate fire to any other building or buildings, and no action shall be maintained against the city of White Plains, or against any person therefor, except as set forth in this section. 
A person claiming damages as a result of any building so pulled down or destroyed, or in any personal property therein destroyed, shall present to the common council a verified claim therefor within ninety (90) days after such building is pulled down or destroyed. The common council may agree with such person upon the amount of damages to be allowed him. If this agreement is not made within thirty (30) days after the presentation of the claim, the person presenting it may apply to the supreme court for the appointment of three (3) commissioners to determine the compensation to which he is entitled. Notice of the application must be served upon the mayor at least ten (10) days before the hearing thereof. All proceedings subsequent to the appointment of the commissioners shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of the condemnation law so far as applicable. The common council or such commissioners shall, in determining the compensation, reduce the amount of compensation as finally determined by the amount recoverable by the claimant under any fire or other insurance policies. The amount agreed upon for such damages, or the award therefor, together with the costs, if any, allowed to the claimant, shall be a charge against the city and shall be paid out of funds available or made available. 
No proceeding or action under this section shall be maintained against the city unless the same shall be commenced within one year after such building is so pulled down or destroyed. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 7) 
State Law reference— Notice of claim condition precedent to commencement of suit, General Municipal Law, § 50-e; commencement of suit one year and ninety days after the happening of the event on which claim is based, General Municipal Law, § 50-i.  
Sec. 226. - Powers of the commissioner of public safety over abandoned vehicles. 
The commissioner of public safety shall have the authority to administer the provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law with respect to abandoned vehicles. He is authorized to convert to the use of the city unclaimed abandoned and/or scofflaw vehicles to the extent permitted by state law and city ordinance. 
(L.L. No. 3-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 22)  
Secs. 227—229. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Secs. 226—229 were repealed by L.L. No. 2-1932, sec. 7. Said section numbers are retained by the editors to maintain sequence. Subsequently, L.L. No. 3-1979, sec. 1, added a new § 226.  
Secs. 230—238. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Secs. 230—238 were repealed by L.L. No. 4-1968, sec. 8. Said section numbers are retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
ARTICLE VIII-B. - DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION[13] 
Section 
238-b.
Commissioner of recreation and parks. 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative power of city vested in common council, § 32. 
Code reference— Parks and recreation, Tit. VI. 
State Law reference— Authority to lay out, construct, establish, operate and maintain parks and playgrounds, General City Law, § 20(7); to provide for swimming pools, General Municipal Law, § 242. 
 
Sec. 238-b. - Commissioner of recreation and parks. 
The commissioner of recreation and parks, subject to the supervision and control of the common council, shall manage and have charge of public recreation and the equipment, and operation of playgrounds, recreation centers and all other recreation areas in the city. He shall also, subject to the supervision and control of the common council, have charge of all public parks and other park lands in the city. He shall also exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon him from time to time by the common council. The commissioner of recreation and parks may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with any general, special or local law or ordinance for the government and discipline of the department of recreation and parks and its staff. 
(L.L. No. 4-1940, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1961, § 3; L.L. No. 2-2003, § 2) 
Cross reference— City officers generally, § 6 et seq.  
ARTICLE VIII-D. - DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL[15] 
Section 
238-f.
Department of personnel; purpose. 
238-g.
Personnel officer; term of office, duties and prerogatives. 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative power of city vested in common council, § 32; annual reports of departments, § 287. 
Code references— Officers and employees, Ch. 2-5; civil service rules, § 2-5-171 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to determine and regulate number, mode of selection, qualifications, etc., of officers and employees; to create a municipal civil service, General City Law, § 20(17), (18). 
 
Sec. 238-f. - Department of personnel; purpose. 
A department of personnel is hereby established in the city of White Plains. The purpose of the department is to assist the common council in establishing a comprehensive personnel policy covering recruitment, employee safety, training, compensation, labor relations management and salary, and fringe benefits, administration; to establish standards for and to develop procedures thereon covering individual job performance with the objective of counseling and utilizing personnel to the best advantage, improving efficiency and effectiveness, to recommend to the common council standards and procedures with reference to city personnel, and to exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be conferred and imposed by or pursuant to the civil service law. 
(L.L. No. 6-1952, § 1; Laws 1972, Ch. 843, § 1)  
Sec. 238-g. - Personnel officer; term of office, duties and prerogatives. 
The term of office of the personnel officer shall be for six years. 
The personnel officer shall be in charge of the personnel department. The duties and prerogatives shall be as follows: 
(a)  To have all the powers and duties of a municipal civil service commission. 
(b)  To have general supervision over the department and its personnel, and when authorized by the common council, to appoint members of the staff of the personnel department. 
(c)  To carry out the stated purposes of the personnel department. 
(L.L. No. 6-1952, § 1; Laws 1972, Ch. 843, §§ 2, 3; L.L. No. 4-1976, § 5) 
Code reference— Personnel officer authorized to appoint representative, § 2-5-1.  
ARTICLE VIII-E. - DEPARTMENT OF PURCHASE 
Section 
238-h.
Department of purchase; purpose. 
238-i.
Commissioner of purchase; duties and prerogatives. 
 
Sec. 238-h. - Department of purchase; purpose. 
A department of purchase is hereby established in the city of White Plains. The purpose of the department, so far as is consistent and not in conflict with any general, special or local law, is that said department shall have sole power to purchase, store and distribute all supplies, materials and equipment required by any department, office, board, body or commission of the city and, if authorized by the common council, to establish and maintain one or more city storehouses and to maintain on hand a sufficient stock of staple commodities to supply the estimated current needs of the agencies for which the department is authorized to purchase. In addition, the department shall be empowered to sell, trade or otherwise dispose of, all surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment no longer required by the city. 
(L.L. No. 11-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1969, § 1)  
Sec. 238-i. - Commissioner of purchase; duties and prerogatives. 
The department of purchase shall be in charge of the commissioner of purchase. The duties and prerogatives of the commissioner of purchase shall be as follows: 
(a)  To have general supervision over the department and its personnel. 
(b)  To make rules and regulations for the conduct of the department and for the requisition for and distribution of supplies, materials and equipment, and the disposition of surplus or obsolete supplies, materials and equipment no longer required by the city. 
(c)  Such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance or resolution of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 11-1952, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1969, § 2)  
ARTICLE VIII-F. - TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION[16] 
Section 
238-j.
Transportation commission. 
238-k.
Duties of the commission. 
238-l.
Commission meetings and support. 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative powers of city vested in common council, § 32; department of public safety, § 219 et seq.; department of planning, § 238-x et seq. 
Code references— Traffic and street regulation, Tit. VIII; highway safety committee, § 8-1-1; basic traffic ordinance, Ch. 8-2. 
State Law reference— Authority to create traffic commission; composition, duties of same, General City Law, § 20(32). 
 
Sec. 238-j. - Transportation commission. 
(a)  It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the effective regulation and control of vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic is necessary to promote public safety; to protect human life, health, and property; and to serve the public convenience. 
(b)  The Transportation Commission ("the Commission") is established and given certain specific duties, specified below, to enable the Common Council to more effectively administer transportation-related matters; respond to the citizenry; and to insure the provision of safe, accessible, and efficient transportation systems to meet the needs of the City. 
(c)  The Mayor shall appoint ten persons as members of the Transportation Commission, including, serving ex officio , the Commissioner of Public Safety, the Commissioner of Public Works, the Commissioner of Planning, the Commissioner of Parking, the Deputy Commissioner of Parking responsible for transportation engineering, the Chair of the Capital Projects Board, and the Corporation Counsel, and three members who represent the diversity of the users of the transportation network with respect to modes of travel ( e.g. walkers, bicyclists, transit riders, drivers of motor vehicles), special needs ( e.g. , schoolchildren, senior citizens, persons with disabilities) and tenure ( e.g. , residents, business owners, commuters). The Mayor shall designate any one of the members to be the Chair of the Commission. 
(d)  The appointment of members shall be for a term expiring at the end of the term of the Mayor, and the terms of office of their successors shall also expire on the same day as the expiration of the term of the Mayor who appoints them. Each member shall continue to serve until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor. Vacancies on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term and the appointment must be made in accordance with the criteria established for original appointments. The members of the Commission shall choose from their number a vice chair who shall preside over the meetings in the absence of the Chair. The ex officio members of the commission shall serve without additional compensation and the other members shall serve without pay for their services rendered pursuant to this article, but all members shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties under this article. The powers of the Commission shall be vested in and exercised by a majority of the members of the Commission then in office. 
(L.L. No. 1-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 10-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1968, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 6; L.L. No. 4-1979, § 3; L.L. No. 2-2006, § 3; L.L. No. 3-2012, § 3; L.L. 4-2014, § 1 )  
Sec. 238-k. - Duties of the commission. 
The duties of the Commission shall be to: 
(1)  Make such procedural rules and regulations as necessary to conform with law and to properly conduct business. 
(2)  Collect and compile transportation-related data, engineering studies, planning studies, and surveys in regard to vehicular, bicycle, public transit, and pedestrian traffic in the City. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the Mayor detailed reports in regard to transportation conditions in the City. 
(4)  Make recommendations to the Mayor in regard to methods of ameliorating transportation conditions which adversely affect the welfare of the City and which cannot be remedied by traffic ordinances or regulations. 
(5)  Submit to the Mayor, for consideration and forwarding to the appropriate City departments and agencies, specific proposals for amendments of ordinances, rules and regulations of the City and City agencies which affect transportation conditions in the City, and proposed legislation which the Commission deems necessary or proper to implement and effectuate its proposals. 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the Mayor, for consideration and forwarding to the Common Council, the Planning Board, the Parking Department and to other appropriate agencies and departments of the City, recommendations and proposals in regard to the improvement of existing streets, street widening, alterations, traffic calming measures, and the location of new streets, avenues and highways; the location and establishment of off-street public parking area and garages; and of off-street loading and unloading and parking facilities; sidewalks, bike lanes, and bus and rail facilities; and other matters relating to traffic control. 
(7)  Coordinate the efforts of and consider the reports, recommendations and suggestions of public and private agencies and civic groups or citizens regarding issues related to all modes of transportation and take action or make recommendations to the Common Council as appropriate. 
(8)  Collaborate with other City departments and agencies in promoting traffic safety and the free movement of all modes of transportation. 
(9)  Obtain and consider analyses of traffic collisions involving all modes of transportation with a view to determining their causes and means for their prevention. 
(10)  Study and make recommendations to the Mayor, for consideration and forwarding to the Common Council, and City departments and agencies on the location and use of street parking meters and the location and erection of traffic signs, signals, markings and devices, and as to type and intensity of illumination of streets and highways. 
(11)  Review and consider traffic matters relating to planned development and make recommendations to the Common Council regarding these issues. 
(L.L. No. 1-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 2-2006, § 4; L.L. 4-2014, § 1 )  
Sec. 238-l. - Commission meetings and support. 
(a)  The Commission shall schedule stated meetings, as determined by its own rules. All meetings of the Commission are open to the public. Any member of the public who wishes to present matters or suggestions for consideration of the Commission may do so, provided that he or she gives the required notice to the Commission staff coordinator, and further provided that such item is placed on the agenda of the Commission for discussion at such meeting. 
(b)  The staff of the Transportation Commission shall consist of the Commissioner of the Parking Department or his or her appointed representative, a Deputy Commissioner of Public Works, the senior officer in charge of the traffic division of the Police Department, the assistant traffic engineer or other designee of the Deputy Commissioner of Parking responsible for transportation engineering who shall serve as staff coordinator, and one member appointed by the Mayor from the Department of Parking. Said staff members shall attend the meetings of the Transportation Commission and the staff as a whole shall be responsible for staff reports requested by the Commission, and for the preparation and distribution of minutes of Commission meetings. 
(c)  The Commission, when authorized by the Common Council, may engage in transportation engineers or other expert assistants on a consulting basis to supplement said staff when necessary for effectuation of the Commission's duties. 
(L.L. No. 1-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1956, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1958, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1972, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 7; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 26; L.L. No. 2-2006, § 5; L.L. No. 3-2012, § 4; L.L. 4-2014, § 1 )  
ARTICLE VIII-H. - CAPITAL PROJECTS BOARD[18] 
Section 
238-p.
Definitions. 
238-q.
Capital projects board. 
238-r.
Estimates and reports of city departments and agencies. 
238-s.
Board of recommendations. 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative powers of city vested in common council, § 32; department of finance, § 51 et seq. 
State Law reference— Capital improvement defined, General Municipal Law, §§ 6-c(1b), 6-g(1); planning for future capital improvements, capital program, General Municipal Law, §§ 99-d, 99-g. 
 
Sec. 238-p. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the term "capital project" shall mean: (a) any physical public improvement or betterment, or any preliminary studies, surveys or plans relative thereto; (b) the acquisition of property of a permanent nature; (c) the purchase of equipment for any public improvement or betterment when first erected or acquired; and (d) the allocation of reserve funds for acquisition of vehicles and major equipment for all departments. The term "pending" shall mean appropriated, reserved or authorized but not yet completed. 
(L.L. No. 8-1954, § 1)  
Sec. 238-q. - Capital projects board. 
The capital projects board shall consist of ten persons, seven of whom shall be the commissioner of finance, the commissioner of public works, the commissioner of public safety, the commissioner of planning, the commissioner of recreation and parks, the commissioner of parking and the budget director, or a respective deputy of any such commissioner to be designated by the mayor, ex officio, and the mayor shall appoint a member of the planning board and two members of the common council. The mayor shall appoint one of the said councilmen as the chairman of the board. The term of each member appointed by the mayor shall be for two years. Each member shall continue to serve until the appointment and qualification of his successor. Vacancies in such board, except for ex officio members, occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term shall be filled by appointment by the mayor for the unexpired term. The members of the board shall choose from their number a vice-chairman and a secretary from their number or from the staff of the department of budget. The ex officio members of the board shall serve without additional compensation and the other members shall serve without pay for their services rendered pursuant to this article, but all members shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties under this article. The powers of the board shall be vested in and be exercised by a majority of the members of the board then in office. 
(L.L. No. 8-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 10; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 8; L.L. No. 1-1977, § 6; L.L. No. 8-1979, § 1; L.L. No. 7-1982, § 6; L.L. No. 1-1986, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 27; L.L. No. 3-2012, § 6)  
Sec. 238-r. - Estimates and reports of city departments and agencies. 
Not later than the first day of October in each year all heads of departments, officers and other agencies of the city shall submit to the budget director and to the capital projects board, on forms to be supplied by said board: 
(a)  estimates and details of their capital project expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year; 
(b)  detailed reports of all pending capital projects; 
(c)  recommendations for new capital undertakings within the six (6) succeeding fiscal years; and 
(d)  any other information deemed pertinent by the board. 
Said heads of departments, officers and agencies shall have the right, and it shall be their duty, when requested by the board, to appear and to be heard. The board may consult with the board of education of the city school district of the city of White Plains in order to consider and correlate their respective capital project programs insofar as may be practicable. 
(L.L. No. 8-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 11; L.L. No. 1-1977, § 7; L.L. No. 1-1982, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 28)  
Sec. 238-s. - Board of recommendations. 
Not later than the first day of February in each year, the board shall submit its report and recommendations to the budget director of new capital projects for the city to be included in the budget of the city for the ensuing fiscal year. Between the first day of October and the thirty-first day of January in each year, the board shall review the recommendations for new capital undertakings proposed for the ensuing fiscal year and for the six (6) succeeding fiscal years. The board shall include in its report to be made to the budget director not later than the first day of February in each year its recommendations as to such new capital undertakings, and the commissioner of budget shall include such report in his annual budget message. The board shall meet from time to time during the fiscal year and review the actual expenditures being made for capital projects under construction and compare such actual expenditures with the estimates of cost thereof made by the head of a department, officer or other agency of the city, or as revised by the capital projects board or the common council, both as to separate capital projects and as to the total of all capital projects whether financed in the budget or by capital notes or bonds and the board shall thereafter make such further recommendations, if any, to the common council as it may determine to be advisable. The common council may refer back to the capital projects board any capital projects under construction which it believes are exceeding the estimates of cost thereof made by the head of a department, officer or other agency of the city, or as revised by the capital projects board or the common council. In addition to reporting on such reference, the board may from time to time report and recommend with respect to any changes or modifications or other disposition of pending projects. 
(L.L. No. 8-1954, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 12; L.L. No. 1-1977, § 8; L.L. No. 1-1982, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1991, § 29)  
ARTICLE VIII-I. - DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING[19] 
Section 
238-t.
Department of building; purpose. 
238-u.
Commissioner of building; duties. 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative powers of city vested in common council, § 32; department of planning, § 238-x et seq.; annual reports of departments, § 287. 
Code reference— Zoning, planning, building and structures, Title IX. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate height, bulk, location of buildings, General City Law, § 20(24); uses thereof, General City Law, § 20(25); to provide for repair, removal of unsafe buildings, structures, General City Law, § 20(35). 
 
Sec. 238-t. - Department of building; purpose. 
A department of building is hereby established in the city of White Plains. Said department shall have jurisdiction over, and shall issue the permits for, all excavations, materials, manner of erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, repair, demolition, use, occupancy, sanitary conditions, safety, inspection, and all other work and matters concerning or relating to all buildings, exterior signs, structures, appurtenances and land in the city of White Plains, exclusive of public streets, and shall issue the certificates of occupancy, permits or licenses for the erection, repair and use of all such buildings, land, structures, signs and appurtenances except as may be otherwise provided for in this charter or by ordinance of the common council or any controlling state law or agency having jurisdiction. Said department shall have such other jurisdiction and powers as may from time to time be prescribed by law or be granted by ordinance or resolution of the common council. The purpose of said department shall be to secure the public safety, health and general welfare, and secure life and property from all hazards incident to design, construction, use, occupancy or work upon lands, buildings and structures in the city of White Plains, exclusive of public streets. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this charter or by controlling statute, or ordinance of the common council, the said department shall enforce all laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations as may govern said matters within the jurisdiction and powers of said department of building. 
(L.L. No. 4-1957, § 1) 
Code references— Building code, Ch. 9-5; plumbing code, Ch. 9-7; minimum housing standards, Ch. 9-8; special residence facilities, Ch. 9-9; signs, Ch. 9-10.  
Sec. 238-u. - Commissioner of building; duties. 
There shall be a commissioner of building who shall have jurisdiction, supervision and control of the department of building and of its operations and functions, records and files, and of all personnel of said department and the discipline thereof. He shall have authority to administer oaths and to take evidence, affidavits and acknowledgments in all matters and proceedings pertaining to the department, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by law, or by ordinance or resolution of the common council. He shall have general direction and supervision of the expenditure of all monies appropriated to the department of building. 
(L.L. No. 4-1957, § 1)  
ARTICLE VIII-K. - DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING[21] 
Section 
238-x.
Department of planning; purposes. 
238-y.
Commissioner of planning; duties. 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Cross reference— Corporate powers of city, § 4; legislative power of city vested in common council, § 32; department of public safety, Art. VIII; traffic commission, Art. VIII-F; department of building, Art. VIII-I; annual reports of departments, § 287. 
Code references— Zoning, Ch. 9-2; planning, Ch. 9-3; subdivisions, Ch. 9-4. 
State Law reference— Planning boards generally, General City Law, § 27 et seq. 
 
Sec. 238-x. - Department of planning; purposes. 
A department of planning is hereby established in the city of White Plains. The purposes of the department, so far as is consistent and not in conflict with the general city law and the general municipal law of the state of New York and with any other general, special or local law are: To plan for the present and future development and improvement of the city of White Plains in any and all phases of its activities, whether governmental, proprietary or otherwise. Such activities shall include but not be limited to transportation planning, mass transportation routes, playgrounds, parks, public buildings, housing, public monuments, works of art, public streets and public utilities. 
Said planning department shall, through its commissioner of planning, advise the mayor and the common council with respect to the planning affairs of the city and shall furnish to the mayor and the common council at any time upon request such information and particulars as to planning as may be desired. Said department shall act upon all matters referred to it by the mayor or the common council and shall, if required or deemed necessary, report thereon to the mayor or the common council. Said department, through its commissioner of planning, shall be the adviser and consultant to the city planning board and shall prepare and furnish to the city planning board such reports, studies, plans, surveys or other data as may be necessary to aid and assist said planning board in the discharge of its duties. Said department shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance or resolution of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 2-1962, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1967, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 2)  
Sec. 238-y. - Commissioner of planning; duties. 
There shall be a commissioner of planning who shall have jurisdiction, supervision and control of the department of planning and of its operations and functions, records and files and of all personnel of said department and the discipline thereof. He shall have general direction and supervision of the expenditures of all moneys appropriated to the department of planning. He shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by law or by ordinance or resolution of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 2-1962, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1967, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1976, § 3) 
Cross reference— City officers generally, Art. II.  
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW[23] 
Section 
239.
Corporation counsel. 
240.
Powers and duties of corporation counsel. 
241.
Certification and approval of contracts and real property documents. 
242.
Compromises. 
243.
Counsel and advice. 
244.
Employment of special counsel. 
245.
Police to aid corporation counsel. 
246—249. Reserved. 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Article X of Ch. 356, Laws 1915 entitled "Department of Public Instruction" and consisting of secs. 257—268 was repealed by Laws 1917, Ch. 786. The city school district is now a separate entity created by Laws 1950, Ch. 762 and having its own taxing powers (Education Law, § 2501 et seq.). The section numbers from Article X, Ch. 356, Laws 1915 were subsequently used in amending Article IX, Ch. 356, Laws 1915 entitled "Department of Judiciary." Article IX, together with amendments thereto, with the exception of sec. 267-x, was subsequently repealed by Laws 1944, Ch. 783, enacting "The City Court Act for the city of White Plains," sec. 267-x specifying the duties of the corporation counsel appears to be repealed by implication in the new Article IX added by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1968, sec. 14 and entitled "Department of Law." 
Code reference— Corporation counsel to keep records of notices of claims, § 2-1-5. 
 
Sec. 239. - Corporation counsel. 
There shall be a department of law, the head of which shall be the corporation counsel. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 14) 
Cross reference— Qualifications, terms, etc., of city officers generally, Art. II.  
Sec. 240. - Powers and duties of corporation counsel. 
The corporation counsel shall have charge of and conduct all of the legal business of the municipal corporation which is the city of White Plains, including all of its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions. 
He shall prepare contracts and other instruments in writing in which the city, its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions are concerned. 
He shall have charge of and conduct all legal actions and proceedings instituted for and on behalf of or against the city, including all of its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions. He shall have authority to defend actions or proceedings against the city, including all of its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions and take all steps and procedures necessary or advisable to protect the rights of the city, including all of its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions. The corporation counsel shall not institute any actions or proceedings or take any appeals therein, without specific authorization of the common council, unless time limits are involved, or there is an emergency, in which event he may institute any such action, proceeding or appeal, provided that he apply at the next scheduled meeting of the common council to continue such procedure, unless the right to do so has been given by general authorization of the common council. All matters in which the city of White Plains or any of its officers, departments, bureaus, boards or commissions is a party in the city court of White Plains, and any appeals taken from a decision of the city court of White Plains in which the city is an interested party, including its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions, may be prosecuted, defended or appealed in the discretion of the corporation counsel. The corporation counsel may also institute actions or proceedings to enforce or defend ordinances or local laws of the city, without any general or specific authorization of the common council. 
In the conduct of the trial of any action or proceeding, the corporation counsel shall have all of the powers and privileges customarily exercised in the course of litigation by attorneys and counselors at law when acting for private clients. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 14)  
Sec. 241. - Certification and approval of contracts and real property documents. 
No agreement providing for the payment of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more shall be entered into by the city or any of its officers, departments, bureaus, boards or commissions or shall be executed on behalf of the city until there shall be endorsed thereon by the corporation counsel or an attorney in the law department an approval as to form. The corporation counsel or an attorney in the law department shall approve all deeds, conveyances, leases and other documents affecting real property purchased, sold, leased or otherwise dealt in by the city prior to their execution. Any agreements or any real property documents made or executed in violation of this section shall be null and void as to the city and no money belonging to the city shall be paid thereon. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 14)  
Sec. 242. - Compromises. 
The corporation counsel shall, whenever he considers that the best interests of the city will be served thereby, enter into an agreement in writing, subject to the approval of the common counsel [council], to compromise, settle, or adjust any rights, claims, demands, or causes of action in favor of or against the city of White Plains, its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions, and when so approved by the common council shall constitute a valid obligation against or in favor of the city, as the case may be. Any such obligations may be paid from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law as may be determined by the common council. The common council, may from time to time, adopt ordinances granting the corporation counsel such general or specific authorization. The corporation counsel shall not permit, offer or confess judgment against the city, its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions nor accept any offer of judgment in favor of the city, its officers, departments, bureaus, boards and commissions unless previously duly authorized, either generally or specifically, so to do by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 14)  
Sec. 243. - Counsel and advice. 
The corporation counsel shall be the legal adviser to the common council and to each officer, department, bureau, board or commission of the city and shall, when requested, issue legal opinions. He shall furnish to the said common council, officer, department, bureau, board or commission all such advice and assistance as counsel and attorney, in and out of court, as may be required by them in their official capacity. 
No officer, department, bureau, board or commission of the city shall have or employ any attorney or counsel at the expense of the city unless specifically authorized so to do by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 14)  
Sec. 244. - Employment of special counsel. 
The corporation counsel, with the written consent of the mayor, may employ counsel and experts at such compensation as may be agreed upon by the common council, to assist in the prosecution, defense, argument and conduct of actions or proceedings in which the city is interested or is a party. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 14)  
Sec. 245. - Police to aid corporation counsel. 
It shall be the duty of every member of the police force of the city, observing or having any knowledge of any accident from which a cause of action might arise against the city, to forthwith report the facts of such accident in writing to the corporation counsel; and upon the request of the corporation counsel the commissioner of public safety shall detail some member of the force to aid the corporation counsel in the investigation of claims against the city for injuries to person or property. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 14)  
Secs. 246—249. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following title of Article IX.  
ARTICLE X. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKING[24] 
Section 
250.
Department of parking; commissioner of parking duties. 
251.
Civil service status of officers and employees. 
252—268. Reserved. 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Fomerly, Article X, consisting of secs. 268-a and 268-b, was repealed by Laws 1953, Ch. 878. Said article number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence. For a more complete explanation, see the editor's note following title of Article IX. 
 
Sec. 250. - Department of parking; commissioner of parking duties. 
There shall be a Department of Parking, the head of which shall be the Commissioner of Parking, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Common Council. Said position shall be in the unclassified service as defined in the civil service law. The Commissioner of Parking shall be under the general direction and supervision of the Mayor and shall manage the Department of Parking. The Commissioner of Parking is authorized to appoint a Deputy Commissioner of Parking I and a Deputy Commis sioner of Parking II who shall be in the exempt class of the classified service as defined in the civil service law. The Commissioner of Parking shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.  Appoint, direct and have authority to discharge all Department of Parking staff, and to coordinate the activities of the enforcement staff with the Department of Public Safety; 
b.  Prepare the annual budget for the Department of Parking; 
c.  Monitor and evaluate parking income and expenses and make recommendations on parking rates to the Common Council; 
d.  Direct and supervise the expenditure of Department of Parking funds; 
e.  Formulate policies and procedures for the operation of the Parking Department; 
f.  Plan for present and future parking facilities; 
g.  Direct and participate in comprehensive parking studies, developed internally or by outside consultants and make recommendations for future development or changes in existing facilities; 
h.  Make studies and recommendations and participate in decisions concerning location and use of street parking meters for the regulation of traffic, or restrictions in cooperation with other City departments and agencies; 
i.  Analyze and upgrade operational activities continually to respond to changing parking demands; 
j.  Research and recommend to the Mayor and Common Council on the types of parking operations and security and types of devices used for parking control; 
k.  Manage and have charge of maintenance and installation of all traffic control devices authorized by law for the control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in highways, streets and other public places, including but not limited to signs, signals and markings, subject to the requirements of law for referral to the Transportation Commission and Common Council; 
l.  Authorize the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering to manage and be responsible for the design and operation of all traffic control devices authorized by law for the control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in highways, streets and other public places, including but not limited to signs, signals and markings, subject to the requirements of law for referral to the Transportation Commission and Common Council; 
m.  In coordination with other planning agencies of the City and upon the recommendation of the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering, have charge of the planning for traffic and transportation, including but not limited to, development of traffic and transportation studies, surveys and reports and plans for both current and future needs; 
n.  Act upon all matters referred to him or her by the Common Council; 
o.  In addition thereto, with the recommendations of the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering, advise the Common Council, the Mayor and other agencies of the government as to the City's traffic requirements and the general provision of the welfare of the public with respect to traffic problems requiring assistance and guidance of other agencies of the City; 
p.  Enforce parking rules and regulations, including, but limited to, authorizing the issuance of appearance tickets by enforcement staff; and 
q.  Enforce concurrently with other designated City department officials and personnel, quality of life laws relating to littering, noise, graffiti, refuse disposal, dumping, peddling, bicycling/skateboarding on sidewalks or municipal parking facilities, shopping carts, signage, handbills, removal of snow and ice, dirt, debris, or foreign matter on sidewalks, obstructing or encumbering public streets, highways, or sidewalks, and custody and control of dogs, including but not limited to, authorizing the issuance of appearance tickets by enforcement staff assigned to same; and 
r.  Perform such other and further duties pertaining to his or her office, as from time to time be prescribed by law. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1; L.L. No. 2-2006, § 2; L.L. No. 3-2012, § 2; L.L. No. 3-2013, § 1; L.L. 4-2014, § 2 )  
Sec. 251. - Civil service status of officers and employees. 
Officers and employees of the White Plains Parking Authority shall be transferred to the Department of Parking in accordance with the provisions of the civil service law and shall be eligible for such transfer and appointment without examination to offices and positions in the Department of Parking. Such officers and employees who are members or beneficiaries of any existing pension or retirement system shall continue to have the rights, privileges, obligations and status as are now prescribed by law, and as they had under their original appointments. 
(L.L. No. 1-2004, § 1)  
Secs. 252—268. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES[25] 
Section 
269.
City to maintain a public library. 
270.
Board of library trustees. 
271.
General powers of library trustees. 
272.
Appointment of library trustees. 
273.
Duties of the trustees. 
274.
Reports of library trustees. 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Cross reference— Funds for city library to be included in tax budget, § 61; annual reports of departments, § 287. 
State Law reference— Establishment, maintenance of free public library by municipality, General Municipal Law, § 79; Education Law, § 255 et seq. 
 
Sec. 269. - City to maintain a public library. 
The said city shall provide for and maintain a public library within its boundaries, said library to be known as the White Plains Public Library. Said library and its branches, if any, shall be entitled to all rights, powers, privileges, public moneys and other benefits conferred upon public libraries by law or other state authority and shall, except as otherwise provided in this act, be subject to all the rules, regulations, powers of inspection and superintendence prescribed by law, applicable to public libraries in the state of New York. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 16)  
Sec. 270. - Board of library trustees. 
The affairs of the White Plains public library shall be managed by a board of nine (9) members, eight (8) of whom shall be appointed in the manner provided elsewhere in this act, and the ninth shall be the superintendent of public schools acting ex-officio, which board shall be known and designated as the board of trustees of the White Plains public library. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 17; L.L. No. 2-1995, § 1)  
Sec. 271. - General powers of library trustees. 
Said board shall possess all the powers conferred, and discharge all the duties imposed by this act or by any general law of this state relating to public libraries and not inconsistent with the purpose of this act. All moneys and funds belonging to or received by said public library shall be paid over and delivered to the commissioner of finance. All the rights, powers, privileges, obligations and liabilities of said White Plains public library shall be vested in and be imposed upon this board except as otherwise provided for in this act. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 18)  
Sec. 272. - Appointment of library trustees. 
The common council shall annually in the month of January appoint two (2) residents of said city as members of the board of trustees of the White Plains public library. The common council may, at any time, appoint a resident of said city to fill any vacancy in the membership of said board caused by death or otherwise, whenever such vacancy shall occur. Each person so appointed shall, after due qualification, hold office during the term of three (3) years as measured from the first day of January preceding such appointment or until his successor has duly qualified, except when appointed to fill a vacancy and in such case to fill the unexpired term caused by such vacancy. 
(Laws 1917, Ch. 381, § 15; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 19)  
Sec. 273. - Duties of the trustees. 
Subject to the provisions of this act and to laws and regulations pertaining to public libraries in the state of New York, and subject to the control of the common council of said city, said board of trustees shall have power and it shall be its duty: 
(1)  To elect one of its members to serve as president of the board and another member to serve as secretary. Such elected officers shall perform the duties usually pertaining to their respective offices, subject to the provisions of this act and to the laws and regulations pertaining to public libraries in the state of New York. 
(2)  To have the exclusive care, custody, management and control of the public library of said city and all property pertaining thereto. 
(3)  To provide, with the approval of the common council, suitable rooms and buildings for said library and to supervise their care and maintenance. 
(4)  To appoint a director and to employ, subject to civil service rules and regulations and other applicable rules, regulations and other laws pertaining to city employment, such other persons as may be necessary to properly care for and maintain the public library and its service to the public. 
(5)  To promulgate rules and regulations for the adequate service of the library to the public. 
(6)  To adopt bylaws for the conduct of its business and the performance of its duties. 
(7)  To prepare budget estimates for library expenditures as required by law and applicable rules and regulations and subject to all applicable provisions of law, rules and regulations to control appropriations made by the common council for the support and maintenance of the library. 
(8)  To purchase, sell, or exchange, improve and repair books and other library materials required for the proper operation of the library as well as library appurtenances and equipment, except those items which may appropriately be performed by the department of purchase. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 21)  
Sec. 274. - Reports of library trustees. 
The board shall make such reports, annual and special, as are required by law and applicable rules and regulations. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 22)  
ARTICLE XII. - DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
Section 
275.
Department of information technology; [director of information services] chief information officer duties. 
276.
Reserved. 
 
Sec. 275. - Department of information technology; chief information officer duties. 
There shall be a Department Of Information Technology, the head of which shall be the Chief Information Officer, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Common Council. The Chief Information Officer shall be under the general direction and supervision of the Mayor. The Chief Information Officer shall have the following powers and duties: 
a.  Plan and develop City-wide information technology policies; 
b.  Coordinate and support information systems technology for all user departments, and develop methods of multi-agency or multi-departmental use of centralized information systems to achieve efficiency and economy of operation. 
c.  Direct and coordinate development and management of new automated information and communication systems and technology, as well as enhancements to existing automated systems in the City; 
d.  Review and analyze proposals for new technology or systems enhancements, and make recommendations as to the cost/benefit, applicability, compatibility and needed resources; 
e.  Serve as chief technology advisor to the Mayor, Department Heads and as a representative of the City with other municipalities and agencies in coordinating information technology related functions; 
f.  Direct and coordinate the day-to-day operations of the Department Of Information Technology to insure optimal utilization of staff resources both for on-going operations and assigned projects; 
g.  Prepare the annual budget for the Department Of Information Technology and review the information technology component of all Department budgets, Requests for Information (RFI's), Requests for Proposals (RFP's), and capital project submissions, and monitor spending throughout the fiscal year to insure adequate funding and cost containment; and 
h.  Plan, coordinate and implement measures to safeguard and insure the security of data and computer files through authorized systems access and information disclosure or modification, taking necessary actions for security violations and breaches. 
(L. L. No. 2-1999, § 1; L.L. No. 3-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 276. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Section 
277.
Actions for damages or injuries to person or property. 
278.
Judgments against city. 
279.
Additional allowances. 
280.
Reserved. 
281.
Inhabitants not incompetent. 
282.
Witnesses not to be excused from testifying. 
283.
City boundaries may be marked; no adverse title obtained by encroachments. 
284.
Notice to one owner, notice to all. 
285, 286.
Reserved. 
287.
Annual reports of departments. 
288.
Reserved. 
289.
Creation of debt. 
290.
Public act. 
291.
Bonded debt of village and town of White Plains. 
292.
Apportionment of state and county taxes. 
293.
Adjustment of leases and certificates of sales. 
294.
Enforcement of taxes and assessments already levied. 
295.
Collection of taxes. 
296.
Village ordinances, et cetera, continued. 
297.
Towns of North Castle and Greenburgh and school districts continued. 
298.
Village and town corporations dissolved. 
299.
State insurance law to apply. 
300.
Trustees of police pension fund. 
301.
Police pension fund; how constituted. 
302.
Pensions, to whom granted. 
303.
Trustees of fire department pension fund. 
304.
Firemen's pension fund; how constituted. 
305.
Pensions, to whom granted. 
306.
Liability of city and trustees; medical board. 
307, 308.
Reserved. 
309.
First assessment roll—How prepared. 
310.
Acts repealed. 
311.
Saving clause. 
312.
When act takes effect. 
 
Sec. 277. - Actions for damages or injuries to person or property. 
No civil action shall be maintained against the city and the city shall not be liable for damages or injuries to person or property sustained in any way or manner in consequence of: (a) any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk or public parking area being out of repair, defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, or the existence of snow or ice upon any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, city tree or public parking area unless written notice thereof relating to the particular place and condition was actually given to the commissioner of public works or filed in his office prior to such damage or injury and there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or remedy the condition, or to cause such snow or ice to be removed, or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe; and (b) any traffic control light, signal or sign being out of repair, defective, removed or not operating, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed, unless actual notice thereof relating to the particular place and condition was given to the commissioner of public safety or to the desk officer at police headquarters prior to such injury or damage and there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice to repair or remedy the condition or to make the place otherwise reasonably safe. No action shall be brought upon any claim against the city, and the city shall not be liable, for damages or injuries to person or property alleged to have been caused by or founded upon the misfeasance, negligence or tort of the city, or any of its officers, appointees or employees, unless a written notice of such claim sworn to by or in behalf of the claimant, setting forth the particulars of place, time, injuries and damage, and the cause, nature and extent thereof, so far as then practicable, shall have been made and served. Such notice of claim shall be made and served in compliance with section fifty-e of the general municipal law. Nothing contained in this section shall be held to repeal or modify or waive any existing requirement or statute of limitations which is applicable to these classes of actions, but, on the contrary, shall be held to be additional requirements to the right to maintain such action; nor shall anything herein contained be held to modify any existing rule of law relative to the question of contributory negligence, nor to impose upon the city any greater duty or obligation than that it shall keep its streets and public places in a reasonably safe condition for public use and travel. Except as otherwise provided by law, the place of trial of all actions or proceedings against the city or any of its officers, appointees, employees, boards or departments, shall be the county of Westchester. 
(L.L. No. 5-1953, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 25; L.L. No. 1-1990, § 30) 
Cross reference— City not liable for acts or omissions of fire department, § 224; damages for building destroyed to prevent spread of fire, § 225. 
State Law reference— Negligence and malfeasance of public officers; taxpayers' remedies, General Municipal Law, § 50 et seq.  
Sec. 278. - Judgments against city. 
The amount of any judgment recovered against the city, and payable by it and remaining unpaid, with the interest due thereon, in case no appeal is intended to be taken, or in case such judgment is finally affirmed on an appeal taken, shall be reported by the corporation counsel immediately after the same shall have become payable to the common council; and such amount shall be raised in the next levy of taxes for the expenses of the city, unless execution upon such judgment shall be stayed. Such judgments shall be paid out of the moneys paid to the commissioner of finance on account of such levy, in the order of their recovery. Until the money so raised shall be paid to the commissioner of finance and payment of judgments refused, no execution shall issue against the city, unless the amount of such judgments shall not have been included in the tax levy; provided, nevertheless, said judgments may be paid, in order of their recovery, from funds available therefor in the tax budget or may be financed pursuant to the local finance law, as may be determined by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 26)  
Sec. 279. - Additional allowances. 
No allowance or compensation, in addition to the salary or compensation prescribed by law or authorized by this act or otherwise by law shall be paid to any officer or employee of the city or to any person paid out of city funds, nor shall any amount in excess of the sum payable under any contract be paid on account thereof. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 27) 
State Law reference— Increasing compensation of officer during fiscal year prohibited, General City Law, § 25.  
Sec. 280. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 280 was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1968, sec. 28. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 281. - Inhabitants not incompetent. 
Upon the trial of any issue or the prosecution of any proceeding, or upon the taking or making of any inquisition, appraisal or award, or upon the judicial investigation of any fact whatever, to which issue, proceedings, inquest, investigation or award the city is a party, or in which the city may, in any way, be interested, no person shall be deemed incompetent as a judge, referee, commissioner, witness or juror by reason of his being an inhabitant, resident or taxpayer of the city. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 29)  
Sec. 282. - Witnesses not to be excused from testifying. 
In any criminal proceeding before a court, magistrate or grand jury or in any investigation or inquiry before the common council, or any committee thereof, or before any officer conducting an investigation, touching the knowledge of such witness as to any offense committed in violation of the provisions of this chapter or ordinance of the city, the court, magistrate or grand jury, or the common council, committee or officer, may confer immunity in accordance with the provisions of the code of criminal procedure; provided, however, that no immunity shall be conferred except upon twenty-four (24) hours prior written notice to the district attorney of the county of Westchester. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 31)  
Sec. 283. - City boundaries may be marked; no adverse title obtained by encroachments. 
The common council shall have power to cause the boundaries of the city to be surveyed and permanent monuments to be placed to indicate the same, and a map to be made thereof. Except as otherwise provided by law, no encroachment on any sidewalk, alley, street, highway or public grounds in said city shall operate to confer any right upon any person or corporation adverse to the city, but such encroachment shall be deemed a nuisance, and the city may, at any time, cause the same to be removed. 
(L.L. No. 4-1968, § 32)  
Sec. 284. - Notice to one owner, notice to all. 
Whenever any real estate in said city shall be owned by two (2) or more persons jointly, or as tenants in common, a notice served on one of such persons shall be sufficient notice to all, for any purpose requiring a notice under this act.  
Secs. 285, 286. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Secs. 285 and 286 were repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1968, sec. 33. Said section numbers are retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 287. - Annual reports of departments. 
The several heads of departments shall present to the mayor, annually, on or before the first Monday of August, a report of the proceedings of such department during the preceding fiscal year, and he shall transmit the same to the common council with any recommendation he may think proper to make. But nothing in this section contained shall be so construed as to relieve such heads of departments from furnishing information required by the mayor or common council at any other time. 
(L.L. No. 4-1956, § 1)  
Sec. 288. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 288 was repealed by Intro. L.L. No. 4-1968, sec. 33. Said section number is retained by the editors to maintain sequence.  
Sec. 289. - Creation of debt. 
No person shall have power to make any purchase or contract any debt on the part of the city, unless especially authorized by the provisions of this act or the Local Finance Law. 
(Laws 1943, Ch. 710, Pt. 3, Title 62, § 1056)  
Sec. 290. - Public act. 
This act is intended to be and shall be deemed and held in all courts and jurisdictions to be a public act, of which the courts shall take judicial notice. This act shall be construed not as an act in derogation of the powers of the state, but as one intended to aid the state in the execution of its duties, and shall be liberally construed so as to carry into effect the objects and purposes thereof.  
Sec. 291. - Bonded debt of village and town of White Plains. 
The city of White Plains shall be liable for the bonded debt of the village and town of White Plains, and shall pay and discharge the principal as the same shall fall due, and the annual interest accruing thereon, and such bonded debt for all purposes shall be deemed the bonded debt of the city of White Plains. 
(Laws 1945, Ch. 839, § 74)  
Sec. 292. - Apportionment of state and county taxes. 
The board of supervisors of Westchester county shall, at its first annual session after the passage of this act, fix and determine the proportional amounts of the state and county and town charges to be equitably paid by the city of White Plains, and also the proportional shares of amounts thereof to be paid by the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh, not included within the boundaries of said city. Said board of supervisors shall also, at their first annual session after the passage of this act, fix and determine the proportional share or amount of the floating and bonded indebtedness of the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh, incurred and existing at the time of the passage of this act, to be chargeable upon the city of White Plains, and the proportional share or amount thereof to be chargeable to the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh, not included within the boundaries of said city. Said board of supervisors in determining the proportion which shall be paid by said city and towns respectively, shall be governed by the proportion of the assessed valuation of the property of said city and towns, and the amount chargeable to the city of White Plains shall bear such proportion to the whole amount of such floating and bonded indebtedness as the assessed valuation of the property formerly in such town but now in said city of White Plains upon the assessment roll of the city of White Plains for that year, as equalized by said board bears to the aggregate amount of the assessment roll of the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh respectively, for that year as equalized by said board and the assessment roll of said city so equalized. Said board of supervisors, shall also, at their first annual session after the passage of this act, fix and determine the proportional share or amount of the floating and bonded indebtedness of the several school districts, part of which are included in said city, incurred and existing at the time of the passage of this act, to be chargeable upon the city of White Plains, and the proportional share or amount thereof chargeable to the part of each of such several school districts, not included in the boundaries of said city. 
Said board of supervisors, in determining the proportion which shall be chargeable to said city and school districts not included in the boundaries of said city, shall be governed by the proportion of the assessed valuation of the property of said city and several school districts not included in the boundaries of said city, and the amount chargeable to the city of White Plains shall bear such proportion to the whole amount of such floating and bonded indebtedness as the assessed valuation of the property in said city of White Plains, formerly in such school district, bears to the aggregate amount of the assessment roll of such school districts, respectively, on the last preceding assessment roll of such school district. The portion of the indebtedness so apportioned shall become a charge for principal and interest upon the city of White Plains and the respective towns and school districts as though the same had been incurred by said city, towns and school districts separately. After the passage of this act the said city of White Plains, shall, for all purposes relating to the assessment and collection of taxes, be and constitute a separate and distinct township in said county of Westchester.  
Sec. 293. - Adjustment of leases and certificates of sales. 
Immediately after the appointment of a city clerk of the city of White Plains, as herein provided, the town clerk, town receiver of taxes and the supervisor, of the town of White Plains shall deliver all books, papers and other property in his possession belonging to the town of White Plains to the city clerk of the city of White Plains, and upon such delivery of the right, title and interest of the town of White Plains in and to tax leases, tax sales and tax certificates of sales, shall be vested in the city of White Plains with the same purpose and effect as though they had been actually assigned by the town of White Plains to the city of White Plains. The supervisors of the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh, shall continue to keep the record of tax sales and retain the custody and ownership of tax leases and certificates of sale for taxes within that portion of the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh hereby included within the city of White Plains, as though such portions had not been included within the city of White Plains, and upon the payment of any tax now due upon land lying within such portions of said towns the same shall be placed to the credit of such towns. The board of supervisors of Westchester county shall, at its first annual session after the passage of this act, fix and determine the proportionate amount of back taxes so collected to be retained by each town and the proportionate amount to be paid by each of said towns to the said city of White Plains. Such apportionment shall be made by said board of supervisors on a basis of the assessment roll in effect when this act takes effect, and the supervisors of the several towns shall annually, upon a basis or proportion, fixed as aforesaid, pay on or before the first day of January in this year to the commissioner of finance of the city of White Plains the part or proportion of taxes to which said city is entitled.  
Sec. 294. - Enforcement of taxes and assessments already levied. 
All proceedings taken or which shall be taken prior to the time this act takes effect, for the collection of taxes, under the provisions of chapter six hundred and ten of the laws of eighteen hundred and seventy-four, and the amendments thereto, and chapter six hundred and fifty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred and thirteen, shall be concluded under the provisions of those acts, and all acts required to be done and performed by the supervisor shall be performed by the commissioner of finance and all acts required to be done and performed by the town clerk shall be performed by the city clerk, with the same force and effect as though such acts had been done and performed by such supervisor and town clerk, and the collection of all taxes and assessments which have been or shall have been imposed before this act takes effect shall be concluded in the manner prescribed by law at the time such taxes and assessments were imposed by the commissioner of finance.  
Sec. 295. - Collection of taxes. 
This act shall in no wise apply to or affect the collection of the town, county or state, village or school taxes, the warrant for collection of which may be in the hands of the receiver of taxes of the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh, and all steps and means now provided by the statute for the collection of said taxes may at any time hereafter be taken and enforced as is now provided by statute for delinquent taxes, and when the same shall be collected they shall be disposed of in the same manner as though this act had not become a law, except as otherwise provided by this act.  
Sec. 296. - Village ordinances, et cetera, continued. 
The existing ordinances, bylaws, resolutions and regulations of the trustees of the village of White Plains as the same shall be in force when this act takes effect, shall be and continue in force, and shall have the same force and effect over the entire limits of the city of White Plains, as in and by this act established, and shall be and continue in force and effect over the whole city as if duly adopted, passed and published by the common council of said city until the same shall be repealed by the common council of said city.  
Sec. 297. - Towns of North Castle and Greenburgh and school districts continued. 
The balance of the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh not included within the bounds of the city of White Plains, shall be separate and distinct towns with all the rights and privileges of a town as provided by law and shall be known as the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh; and the portions of the several school districts not included in the boundaries of said city shall be separate and distinct school districts with all the rights and privileges of a school district as provided by law; all officers of said towns and school districts who shall be residents of the same as hereby altered shall continue to hold their offices for the time and in the manner prescribed by law; all officers holding office either by election or appointment, who shall cease to be residents of the towns of North Castle and Greenburgh, or of the several school districts, in consequence of the alteration of said towns and school districts hereby shall be deemed to have vacated their offices from the day when this act shall take effect, as if they had removed from the towns or school districts, except as in this act otherwise provided. All vacancies caused as above stated shall be filled by the respective town board and school districts as provided by law.  
Sec. 298. - Village and town corporations dissolved. 
The corporations known as the village of White Plains and the town of White Plains, and included in the boundaries hereinbefore described, are hereby dissolved, and all offices elective and appointive, existing under the government of the village and town of White Plains, are hereby abolished, and all such village and town offices shall immediately deliver and turn over all books, papers, money and property of every description to the city of White Plains, and the title thereto and also the title of said town and village of, in and to any and all real estate, leases, tax leases and any interest in real estate and personal property belonging to the village or town of White Plains is hereby vested in the city of White Plains.  
Sec. 299. - State insurance law to apply. 
The provisions of section one hundred and thirty-three of chapter thirty-three of the consolidated laws of nineteen hundred and nine of the state of New York, known as the insurance law of the state of New York, shall apply to the city of White Plains and be a portion of this act.  
Sec. 300. - Trustees of police pension fund. 
The common council of the city of White Plains are hereby constituted a board of trustees of the police pension fund created by this act. The commissioner of finance shall be the treasurer of such board of trustees. Such board of trustees shall have charge of and administer said fund, and from time to time invest the same, or any part thereof, as they shall deem most beneficial to said fund, and are empowered to make all necessary contracts and take all necessary and proper actions and proceedings in the premises, and to make payments from said fund of pensions granted in pursuance of this act. And the fund now in the possession of the board of police commissioners as trustees of the police pension fund of the village of White Plains shall be transferred to the trustees of the police pension fund hereby created. The said trustees shall from time to time establish such rules and regulations for the administration of the police pension fund as they may deem best. The commissioner of finance shall report in detail to the common council of the city of White Plains annually on or before the first day of August, in which report shall be stated the condition of the police pension fund, how invested and the items of their receipts and disbursements on account of the same. No payments whatever shall be allowed or made by said trustees as reward, gratuity or compensation to any person for salary or services rendered by or for said board of trustees.  
Sec. 301. - Police pension fund; how constituted. 
The police pension fund shall consist of: 
(1)  The police pension fund now in the possession of the board of police commissioners of the village of White Plains as trustees of the police pension fund. 
(2)  All fines imposed by the commissioner of public safety upon members of the police force. 
(3)  All rewards, fees, gifts, testimonials, proceeds of entertainments and emoluments that may be presented, paid or given to the police department or any member of the police force for or on account of police services, except such as shall be allowed by the commissioner of public safety to be retained by said member. 
(4)  All lost or stolen money remaining in the custody of the city for the space of one year, and for which there shall be no lawful claimant, and moneys arising from the sale of unclaimed property, which the commissioner of public safety is hereby authorized to sell after said property shall have been without lawful claimant for the space of one year. 
(5)  All moneys, pay, compensation or salary, or any part thereof, deducted or withheld from any member of the police force for or on account of absence or suspension from duty. 
(6)  Two per centum (2%) of the salary of each of the members of said police force, who may, by their consent in writing to be filed with the board of trustees of the police pension fund, consent to its being taken for the police pension fund. Twenty-five per centum (25%) of all license money. 
(7)  All fees received and paid for the inspection and testing by the police department of combustible and dangerous materials and received and paid for licenses in connection therewith, as shall be provided by the laws and ordinances of said city. 
(8)  A sum of money annually equal to, but not greater than five per centum (5%) of an amount not exceeding the revenue estimated upon a basis of the number of liquor tax licenses granted in the last year in which the excise tax was received, and any other moneys that the Common Council shall pay into such fund any other source as may be necessary to fund all future obligations to beneficiaries. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 24; L.L. No. 4-1925, § 1; Laws 2003, Ch. 278)  
Sec. 302. - Pensions, to whom granted. 
The board of trustees of the police pension fund created by this act shall have power to grant pensions as hereinafter provided to any member of the police force of said village at the time of the passage of this act, or to any person who became a member of the police force prior to June twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred and forty, who may have signed the consent in writing as hereinbefore provided, as follows: 
(1)  To the widow of any member of the police force at the time of the passage of this act, or who became a member of the police force prior to June twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred and forty, who shall have been killed while in the actual performance of police duty, or shall have died from the effects of any injury received while in the actual discharge of such duty, provided such death shall not have been caused by misconduct on his part, such sum per annum as may in the discretion of the board of trustees of said fund be deemed proper. 
(2)  To any child or children under sixteen (16) years of age of such member of the police force killed or dying as aforesaid, but leaving no widow, or if a widow, then after her death to such child or children being yet under sixteen (16) years of age, such sum as the board of trustees of said fund may deem proper. 
(3)  To any such member of the police force who, while in the actual performance of police duty, and by reason of the performance of such duty, and without fault or misconduct on his part, shall have become permanently disabled physically or mentally so as to be unfitted to perform full police duty, such sum per annum as the board of trustees of the pension fund shall deem proper. 
(3-a)  To any such member of the police force who, while in the military, naval or air force service of the United States, has become permanently disabled physically or mentally so as to be unfit to perform the full duty of his employment in the police force, such sum per annum as the board of trustees of the pension fund shall deem proper, not exceeding an amount equivalent to one-half (½) the full pay of a member of said police force of the rank of the member so retired. 
(4)  Any such member of the police force who has or shall have performed police duty for a period of twenty (20) years or upwards upon his own application or upon the certificate of a majority of the members of the medical board certifying that such member is permanently disabled so as to be unfit for police duty may, in the discretion of the board of trustees of the said fund with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, and any such member of the police force who attains age sixty-two (62) shall (except as hereinafter set forth) be retired from service and placed upon the police pension roll, and therefrom, shall be awarded, granted and paid from said police pension fund by the trustees thereof an annual sum during his lifetime, equivalent to one-half (½) the full pay of a member of said police force of the rank of the member so retired. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision relative to the compulsory retirement of a member of the police force who attains age sixty-two the board of trustees of the said fund with the approval of the commissioner of public safety may permit the continuance in service of such member for periods not to exceed one year each; provided, however, that no such permission shall be given (a) without the certification of a majority of the members of the medical board that such member of the police force is physically and mentally fit to perform the duties of his position, and (b) such member of the police force is less than sixty-five (65) years of age. The board of trustees of the said fund may award, grant and pay from said pension fund to a member of the police force who has served as such for a period of at least thirty-three (33) years such sum as they may deem proper; provided such sum shall not be less than an amount equivalent to one-half (½) the full pay of a member of said police force of the rank of the member so retired and shall not be in excess of three-fourths (¾) thereof. Pensions granted under this section shall be for the natural life of the officer, and, except as otherwise provided by law, shall not be revoked, repealed or diminished. In case any retired member of said police force shall die leaving a widow, such widow shall be entitled to receive three hundred dollars ($300.00) per annum during her life. In case such retired member shall leave a minor child, or children, and no widow, then the board of trustees of such pension fund shall pay to the guardian of such minor child or children such pension per annum as the board may deem proper, not to exceed in all three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(4-a)  To the widow of any member of the police force who at the time of his death was a member of such police force, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per annum during her lifetime. In case such member shall leave a minor child, or children, and no widow, then the board of trustees of such pension fund shall pay to the guardian of such minor child or children such pension per annum as the board may deem proper, not to exceed in all three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(5)  Pensions to widows shall terminate when the widow shall remarry and pensions to children shall terminate whenever the children shall, respectively, arrive at the age of sixteen (16) years. The common council may, in its discretion, order any pension granted or any part thereof to cease, except to members of the police force retired after twenty (20) years' service, as hereinbefore provided; but in all such cases the said common council shall file with the city clerk a written statement of the causes which determined them in ordering any pension to so cease, and nothing herein contained shall render the granting or payment of such pension obligatory on the common council, as the trustees of the police pension fund, except as hereinbefore provided. 
(6)  No member of the police force shall be awarded, granted or paid a pension on account of physical or mental disability or disease unless upon the certificate of a majority of the members of the medical board, which shall set forth the cause, nature and extent of the disability, disease or injury of each member of the police force who may be placed upon the pension roll, and said certificate shall distinctly state whether or not such disability, disease or injury was incurred or sustained by said member of the police force in the performance of police duty, and such certificate shall in each case be filed with and entered upon the minutes of the common council. 
(7)  No member of the said police force shall be entitled to any benefits of this act in any way whatever unless he shall have signed a consent in writing to the effect that two per centum (2%) of his salary shall be taken for the benefit of the police pension fund, as hereinbefore provided, nor unless he shall continue to permit the same to be taken so long as he shall remain an active member of said force. The time for the commencement of the two per centum (2%) to run shall be at the date of the passage of this act as to members then on the force, and as to those members who were subsequently appointed it shall commence as of the date of their appointment. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 25; Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 9; L.L. No. 2-1943, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1948, § 1; L.L. No. 5-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1959, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1965, § 1) 
Code references— Supplemental police and fire death benefits, § 2-5-92; supplemental pensions for retired policemen and retired paid firemen and widows of certain firemen, § 2-5-93; supplemental pension payments to widows and orphan minor children of retired policemen and retired paid firemen, § 2-5-94. 
State Law reference— Minimum retirement benefits for policemen who are members of police pension or retirement system maintained by cities, General Municipal Law, § 207-e; ordinary death benefits of members of police retirement systems, § 207-g thereof; death benefits for beneficiaries, § 208-b thereof.  
Sec. 303. - Trustees of fire department pension fund. 
The common council of the city of White Plains are hereby constituted a board of trustees of the fire department pension fund created by this act. The commissioner of finance shall be the treasurer of such board of trustees. Such board of trustees shall have charge of and administer said fund, and from time to time invest the same, or any part thereof, as they shall deem most beneficial to said fund, and are empowered to make all necessary contracts and take all necessary and proper actions and proceedings in the premises, and to make payments from said fund for pensions granted in pursuance of this act. The said trustees shall from time to time establish such rules and regulations for the administration of the fire department pension fund as they may deem best. The commissioner of finance shall report in detail to the common council of the city of White Plains annually on or before the first day of August, in which report shall be stated the condition of the fire department pension fund, how invested and the items of the receipts and disbursements on account of the same. No payments whatever shall be allowed or made by said trustees as reward, gratuity or compensation to any person for salary or services rendered by or for said board of trustees. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 28)  
Sec. 304. - Firemen's pension fund; how constituted. 
There shall be established and maintained in the city of White Plains a firemen's pension fund for the paid officers and paid members of the fire department of such city. Such pension fund shall consist of: 
(1)  All fines imposed by the commissioner of public safety upon paid members of the fire department. 
(2)  All rewards, fees, gifts, testimonials, proceeds of entertainments and emoluments that may be presented, paid or given to the paid fire department or to any member thereof, for or on account of the services of such department or the members thereof. 
(3)  All moneys, pay, compensation or salary, or any part thereof, deducted or withheld from any paid member or members of said fire department for or on account of absence or suspension from duty. 
(4)  Two per centum (2%) of the salary of each of the paid members of said fire department, who may, by their consent in writing to be filed with the board of trustees of the fire department pension fund, consent to its being taken for said pension fund. 
(5)  Any other moneys that the common council may from time to time pay into said fund from any other sources. 
(6)  All fees received and paid for the inspection and testing by the fire department of combustible and dangerous materials, and received and paid for licenses in connection therewith, as shall be provided by the laws and ordinances of said city. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 28; L.L. No. 2-1925, § 1)  
Sec. 305. - Pensions, to whom granted. 
The board of trustees of the fire department pension fund created by this act shall have power to grant pensions as hereinafter provided to any member of the paid fire department of said city at the time of the passage of this act, or to any person who became a member of the paid fire department prior to June twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred and forty, who may have signed the consent in writing as hereinbefore provided, as follows: 
(1)  To the widow of any member of the paid fire department at the time of the passage of this act, or who became a member of the paid fire department prior to June twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred and forty, who shall have been killed while in the actual performance of fire duty, or shall have died from the effects of any injury received while in the actual discharge of such duty, provided such death shall not have been caused by misconduct on his part, such sum per annum as may in the discretion of the board of trustees of said fund be deemed proper. 
(2)  To any child or children under sixteen (16) years of age of such member of the paid fire department killed or dying as aforesaid, but leaving no widow, or if a widow, then after her death to such child or children being yet under sixteen (16) years of age, such sum as the board of trustees of said fund may deem proper. 
(3)  To any such member of the paid fire department who, while in the actual performance of fire duty, and by reason of the performance of such duty, and without fault or misconduct on his part, shall have become permanently disabled physically or mentally, so as to be unfitted to perform full fire duty, such sum per annum as the said board of trustees of the pension fund shall deem proper. 
(3-a)  To any such member of the paid fire department who, while in the military, naval or air force service of the United States, has become permanently disabled physically or mentally so as to be unfit to perform the full duty of his employment in the paid fire department, such sum per annum as the board of trustees of the pension fund shall deem proper, not exceeding an amount equivalent to one-half (½) the full pay of a member of said paid fire department of the rank of the member so retired. 
(4)  Any such member of the paid fire department who has or shall have performed duty as a paid fireman for a period of twenty (20) years or upwards upon his own application or upon the certificate of a majority of the members of the medical board certifying that such member is permanently disabled so as to be unfitted for fire duty may, in the discretion of the board of trustees of the said fund with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, and any such member of the paid fire department who attains age sixty-two (62) shall (except as hereinafter set forth) be retired from service and placed upon the fire department pension roll, and therefrom shall be awarded, granted and paid from said fire department pension fund by the trustees thereof an annual sum during his lifetime, equivalent to one-half (½) the full pay of a member of said fire department of the rank of the member so retired. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision relative to the compulsory retirement of a member of the paid fire department who attains age sixty-two (62), the board of trustees of the said fund with the approval of the commissioner of public safety may permit the continuance in service of such member for periods not to exceed one year each; provided, however, that no such permission shall be given (a) without the certification of a majority of the members of the medical board that such member of the paid fire department is physically and mentally fit to perform the duties of his position, and (b) such member of the paid fire department is less than sixty-five (65) years of age. The board of trustees of the said fund may award, grant and pay from said pension fund to a member of the paid fire department who has served as such for a period of at least thirty-three (33) years such sum as they may deem proper; provided such sum shall not be less than an amount equivalent to one-half (½) the full pay of a member of said paid fire department of the rank of the member so retired and shall not be in excess of three-fourths (¾) thereof. Pensions granted under this section shall be for the natural life of the member, and, except as otherwise provided by law, shall not be revoked, repealed or diminished. In case any retired member of said fire department shall die leaving a widow, such widow shall be entitled to receive three hundred dollars ($300.00) per annum during her life. In case such retired member shall leave a minor child, or children, and no widow, then the board of trustees of such pension fund shall pay to the guardian of such minor child or children such pension per annum as the board may deem proper, not to exceed in all three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(4-a)  To the widow of any member of the paid fire department who at the time of his death was a member of such paid fire department, the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per annum during her lifetime. In case such member shall leave a minor child, or children, and no widow, then the board of trustees of such pension fund shall pay to the guardian of such minor child or children such pension per annum as the board may deem proper, not to exceed in all three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(5)  Pensions to widows shall terminate when the widow shall remarry and pensions to children shall terminate whenever the children shall, respectively, arrive at the age of sixteen (16) years. The common council may, in its discretion, order any pension granted or any part thereof to cease, except to members of the paid fire department retired after twenty (20) years' service, as hereinbefore provided; but in all such cases the said common council shall file with the city clerk a written statement of the causes which determined them in ordering any pension to so cease, and nothing herein contained shall render the granting or payment of such pension obligatory on the common council, as the trustees of the fire department pension fund, except as hereinbefore provided. 
(6)  No member of the paid fire department shall be awarded, granted or paid a pension on account of physical or mental disability or disease unless upon the certificate of a majority of the members of the medical board, which shall set forth the cause, nature and extent of the disability, disease or injury of each member of the paid fire department who may be placed upon the pension roll, and said certificate shall distinctly state whether or not such disability, disease or injury was incurred or sustained by said member of the paid fire department in the performance of fire duty, and such certificate shall in each case be filed with and entered upon the minutes of the common council. 
(7)  No member of the said paid fire department shall be entitled to any benefits of this act in any way whatever unless he shall have signed a consent in writing to the effect that two per centum (2%) of his salary shall be taken for the benefit of the fire department pension fund, as hereinbefore provided, nor unless he shall continue to permit the same to be taken so long as he shall remain an active member of said paid fire department. The time for the commencement of the two per centum (2%) to run shall be the first day of January, nineteen hundred and nineteen, as to members then in said fire department, and who are now members thereof, and as to those members who were subsequently appointed it shall commence as of the date of their appointment. 
(Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 28; Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 10; L.L. No. 2-1943, § 3; L.L. No. 2-1948, § 2; L.L. No. 5-1950, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1959, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1965, § 2) 
Code references— Supplemental police and fire death benefits, § 2-5-92; supplemental pensions for retired policemen and retired paid firemen and widows of certain firemen, § 2-5-93; supplemental pension payments to widows and orphan minor children of retired policemen and retired paid firemen, § 2-5-94. 
State Law reference— Minimum retirement benefits for firemen who are members of fire department pension or retirement system, General Municipal Law, § 207-e; ordinary death benefits of members of fire department systems of cities, § 207-f thereof; death benefits for beneficiaries, § 208-b thereof.  
Sec. 306. - Liability of city and trustees; medical board. 
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this act, no member of the police force or paid fire department of the city appointed on or after June twenty-ninth, nineteen hundred and forty, shall be or become a member of the pension systems of the city or shall be required to pay any money or part of any salary or compensation to the aforesaid pension funds and no such person, his widow or children, shall be entitled to receive or be granted or paid any pension, annuity, allowance or moneys from said pension funds. The common council shall appoint three (3) physicians as members of and to constitute the medical board. The term of office of the present members of the medical board shall expire on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred sixty-nine. In the month of January, nineteen hundred seventy, and in such month every two (2) years thereafter, the common council shall make similar appointments to said medical board for a term expiring on the thirty-first day of December in the year following such appointments. The members of the medical board shall continue as such members until the appointment and qualification of their successors. Vacancies in the board shall be filled by the common council for the unexpired term. The members of the medical board shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the common council. The medical board shall arrange for and shall pass upon all medical examinations required under the provisions of this act, shall investigate all essential statements and certifications by or on behalf of a member of the pension systems of the city, shall make a physical examination of any member of the pension systems of the city, in connection with an application for retirement, when requested to do so by the common council, and shall certify to the common council its suggestions and recommendations thereon. 
(Renumbered § 306 by Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 26; Amended by Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 26; Laws 1922, Ch. 521, § 11; L.L. No. 1-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1943, § 5; L.L. No. 4-1968, § 34)  
Secs. 307, 308. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Secs. 307, 308 were repealed by secs. 31, 32 of L.L. No. 1-1990.  
Sec. 309. - First assessment roll—How prepared. 
The assessor of the city of White Plains shall, on or before the twenty-second day of January, nineteen hundred and sixteen, make up an assessment roll of the taxable property, real and personal, in the said city by copying so much of the last preceding assessment roll of the towns of White Plains, Greenburgh and North Castle as relate to persons residing in and property included and taxable within the city of White Plains. Upon the completion of the said assessment roll the said assessor shall annex thereto a certificate under his hand that the said assessment roll contains so much of the assessment rolls of the aforesaid towns of White Plains, Greenburgh and North Castle as relates to persons residing in and property included and taxable within the said city of White Plains and shall deposit the same in his office. He shall immediately have published the notice and perform the duties required by section seventy-four of this act, except that such assessment roll, as corrected and completed shall be filed by said assessor in the office of the city clerk on or before the twelfth day of February, nineteen hundred and sixteen. On or before the twenty-ninth day of February, nineteen hundred and sixteen, the city clerk shall deliver said assessment roll to the commissioner of finance for the purpose of extending the tax thereon. The filing of such roll with the board of supervisors of the county of Westchester shall not be required. The sums adopted by the common council in the tax budget for the fiscal year beginning January first, nineteen hundred and sixteen, shall be assessed on all real and personal estate in the city (except city property and property exempt by law) according to the valuation of the same in the assessment roll for said year, and shall be extended by the commissioner of finance. The amount thus extended shall be regarded and known in all proceedings as "tax" and become due in one installment on the first day of April, nineteen hundred and sixteen. The commissioner of finance shall complete the roll and deliver it to the city clerk on or before the twenty-ninth day of March, nineteen hundred and sixteen. The city clerk shall re-deliver said roll to the commissioner of finance on or before the thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred and sixteen, with a warrant in the form and executed in the manner prescribed by section eighty-four of this act. All of the provisions of this act relating to the collection and enforcement of taxes shall apply, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(Renumbered § 309 by Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 27)  
Sec. 310. - Acts repealed. 
Except for the purposes otherwise provided in this act the following acts are hereby repealed: 
Laws of 	Chapter 
1866 ..... 	351   
1867 ..... 	518   
1870 ..... 	693   
1871 ..... 	606   
1872 ..... 	668   
1873 ..... 	409   
1878 ..... 	179   
1884 ..... 	493   
1886 ..... 	378   
1887 ..... 	609   
1890 ..... 	407   
1890 ..... 	315   
1890 ..... 	60   
1892 ..... 	156   
1894 ..... 	206   
1895 ..... 	109   
1895 ..... 	747   
1896 ..... 	768   
1896 ..... 	769   
1899 ..... 	225*  
1899 ..... 	353   
1900 ..... 	495   
1900 ..... 	497   
1901 ..... 	310   
1902 ..... 	201   
1902 ..... 	115   
1903 ..... 	428   
1903 ..... 	451   
1903 ..... 	552†  
1903 ..... 	616   
1904 ..... 	476   
1904 ..... 	306   
1904 ..... 	276   
1904 ..... 	278   
1905 ..... 	619   
1905 ..... 	147   
1905 ..... 	148   
1905 ..... 	619** 
1906 ..... 	80   
1906 ..... 	165   
1906 ..... 	43   
1906 ..... 	94   
1907 ..... 	272   
1907 ..... 	317   
1907 ..... 	337   
1907 ..... 	299   
1907 ..... 	604   
1908 ..... 	66   
1908 ..... 	69   
1908 ..... 	67   
1908 ..... 	68   
1908 ..... 	71   
1908 ..... 	70   
1909 ..... 	191   
1909 ..... 	386   
1911 ..... 	306   
1911 ..... 	666   
1911 ..... 	713   
1912 ..... 	126   
1912 ..... 	152   
1912 ..... 	493   
1913 ..... 	14   
1913 ..... 	178   
1913 ..... 	300   
1913 ..... 	661   
 
and all other laws inconsistent with the provisions of this act are hereby repealed. Such repeals shall not survive any act hereby repealed, but shall include all laws amendatory repealed except as provided in this section. Such repeals shall not affect any act already existing or accrued or any liability incurred by reason of any violation of a law heretofore existing or any suit or proceeding already instituted, or action had under the laws or ordinances, unless expressly provided in this act. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect any of the acts or parts of acts to regulate or improve the Civil Service of the State of New York. 
(Renumbered § 310 by Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 27) 
*Editor's note— Repeal of Laws 1899, Ch. 255 evidently intended. 
†Editor's note— Repeal of Laws 1903, Ch. 452 evidently intended. 
**Editor's note— Repetition in original.  
Sec. 311. - Saving clause. 
Nothing contained in this act shall be construed to repeal any statute of the state or ordinance of the village, or rule or regulation of the board of health or the rules or regulations adopted by the water commissioners of the village not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, and the same shall remain in full force and effect when not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, to be construed and operated in harmony with the provisions of this act. The powers which are conferred and the duties which are imposed upon any officer or department of the village under any statute of the state or any village ordinance which is in force at the time of the taking effect of this act, shall, if such office or department be abolished by this act, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the officer, board or department upon whom is imposed corresponding or like functions, powers and duties under the provisions of this act. Where any contract has been entered into by the village, prior to the time of taking effect of this act, or any bond or undertaking has been given to or in favor of the city, which contains provisions that the same may be enforced by some officer, board or department therein named, but by the provisions of this act such office, board or department is abolished such contracts, bonds and undertaking shall not in any manner be impaired, but shall continue in full force and the powers conferred and the duties imposed with reference to the same upon the office, board or department which has been abolished shall thereafter be exercised and discharged by the officer, board or department upon whom is conferred or imposed like powers, functions or duties under the provisions of this act. 
(Renumbered § 311 by Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 27)  
Sec. 312. - When act takes effect. 
This act shall take effect January first, nineteen hundred and sixteen, except for the provisions for preparing for and holding the election as provided in section twenty-five of this act, as to which provisions this act shall take effect immediately. 
(Renumbered § 312 by Laws 1919, Ch. 124, § 27)  
CHARTER LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter Local Laws or Special Acts amendatory of the Charter: 
Year 	 Chapter/ 
Local Law 	Section 	  Section 
this Charter 
1915 	Ch. 456 		
1916 	Ch. 167 	1 	58 
		2 	60 
		3 	74 
		4—6 	84—86 
		7 	89 
1917 	Ch. 381 	1 	13 
		2 	64 
		3 	74 
		5 	98 
		6 	167 
		7 	197 
		8 	199 
		9 	200 
		10 	219 
		15 	272 
		16 	275 
1919 	Ch. 124 	2 	73 
		4 	84 
		7 	108 
		10 	117 
		11 	140 
		12 	166 
		14 	176 
		15 	177 
		17 	199 
		18 	213 
		19 	217 
		24 	301 
		25 	302 
		26 	306 
		27 	307—312 
		28 	303—305 
1920 	Ch. 151 	1 	85 
		2 	89 
1921 	Ch. 322 	1 	34 
		2 	36 
		3 	167 
		4 	183 
		5 	185 
	Ch. 627 	1 	8 
		2 	9 
		3 	9-a, 9-b 
		4 	10 
		5 	20 
1922 	Ch. 521 	1 	4 
		2 	67 
		3 	92 
		4 	94 
		5 	97 
		6 	100 
		7 	101 
		8 	183 
		9 	302 
		10 	305 
		11 	306 
1923 	Ch. 570 	1 	10 
		2 	64 
		3 	74 
		4 	83 
		6 	99 
		7 	105, 106 
1925 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	4 
		2 	64 
		3 	189 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	304 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	301 
1926 	Ch. 633 	1—4 	8—9-b 
		5 	17 
		6 	18 
		7 	20 
1927 	Ch. 653 	1 	126 
1928 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	4 
1929 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	151 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	203 
1931 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	153 
		3 	156 
		5 	156-a 
		6 	158-a 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	84 
		5 	115 
		7 	116 
		9 	199 
		11 	200 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	206-a 
1932 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	51 
	L.L. No. 2 	3 	219 
		5 	220 
1933 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	85-a 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	100 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	206-a 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	214 
1934 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	61 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	74 
1935 	Ch. 146 	1 	67 
	L.L. No. 1 	1 	85 
		3 	86 
		5 	89 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	74 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	61 
1939 	L.L. No. 3 	1 	60 
		3 	61 
		5 	65 
		7 	84 
1940 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	306 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	105 
	L.L. No. 4 	2 	238-b 
1941 	Ch. 276 	1 	97-a 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	74 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	104 
		2 	105 
1942 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	40 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	105 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	84 
1943 	Ch. 710, 
(Pt. 3, Title 62) 	1040 	47 
		1041 	50 
		1042 	51 
		1043 	56 
		1044 	60 
		1045 	60 
		1047 	64 
		1048 	150 
		1049 	158-a 
		1051 	176 
		1052 	185 
		1054 	193 
		1056 	289 
	Ch. 712 		166 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	302 
		3 	305 
		5 	306 
1944 	L.L. No. 2 	4 	105 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	89 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	94 
1945 	Ch. 339 		166 
	Ch. 839 	70 	33 
		71 	47 
		72 	67 
		73 	158-a 
		74 	291 
	L.L. No. 3 	1, 2 	60 
1946 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	160 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	167 
1947 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	153 
		2 	156-a 
1948 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	302 
		2 	305 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	17 
1949 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	60 
		2 	63 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	63 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	238-c—e 
1950 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	160 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	50 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	302 
		2 	305 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	115 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	157 
		3 	158 
	L.L. No. 8 	1 	206-a 
	L.L. No. 9 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 11 	1 	65 
	L.L. No. 12 	1 	180 
		3 	183 
	L.L. No. 13 	1 	85 
	L.L. No. 14 	1 	85-a 
	L.L. No. 15 	1 	94 
	L.L. No. 16 	1 	276 
	L.L. No. 17 	1 	168 
1951 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	216 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	106 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	5 
		2 	58 
		3 	60 
		4 	60 
		5 	61 
		6 	74 
		7 	84 
		8 	85 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	4 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	213 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	167 
1952 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	106 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	46 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	60 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	238-f, 238-g 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	219 
		2 	220 
	L.L. No. 8 	1 	117 
		2 	213 
	L.L. No. 11 	1 	238-h, 238-i 
1953 	Ch. 64 	1 	207 
	Ch. 878 	316 	52 
	L.L. No. 1 	1—3 	198—200 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	153 
		2 	156-a 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 4 	1, 2 	60 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	277 
1954 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	238-i—k 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	180 
		3 	183 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	85 
		2 	86 
		3 	89 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	160 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 8 	1 	238-p—s 
	L.L. No. 9 	1 	63 
	L.L. No. 10 	1 	238-j 
	L.L. No. 11 	1 	151 
1956 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	63 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	183-a 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	238-i 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	213, 287 
1957 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	10 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	238-t, 238-u 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	46 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	26 
1958 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	238-i 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	156-a 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	154 
		2 	156-a 
1959 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	16 
	L.L. No. 2 	2 	302, 305 
1960 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	183-a 
	L.L. No. 2 	1—3 	13—15 
		4 	18 
		5 	21 
		6 	28 
		7 	29 
		8 	31 
		9 	34 
		10 	37 
		11 	40 
		13 	42 
		14 	50 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	52 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	46 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	46-a 
1961 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	160 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	203 
	L.L. No. 4 	2 	117 
		3 	238-b 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	65 
	L.L. No. 8 	1 	32 
		2 	51 
		3 	58 
		4—7 	60 
		8 	61 
		10 	73 
		11 	85 
		12 	95 
		13 	106 
		14 	110 
1962 	L.L. No. 1 	1—3 	53—55 
		4 	57 
		5 	64 
		6 	74 
		7 	75 
		8 	77 
		9 	78, 83 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	238-x, 238-y 
1963 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	160 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	130 
1964 	Ch. 588 	1 	7 
	L.L. No. 1 	1 	160 
1965 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	16 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	302 
		2 	305 
1966 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	34 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	89 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	84-a 
1967 	L.L. No. 3 	1, 2 	60 
		4 	73 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	117 
		2 	118 
		3 	122 
		4 	126 
		6 	128 
		7 	129 
		8 	131 
		9 	133 
		11 	135 
		12 	137 
		13 	137-a 
		14—16 	139—141 
		17—19 	144—146 
		21—23 	150—152 
		25—28 	154—156-a 
		29—31 	157—158-a 
		32—36 	159—163 
		37—40 	167—170 
		41 	173 
		42 	174 
		44—52 	176—183-a 
		53 	184 
		54 	185 
		56—58 	191—193 
		59—62 	197—200 
		64—67 	202—205 
		68 	206-a 
		69 	207 
		70 	208 
		71 	209 
		73 	210 
		75 	211 
		77 	212 
		78 	212-a 
		79 	214 
		81—83 	215—217 
		153 	153 
	L.L. No. 5 	2 	238-x 
		3 	238-y 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	10 
1968 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	238-j 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	219 
		2—7 	220—225 
		10—12 	238-q—s 
		14 	239—245 
		16—19 	269—272 
		21—27 	273—279 
		29 	281 
		31 	282 
		32 	283 
		34 	306 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	60 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	63 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	207-a 
1969 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	16 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	238-h 
		2 	238-i 
1970 	Ch. 469 	1 	8 
		2 	9 
		3 	9-a 
		4 	10 
	L.L. No. 1 	1 	84-a 
1971 	Ch. 81 	1 	9 
		2 	9-a 
	L.L. No. 1 	1 	198 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	210 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	156-a 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	160 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	8 
		2, 3 	74 
1972 	Ch. 843 	1 	238-f 
		3 	238-g 
		5 	8 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	238-l 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	167 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	213 
1973 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	213 
1975 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	16 
1976 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	Art. VIII-K(title) 
			238-x(title), 
			238-y(title) 
		2, 3 	238-x, 238-y 
		4 	Art. VIII-L, 
			238-z 
		5 	8 
		6 	238-j 
		7 	238-l 
		8 	238-q 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	47 
	L.L. No. 3 	1, 2 	46 
		3, 4 	46-b, 46-c 
	L.L. No. 4 	1, 2 	8, 9 
		3, 4 	20, 21 
		5 	238-g 
	L.L. No. 5 	1 	9 
1977 	L.L. No. 1 	1       Rnbd 	60, 61, 64 
		      as 	68, 69, 70 
		2 	68 
		3 	71 
		4       Rnbd 	73 
		      as 	62 
		5 	8 
		6—8 	238-q—238-s 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	275 
		2 	8 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	16 
1978 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	217 
	L.L. No. 2 	2 	Art. XII(note) 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	213 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	186, 187 
1979 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	187 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	85 
		2 	86 
		3 	89 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	226 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	238-z 
		2 	8 
	L.L. No. 6 	1 	105 
	L.L. No. 7 	1 	10 
	L.L. No. 8 	1 	238-q 
1980 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	68, 71 
1981 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	16 
1982 	L.L. No. 1 	1, 2 	68 
		1 	69, 70 
		3 	238-r 
		4 	238-s 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	29, 71 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	68 
	L.L. No. 4 	1 	64(note) 
			69, 70 
		1, 2 	68 
		3 	71 
		5 	8 
	Ch. 790 	1 	9, 9-a 
1983 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	85 
		2 	86 
		3, 4 	89 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	16 
1984 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	213 
	L.L. No. 3 	1 	37 
1985 	L.L. No. 3 	1 	16 
1986 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	238-q 
	L.L. No. 2 	1 	105-a 
1989 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	16 
1990 	L.L. No. 1 	1, 2 	7, 8 
		3 	18 
		4       Rpld 	24 
		5 	37 
		6 	Art. V(title) 
		7, 8 	51, 52 
		9 	62 
		10 	65 
		11 	68(5)(B)(a), (d), (C), (6) 
		      Rpld 	68(7) 
		      Rnbd 	68(8), (9) as (7), (8) 
		12       Rnbd 	63 as 73 
		      Amd 	73(d) 
		13 	74(b), (c) 
		14 	115 
		15 	120(2) 
		16 	200 
		17 	206-a 
		18       Rpld 	209 
		19 	215 
		20 	217 
		21 	220 
		22 	226 
		23—25       Rpld 	238-c—238-e 
		26 	238-l 
		27—29 	238-q—238-s 
		30 	277 
		31, 32       Rpld 	307, 308 
1991 	L.L. No. 1 		16 
1992 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	213 
1994 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	16 
1995 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	270 
1996 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	74-a 
1997 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	34 
1999 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	275 
			8 
2000 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	74(b), (c) 
2001 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	85 
		2 	86 
		3 	89 
		4 	200 
		5 	206-a 
2003 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	9 
		2 	9-a 
		3 	10 
2003 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	117 
		2 	238-b 
2003 	Ch. 278 		301 
2004 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	250, 251 
		2 	8 
2004 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	58 
2006 	L.L. No. 2 	1 	8 
		2 	250 
		3 	238-j 
		4 	238-k 
		5 	238-l 
2007 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	9 
		2 	9-a 
		3 	10 
2008 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	84-b 
2010 	L.L. No. 1 		201 
2010 	L.L. No. 2 		213 
2012 	L.L. No. 3 	2 	250 
		3 	238-j 
		4 	238-l 
		5 	8 
		6 	238-q 
2013 	L.L. No. 3 	1       Added 	250-q 
		      Rnbd 	250-q 
		      as 	250-r 
2014 	L.L. No. 1 	1 	9 
		2 	9-a 
		3 	10 
2014 	L.L. No. 3 	1 	275 
		2 	8 
2014 	L.L. No. 4 	1 	238-j—238-l 
		2 	250(k), (l) 
2019 	L.L. No. 1 
1 	33 
  
CHARTER REPEALED SECTIONS[] 
(Rnbd. is abbreviation for renumbered) 
Year Repealed 	Repealer Chapter/ 
  Local Law 	Section 	Charter Section 
  Repealed 
1917 	Ch. 786 		257—268 
			(Art. X)* 
1919 	Ch. 124 	 8 	109 
1931 	L.L. No. 2 	 3 	87 
		 4 	88 
1932 	L.L. No. 2 	 7 	226—229 
1936 	L.L. No. 3 	 6 	66 
1943 	Ch. 712 as amended by Laws 1945, Ch. 336 		68, 69, 
70, 71, 
171, 172, 
186, 190 
1944 	Ch. 783 		Art. IX 
(except for § 
267 x)* 
	L.L. No. 3 	 2 	90 
1952 	L.L. No. 9 	 1 	218-a 
1953 	Ch. 878 		268-a, 268-b, 
(Art. X)* 
1960 	L.L. No. 2 	 12 	41 
1961 	L.L. No. 7 	 1 	107 
1966 	L.L. No. 3 	 2 	104 
		 3       Rnbd 	104-a as 104 
1967       Intro. 	L.L. No. 2 	 3 	62 
	L.L. No. 2 	 1 	268-m, n, o, 
(Art. VIII-G) 
	L.L. No. 3 	 1 	60(5)(B)(b) 
      Intro. 	L.L. No. 4 	 5 	127 
		 10 	134 
		 20 	147—149 
		 43 	175 
	L.L. No. 4 	 55 	187 
		 63 	201 
		 84 	218 
1968       Intro. 	L.L. No. 4 	 33 	285, 286, 288 
	L.L. No. 4 	 8 	230—238 
		 9 	230-a, 
(Art. VIII-A) 
		 13 	238-v, 238-w, 
(Art. VIII-J) 
		 14 	267x* 
		 28 	280 
1971 	L.L. No. 6 	 2 	74 
	L.L. No. 7 	 1 	84-a 
1972 	Ch. 843 	 2 	238-g 
		 4 	275, 276 
	L.L. No. 1 	 1 	3 
1978 	L.L. No. 2 	 2 	Art. XII 
1991 	L.L. No. 1 	 4 	24 
		 11 	68(7) 
		 18 	209 
		 23—25 	238-c—238-e 
		 31, 32 	307, 308 
2012 	L.L. No. 3 	 1 	238-z 
 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
  *Note— Laws 1917, Ch. 786, repealed Art. X(§§ 257—268). Subsequently these section numbers were used in amending Art. IX. A new Art. X consisting of §§ 268a and 268b was enacted prior to 1953. Laws 1953, Ch. 878, repeals this Art. X. Art. IX, together with amendments thereto, was repealed except for § 267-x by Laws 1944, Ch. 785. In 1968, Art. IX was completely amended by Intro. L.L. No. 4, § 14, which appears to repeal by implication § 267-x. 
 
RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Related Laws are various acts not amendatory of the charter which were deemed advisable to include in this volume. The numbering system and catchlines are as set out in such act; in some instances, however, catchlines and other material have been added by the editor for clarity or to facilitate indexing; such material is encased in brackets. The separation of material into articles and divisions is an arbitrary arrangement selected by the editors for organizational purposes. In most acts the symbol "§" was used for the term "section"; in catchlines such term has been abbreviated as "sec.". 
 
ARTICLE A. - SPECIAL LAWS ADOPTED BY THE STATE LEGISLATURE  
DIVISION 1. - SEWER TAX: ESTIMATE; DISTRICT ASSESSMENT; ASSESSMENT ROLLS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 149, Laws of 1932 became a law March 15, 1932. This sub-part is contained in the Westchester County Administrative Code at Art. 9, § 181. 
Charter reference— Assessment, levy and collection of taxes generally, Art. VI; construction, assessment, etc., for sanitary sewers, §§ 161—179. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Annual estimate; district assessment, assessment rolls.] 
Section fourteen of chapter six hundred three of the laws of nineteen hundred twenty-six, re-entitled by chapter eight hundred fifty-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred twenty-eight "An act creating a commission to prepare and report preliminary plans, including estimates and proposed assessment areas, for sanitary trunk sewers and sanitary outlet sewers in the county of Westchester, providing for the payment of the expenses of such commission, authorizing the creation, enlargement, extension and modification of sanitary sewer districts within said county, providing for the construction, enlargement, extension, modification, improvement and maintenance of such sewers, authorizing the issuance of certificates of indebtedness and bonds therefor; directing the adoption of an annual estimate or budget for such districts providing for assessments within and without such districts to pay the cost of maintaining such sewers and to reimburse said county for payment of the principal and interest of bonds and certificates of indebtedness issued therefor," as last amended by chapter six hundred fifty-eight of the laws of nineteen hundred twenty-seven, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
§ 14. Annual estimate or budget; district assessment; assessment rolls. The board of supervisors shall each year before the levy of taxes make up an estimate or budget for any such district established or created, as provided by this act, which shall give the estimated sums required for maintaining and repairing the sewers within such district and all other lawful charges against such district, including the funds necessary to reimburse the county for the payment of principal and interest on bonds and certificates of indebtedness issued as provided by this act for the benefit of any such district. Said board shall apportion to and levy against the several towns and cities within any such district the total amount of the estimate or budget made up for any such district according to the equalized value of the real estate in said towns and cities appearing upon the assessment rolls as situated within the limits of any such district and a certificate thereof, certified by the clerk shall be filed with the supervisors of said towns and the clerks of said cities within any such district on or before the twentieth day of March in each year. In the event that two (2) or more districts shall use and thereby be chargeable with the cost and expense of repair and maintenance of any outlet sewer and/or disposal and/or filtration plant, including the funds necessary to reimburse the county for the payment of principal and interest on bonds and certificates of indebtedness issued as provided by this act, for the benefit of such districts, the total amount for such purposes shall be apportioned between such districts according to equalized value of the real estate of the various towns and cities of one district as compared with such equalized value in the other district or districts. Upon receipt of same by the supervisors of such towns and the clerks of such cities they shall cause the amount of such assessment as apportioned by said board of supervisors to be apportioned and extended in the separate columns to be provided in the assessment rolls for that purpose against the lots or parcels of land in such towns or cities which shall appear on the assessment rolls to be within any such district and liable to the assessments therefor, as provided by this act. Thereupon a warrant shall be issued by the proper officer or officers of such towns and cities and delivered to the officer charged by law with the duty of collecting taxes. All such assessments shall be liens on the first day of April in each year. The same fees and penalties shall apply to the collection of such assessments as apply to the collection of state, county, town or city taxes in any such town or city within any such district and the lien thereof may be sold the same as the lien of state, county, town or city taxes in any such town or city within any such district is sold. The annual assessment rolls of the towns and cities within any such district shall be used for the purpose of such assessments and the assessors of said towns and cities shall make the annual assessment rolls in such form as to show the parcels of land subject to such assessments. Such assessment rolls shall also show the aggregate assessed value of all such parcels and shall contain a column for extending the district assessments against such parcels. Complaints in relation to the valuation of parcels for the district assessments shall be heard at the same time as complaints are heard for the general tax and such rolls shall be open for inspection accordingly. Any balance remaining in any such budget shall be credited to the succeeding budget. The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to the cities of Mount Vernon, White Plains and New Rochelle. In the city of Mount Vernon, the part of the tax of any such sewer district apportioned to and levied against said city as hereinbefore provided shall not be levied or assessed against the lots or parcels of land situate within such sewer district, but the amount of the tax so apportioned to such district shall be levied and assessed upon all the property real and personal, liable to general taxation within said city and not exempt therefrom and it shall be the duty of the city clerk of said city of Mount Vernon forthwith upon the filing of the resolution of the board of supervisors apportioning the amount of the tax for any such sewer district to be levied against the city of Mount Vernon, to extend said tax on the assessment rolls against all the real and personal property appearing upon the assessment rolls as liable to general taxation in said city. But such tax need not be extended in a separate column on such roll, but shall be included in the general city tax, provided, however, that the rate of said tax per centum of each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessment valuation shall be placed on each tax bill. In the cities of White Plains and New Rochelle the part of the tax of any such sewer district apportioned to and levied against said city as hereinbefore provided shall not be levied or assessed against the lots or parcels of land situate within such sewer district, but the amount of the tax so apportioned to such district shall be levied and assessed upon all of the property real and personal within said city, except such as may belong to the United States or used as a cemetery or exempt from taxes and assessments under the provisions of chapter two hundred and ninety-two of the laws of nineteen hundred and twenty-two as amended, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk of said cities of White Plains and New Rochelle forthwith upon the filing of the resolution of the board of supervisors apportioning the amount of the tax for such sewer district to be levied against the cities of White Plains and New Rochelle to extend said tax on the assessment rolls against all the real and personal property in said city appearing upon the assessment rolls against all the real and personal property as liable to taxation or assessment as herein provided. 
(Laws 1932, Ch. 149, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1932, Ch. 149, § 2)  
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING AUTHORITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 288, Laws of 1945, became a law March 27, 1945. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Established; organized, powers, duties.] 
Chapter eight hundred seventy of the laws of nineteen hundred thirty-nine, entitled "An act to compile in one chapter of the consolidated laws, for the purpose of public convenience, the several acts in relation to public authorities created or validated by the legislature, constituting chapter forty-three-a of the consolidated laws," is hereby amended by inserting in article six a new title, to be title twenty, to read as follows: 
§ 1281. White Plains housing authority. A municipal housing authority, to be known as the White Plains housing authority, is hereby created and established for the city of White Plains in the county of Westchester for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and consist of five (5) members. It shall have all the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred by the public housing law upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of the public housing law, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and its operations and activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions of the public housing law. 
(Laws 1945, Ch. 288, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1945, Ch. 288, § 2)  
DIVISION 3. - CITY CONSTITUTED PUBLIC WELFARE DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 539, Laws of 1946, became a law April 5, 1946. However, the city did not elect to constitute itself a city public welfare district. The Social Welfare Law was redesignated as Social Services Law by Laws 1967, Ch. 728, § 5, effective July 1, 1957. 
 
Sec. 1. - [City constituted public welfare district.] 
The city of White Plains, by action of its legislative body taken not later than November fifteenth, nineteen hundred forty-six, is hereby authorized and empowered to elect to constitute itself a city public welfare district and, in the event of such election, such city shall become and be constituted a city public welfare district on and after January first, nineteen hundred forty-seven, for the purpose of administering public assistance and care in such city on and after such date, under and pursuant to the provisions of the social welfare law [Social Services Law] and subject to all of the provisions of law governing and relating to city public welfare districts. 
(Laws 1946, Ch. 539, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Application of social services law.] 
Such city shall be deemed a city subject to the provisions of section seventy-five of the social welfare law [Social Services Law], as added by a chapter [5] of the laws of nineteen hundred forty-six, entitled "An act to amend the social welfare law, generally," and such city shall comply with and be subject to all of the provisions of such section and the rules and regulations, if any, adopted or promulgated, pursuant to the provisions of the social welfare law [Social Services Law], for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of such section. 
(Laws 1946, Ch. 539, § 2) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Known as Ch. 200, Laws of 1946. 
 
Sec. 3. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect April first, nineteen hundred forty-six. 
(Laws of 1946, Ch. 539, § 3)  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 698, Laws of 1947, became a law April 7, 1947. 
Code reference— Distribution of tax on fire insurance companies, § 2-4-1. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Disposition upon disbanding fire companies.] 
Upon the disbandment of any of the companies comprising the volunteer fire department of the city of White Plains, Westchester county, there shall be paid by the commissioner of finance of such city or other officer receiving the taxes for fire department use and benefit imposed by sections five hundred fifty-three and five hundred fifty-four of the insurance law upon premiums on policies of fire insurance on risks located in the city of White Plains, Westchester county, to the Exempt Firemen's Association of the village of White Plains, N. Y., a corporation duly organized under the laws of this state, such proportion of such taxes as the number of companies so disbanded bears to the total number of companies, comprising such volunteer fire department on the first day of January, nineteen hundred forty-seven. Such taxes shall only be used by such corporation for the care and relief of disabled or indigent volunteer and exempt firemen and their families. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 698, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 698, § 2)  
DIVISION 5. - PARKING AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 888, Laws 1947, creating the White Plains Parking Authority became a law April 15, 1947. Formerly Article 7, Title 8, Sections 1463—1481 of the Public Authorities Law, said law was renumbered Article 7, Title 2, Sections 1425—1443 of the Public Authorities Law by Laws 1957, Ch. 914. Said law is set out herein as renumbered and as amended by the various acts reflected in the history notes following the sections. 
Cross reference— Death benefits for beneficiaries of parking authority officers and employees, Art. A, Div. 13. 
Code reference— Metered parking, parking lots and off-street parking structures, § 8-2-86 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - [White Plains Parking Authority.] 
Chapter eight hundred seventy of the laws of nineteen hundred thirty-nine, entitled "An act to compile in one chapter of the consolidated laws, for the purpose of public convenience, the several acts in relation to public authorities created or validated by the legislature, constituting chapter forty-three-a of the consolidated laws," is hereby amended by inserting therein, and at the end and as a part of article seven thereof, a new title to be title eight, to read as follows: 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1)  
Sec. 1425. - Short title. 
This title may be cited as the "White Plains parking authority act." 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9)  
Sec. 1426. - Definitions. 
As used or referred to in this title, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  The term "authority" shall mean the corporation created by section one thousand four hundred twenty-seven of this title; 
(2)  The term "city" shall mean the city of White Plains; 
(3)  The term "bonds" shall mean the bonds authorized in this title; 
(4)  The term "board" shall mean the members of the authority; 
(5)  The term "real property" shall mean lands, structures, franchises, and interest in lands, and any and all things usually included within the said term, and includes not only fee simple absolute but also any and all lesser interests, such as easements, rights-of-way, uses, leases, licenses, and all other incorporeal hereditaments and every estate, interest or right, legal or equitable, including terms of years, and liens thereon by way of judgments, mortgages or otherwise, and also claims for damage to real estate; 
(6)  The term "project" shall mean any area or place operated or to be operated for the parking or storing of motor and other vehicles and shall, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, include all real and personal property, driveways, roads, approaches, structures, terminals of all kinds, garages, meters, machinery, apparatus and equipment, and all appurtenances and facilities either on, above or under the ground which are determined to be necessary or convenient in connection with the operation of any such area or place; 
(7)  The term "projects" shall mean more than one project; 
(8)  The term "bonds" shall mean bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the authority pursuant to this title; 
(9)  The term "construction," as applied to any project, shall include the erection, building, acquisition, alteration, reconstruction, improvement, enlargement or extension thereof, as the case may be, including the inspection and supervision thereof, and the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and economic investigations, studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures and other actions incidental thereto; 
(10)  The term "cost," as used with reference to any project or other corporate purpose of the authority, shall include the cost of the construction, the cost of the acquisition of all property, including real and personal property, improved or unimproved, and the cost of demolishing, removing or relocating any buildings, structures or other improvements on lands acquired for the project, the cost of all machinery, apparatus and equipment, the cost of all appurtenances and incidental facilities, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, the cost of engineering and architectural surveys, plans and specifications, the cost of legal and other professional services, the cost of lease guarantee or bond insurance, other expenses necessary or incidental to the construction of the project and the financing thereof, including the amount authorized in the resolution of the authority providing for the issuance of bonds to be paid into any reserve or other special fund from the proceeds of such bonds and the financing of the placing of the project in operation, including reimbursement to the city, any state agency, the state, the United States government, or any other person, for expenditures made with the prior approval of the authority, that would be costs of the project hereunder had they been made directly by the authority; 
(11)  The term "revenues" shall mean all rates, fees, rents, charges and all other income derived by the authority from its operations; and 
(12)  The term "state" shall mean the state of New York. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1958, Ch. 481, § 1; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 1427. - White Plains parking authority. 
(1)  A board to be known as "White Plains parking authority" is hereby created. Such board shall be a body corporate and politic, constituting a public benefit corporation. It shall consist of a chairman and six other members, who shall be appointed by the mayor of the city. On or before the first day of July, nineteen hundred eighty, the mayor shall appoint four members, two for terms of office expiring on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred eighty-two, and two for terms of office expiring on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred eighty-three. The two members appointed for terms of office expiring on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred eighty-two, shall be deemed to have been appointed to fill two existing vacancies in such board occurring by the expiration of the terms of office of two members heretofore appointed for terms expiring on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred seventy-nine. Each of three members whose term of office expires on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred eighty-one, shall continue to serve until such date or until the appointment and qualification of his successor. The terms of office of all successor members shall be three years, so that the term of office of one-third of such members, as nearly as possible, shall expire on the thirtieth day of June in each year. Each member shall continue to serve until the appointment and qualification of his successor. Vacancies in such board occurring otherwise than by the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term. The members of the board shall choose from their number a vice-chairman. The mayor may remove any member of the board for inefficiency, neglect of duty or misconduct in office, giving him a copy of the charges against him and an opportunity of being heard in person, or by counsel, in his defense upon not less than ten days' notice. The members of the board shall be entitled to no compensation for their services but shall be entitled to reimbursement for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. The powers of the authority shall be vested in and exercised by a majority of the members of the board then in office. Such board may delegate to one or more of its members or to its officers, agents and employees such powers and duties as it may deem proper. 
(2)  It is hereby determined and declared that the authority and the carrying out of its powers, purposes, and duties are in all respects for the benefit of the people of the city of White Plains and the state of New York, for the improvement of their health, welfare and prosperity and that said purposes are public purposes and that the authority is and will be performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by this title. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1954, Ch. 71, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 3)  
Sec. 1428. - Purpose and powers of the authority. 
The purpose of the authority shall be to construct, operate and maintain one or more projects in the city. To carry out said purpose, the authority shall have power: 
(1)  To sue and be sued; 
(2)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(3)  To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property for its corporate purposes, including the power to purchase prospective or tentative awards in connection with the condemnation of real property; 
(4)  To acquire by purchase, grant, lease, gift, condemnation or otherwise, and use real property necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to sell, convey, mortgage, lease, pledge, exchange, or otherwise dispose of such property in such manner as the authority may determine; provided that the location of the site of any project shall be subject to the prior approval of the planning board of the city. All real property acquired by the authority by condemnation shall be acquired in the manner provided in the eminent domain procedure law or in the manner provided by law for the condemnation of land by the city; 
(5)  To make bylaws for the management and regulation of its affairs, and, subject to agreements with bondholders, for the regulation of the project; 
(6)  With the consent of the city to use agents, employees, and facilities of the city, including the corporation counsel, paying to the city its agreed proportion of the compensation or costs; 
(7)  To appoint officers, agents and employees, to prescribe their qualifications and to fix their compensation; subject, however, to the provisions of the civil service law, as hereinafter provided; 
(8)  To make contracts and leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient; 
(9)  To construct such buildings, structures and facilities as may be necessary or convenient; 
(10)  To construct, develop, maintain and operate the projects and to contract in relation thereto with the city and with other persons, and to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any project or part thereof to any person, provided such person shall undertake to operate and maintain any project or part thereof subject to such conditions and limitations as the authority may determine to be in the public interest and consistent with its public purposes; 
(11)  To accept grants, loans or contributions from the United States, the state of New York, or any agency or instrumentality of either of them, or the city, and to expend the proceeds for any purposes of the authority; 
(12)  To fix and collect rentals, fees and other charges for the use of the projects or any of them subject to and in accordance with such agreements with bondholders as may be made as hereinafter provided; 
(13)  To construct, operate or maintain in the projects all facilities necessary or convenient in connection therewith; and to contract for the construction, operation or maintenance of any parts thereof or for services to be performed; to rent parts thereof, and grant concessions, all on such terms and conditions as it may determine. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 4)  
Sec. 1429. - Civil service status of officers and employees. 
Officers and employees of any board, commission or department of the city may be transferred to the authority in accordance with the provisions of the civil service law and shall be eligible for such transfer and appointment without examination to offices and positions under the authority. Officers and employees of the city who are members or beneficiaries of any existing pension or retirement system shall continue to have the rights, privileges, obligations and status with respect to such system or systems as are now prescribed by law, and all such employees who have been appointed to positions in the service of the city under the rules of the municipal civil service commission of the city shall have the same status with respect thereto after transfer to the authority as they had under their original appointments. The appointment and promotion of all employees of the authority shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the civil service law and the rules of the city civil service commission. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter nor the provisions of any other law, rule or regulation, the position and title of director of the White Plains parking authority is hereby established. Such position shall be in the unclassified service as defined in the civil service law. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any other law, rule or regulation, the positions and titles of deputy director I and deputy director II of the White Plains parking authority are hereby established. The positions of deputy director I and deputy director II shall be in the exempt class of the classified civil service as defined in the civil service law. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1969, Ch. 1038, § 1; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 5)  
Sec. 1430. - Conveyance of property by the city to the authority; acquisition of property by the city. 
(1)  The city may, by resolution or resolutions of the common council or by instruments authorized by such resolutions, convey, with or without consideration, to the authority title to real and personal property owned by the city for use by the authority as a project or projects or a part thereof. 
(2)  The city may acquire real property to be conveyed to the authority pursuant to subdivision one of this section or for the widening of existing roads, streets, parkways, avenues or highways or for new roads, streets, parkways, avenues or highways to any of the projects, or partly for such purposes and partly for other city purposes, by purchase or condemnation in the manner provided by law for the acquisition of real property by the city. The city may close such streets, roads, parkways, avenues, or highways as may be necessary or convenient. 
(3)  Contracts may be entered into between the city and the authority providing for the property to be conveyed by the city to the authority, the additional property to be acquired by the city and so conveyed, the streets, roads, parkways, avenues, and highways to be closed by the city and the amounts, terms and conditions of payment to be made by the authority. Such contracts may also contain covenants by the city as to the road, street, parkway, avenue and highway improvements to be made by the city. Any such contracts between the city and the authority may be pledged by the authority to secure its bonds and may not be modified thereafter except as provided by the terms of the pledge. The common council may authorize such contracts between the city and the authority and no other authorization on the part of the city for such contracts shall be necessary. Any such contracts may be so authorized and entered into by the city and in such manner as the common council may determine, and the payments required to be made by the city may be made and financed notwithstanding that no provision therefor shall have first been made in the capital budget of the city. All contractual or other obligations of the city incurred in carrying out the provisions of this title shall be included in and provided for by each capital budget of the city thereafter made, if and to the extent that they may appropriately be included therein. 
(4)  In case the authority shall determine that real property acquired at the cost and expense of the city is no longer required for its corporate purposes, the authority shall have power, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then exist, to reconveying such real property to the city without consideration. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 6)  
Sec. 1431. - Public work contracts. 
The authority shall let contracts for public work in the same manner, so far as practicable, as is provided by law for contracts of the city, except that where the estimated expense of a contract does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), such contract may be entered into without public letting. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the power of the authority to do any construction directly by the officers, agents and employees of the authority. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 7)  
Sec. 1432. - Moneys of the authority. 
All moneys of the authority shall be paid to the commissioner of finance of the city as agent of the authority, who shall not commingle such moneys with any other moneys. Such moneys shall be deposited in a separate bank account or accounts. The moneys in such accounts shall be paid out by the commissioner of finance on requisition of the chairman of the authority or of such other person or persons as the authority may authorize to make such requisitions after audit by the commissioner of finance. All deposits of such moneys shall, if required by the commissioner of finance or the authority, be secured by direct or guaranteed obligations of the United States or its agencies or of the state of New York of a market value equal at all times to the amount of the deposit, and all banks and trust companies are authorized to give such security for such deposits. The commissioner of finance and his legally authorized representatives are authorized and empowered from time to time to examine the accounts and books of the authority, including its receipts, disbursements, contracts, leases, sinking funds, investments and any other records and papers relating to its financial standing. The authority shall have power, notwithstanding the provisions of this section, to contract with the holders of any of its bonds as to the custody, collection, securing, investment and payment of any moneys of the authority or any moneys held in trust or otherwise for the payment of bonds or in any way to secure bonds, and to carry out any such contract notwithstanding that such contract may be inconsistent with the previous provisions of this section. Moneys held in trust or otherwise for the payment of bonds or in any way to secure bonds and deposits of such moneys may be secured in the same manner as moneys of the authority, and all banks and trust companies are authorized to give such security for such deposits. 
The accounts of the authority shall be subject to the supervision of the state comptroller. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 8)  
Sec. 1433. - Bonds of the authority. 
(1)  The authority shall have the power and is hereby authorized from time to time to issue its bonds in conformity with applicable provisions of the uniform commercial code in such principal amounts as may be determined by the authority to be necessary to pay all or part of the cost of any project or any other corporate purpose. The authority shall have power from time to time and whenever it deems refunding expedient, to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether the bonds to be refunded have or have not matured, and may issue bonds partly to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other corporate purpose. The refunding bonds may be exchanged for the bonds to be refunded, with such cash adjustments as may be agreed, or may be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase or payment of the bonds to be refunded. Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by the authority, the bonds of every issue shall be general obligations of the authority payable out of any moneys or revenues of the authority, subject only to any agreements with the holders of particular bonds pledging any particular moneys or revenues. 
(2)  The bonds shall be authorized by resolution of the board and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, not exceeding thirty years from their respective dates, bear interest at such rate or rates, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States of America at such place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption, as such resolution or resolutions may provide. The bonds may be sold at private sale subject to the approval of the state comptroller or at a public sale for such price or prices as the authority shall determine. 
(3)  Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds may contain provisions, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders of the bonds thereby authorized, as to: 
(a)  Pledging all or any part of the revenues derived by the authority from the ownership or operation of, or otherwise in connection with, any project or projects or any part or parts thereof to secure the payment of the bonds, or of any issue thereof, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then exist; 
(b)  The rates, rentals, fees and other charges to be charged, and the amounts to be raised in each year thereby, and the use and disposition of revenues; 
(c)  The creation and setting aside of reserves or sinking funds, and the regulation and disposition thereof; 
(d)  Limitations on the right of the authority to restrict and regulate the use of a project; 
(e)  Limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds of sale of any issue of bonds then or thereafter to be issued may be applied and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment of the bonds or of any issue of the bonds; 
(f)  Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds; the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured; the refunding of outstanding or other bonds; 
(g)  The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given; 
(h)  Limitations on the amount of moneys derived from a project to be expended for operating, administrative or other expenses of the authority; 
(i)  Vesting in a trustee or trustees such property, rights, powers and duties in trust as the authority may determine which may include any or all of the rights, powers and duties of the trustee appointed by the bondholders pursuant to section one thousand four hundred thirty-nine hereof, and limiting or abrogating the right of the bondholders to appoint a trustee under said section or limiting the rights, duties and powers of such trustee; 
(j)  Any other matters, of like or different character, which in any way affect the security or protection of the bonds. 
(4)  It is the intention hereof that any pledge of revenues or other moneys made by the authority shall be valid and binding from the time when the pledge is made; that the revenues or other moneys so pledged and thereafter received by the authority shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act; and that the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in court, contract or otherwise against the authority irrespective of whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution not any other security instrument by which a pledge is created need be recorded or filed. 
(5)  Neither the members of the authority nor any person executing the bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof. 
(6)  The authority shall have power out of any funds available therefor to purchase bonds. The authority may hold, cancel or resell such bonds, subject to and in accordance with agreements with bondholders. 
(7)  In the discretion of the authority, the bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company in the state of New York. Such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the construction, maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the project or projects, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all moneys, and may provide that the project or projects shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers. Notwithstanding the provisions of section one thousand four hundred thirty-two, the authority may provide by such trust indenture for the payment of the proceeds of the bonds and the revenues of the project or projects to the trustee under such trust indenture or other depository, and for the method of disbursement thereof, with such safeguards and restrictions as it may determine. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repairs of the project or projects. If the bonds shall be secured by a trust indenture, the bondholders shall have no authority to appoint a separate trustee to represent them, and the trustee under such trust indenture shall have and possess all of the powers which are conferred by section one thousand four hundred thirty-nine upon a trustee appointed by bondholders. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1957, Ch. 1039, § 1; Laws 1958, Ch. 481, §§ 2, 3; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, §§ 9, 10)  
Sec. 1434. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1434, authorizing the parking authority to issue notes, was repealed by Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 11. The section had formerly been derived from Laws: 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; 1957, Ch. 914, § 9 and 1039, § 2; 1958, Ch. 481, § 4.  
Sec. 1435. - Agreements of the state. 
(1)  The state of New York does pledge to and agree with the holders of the bonds that the state will not limit or alter the rights hereby vested in the authority to acquire, construct, maintain, reconstruct and operate the project or projects, to establish and collect rentals, fees and other charges and to fulfill the terms of any agreements made with the holders of the bonds, or in any way impair the rights and remedies of the bondholders, until the bonds, together with interest thereon, with interest on any unpaid installments of interest and all costs and expenses in connection with any action or proceeding by or on behalf of the bondholders, are fully met and discharged. 
(2)  The authority is hereby authorized, in its discretion, for and on behalf of itself and the city of White Plains, to covenant and agree with the holders of the bonds, with such exceptions and limitations as it may deem in the public interest, that no public parking areas or places except those constructed by the authority will be constructed or operated in the city by the city, or by any public benefit or other corporation the members of which are elected or are appointed by city officials, until all bonds, together with interest thereon, interest on any unpaid installments of interest and all costs and expenses in connection with any action or proceeding by or on behalf of the bondholders are fully met and discharged or adequate provision has been made for the payment thereof. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1948, Ch. 400; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 12)  
Sec. 1436. - State and city not liable on bonds. 
The bonds and other obligations of the authority shall not be a debt of the state of New York or of the city, and neither the state not the city shall be liable thereon, nor shall they be payable out of any funds other than those of the authority. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9)  
Sec. 1437. - Bonds legal investments for public officers and fiduciaries. 
The bonds are hereby made securities in which all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations, investment companies and other persons carrying on a banking business, all administrators, guardians, executors, trustees and other fiduciaries and all other persons whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or other obligations of the state, may properly and legally invest funds including capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds are also hereby made securities which may be deposited with and shall be received by all public officers and bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions for any purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of this state is now or may hereafter be authorized. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914)  
Sec. 1438. - Tax contract by state. 
The state of New York covenants with the purchasers and with all subsequent holders and transferees of bonds issued by the authority pursuant to this title, in consideration of the acceptance of and payment for the bonds, that the bonds of the authority issued pursuant to this title and the income therefrom, and all moneys, funds and revenues pledged to pay or secure the payment of such bonds, shall at all times be free from taxation except for estate taxes and taxes on transfers by or in contemplation of death. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9)  
Sec. 1439. - Remedies of bondholders. 
(1)  In the event that the authority shall default in the payment of principal of or interest on any issue of the bonds after the same shall become due, whether at maturity or upon call for redemption, and such default shall continue for a period of thirty (30) days, or in the event that the authority shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this title, or shall default in any agreement made with the holders of any issue of the bonds, the holders of twenty-five per centum (25%) in aggregate principal amount of the bonds of such issue then outstanding, by instrument or instruments filed in the office of the clerk of the county of Westchester and proved or acknowledged in the same manner as a deed to be recorded, may appoint a trustee to represent the holders of such bonds for the purposes herein provided. 
(2)  Such trustee may, and upon written request of the holders of twenty-five per centum (25%) in principal amount of such bonds then outstanding shall, in his or its own name: 
(a)  By suit, action or special proceeding enforce all rights of the bondholders, including the right to require the authority to collect revenues adequate to carry out by any agreement as to, or pledge of, such revenues, and to require the authority to carry out any other agreements with the holders of such bonds and to perform its duties under this title; 
(b)  Bring suit upon such bonds; 
(c)  By action or suit in equity, require the authority to account as if it were the trustee of an express trust for the holders of such bonds; 
(d)  By action or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawful or in violation of the rights of the holders of such bonds; 
(e)  Declare all such bonds due and payable, and if all defaults shall be made good then with the consent of the holders of twenty-five per centum (25%) of the principal amount of such bonds then outstanding, to annul such declaration and its consequences. 
(3)  The supreme court shall have jurisdiction of any suit, action or proceeding by the trustee on behalf of bondholders. The venue of any such suit, action or proceeding shall be laid in the county of Westchester. 
(4)  Before declaring the principal of all such bonds due and payable, the trustee shall first give thirty (30) days' notice in writing to the authority. 
(5)  Any such trustee, whether or not the issue of bonds represented by such trustee has been declared due and payable, shall be entitled as of right to the appointment of a receiver of any part or parts of the project the revenues of which are pledged for the security of the bonds of such issue, and such receiver may enter and take possession of such part or parts of the project and, subject to any pledge or agreement with bondholders, shall take possession of all revenues or other moneys and other property derived from or applicable to the construction, operation and maintenance of such part or parts of the project and proceed with the acquisition of any real property necessary or convenient in connection with the project that the authority has covenanted to construct, and with any construction which the authority is under obligation to do and to operate and maintain such part or parts of the project and collect and receive all revenues thereafter arising therefrom subject to any pledge thereof or agreement with bondholders relating thereto and perform the public duties and carry out the agreements and obligations of the authority under the direction of the court. In any suit, action or proceeding by the trustee, the fee, counsel fees and expenses of the trustee and of the receiver, if any, shall constitute taxable disbursements and all costs and disbursements allowed by the court shall be a first charge on any revenues derived from such project. 
(6)  Such trustee shall, in addition to the foregoing, have and possess all of the powers necessary or appropriate for the exercise of any functions specifically set forth herein or incident to the general representation of bondholders in the enforcement and protection of their rights. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914; Laws 1962, Ch. 310, § 345; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 13)  
Sec. 1440. - Actions against the authority. 
(1)  In every action against the authority for damages, for injuries to real or personal property, or for the destruction thereof, or for personal injuries or death, the complaint shall contain an allegation that at least thirty (30) days have elapsed since the demand, claim or claims upon which such action is founded were presented to a member of the authority, or to its secretary, or to its chief executive officer and that the authority has neglected or refused to make an adjustment or payment thereof for thirty (30) days after such presentment. 
(2)  An action against the authority for damages for injuries to real or personal property, or for the destruction thereof, or for personal injuries or death, alleged to have been sustained, shall not be commenced more than one year after the cause of action therefor shall have accrued, nor unless a notice of intention to commence such action and of the time when and place where the damages or personal injuries or death were incurred or sustained, together with a verified statement showing in detail the property alleged to have been damaged or destroyed and the value thereof, or the personal injuries alleged to have been sustained and by whom, shall have been filed with the secretary of the authority in the principal office of the authority within six (6) months after such cause of action shall have accrued. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9)  
Sec. 1441. - Termination of the authority and disposition of properties. 
The authority and its corporate existence shall continue only to the thirtieth day of June, two thousand ten, and thereafter until all its liabilities have been met and its bonds have been paid in full or such liabilities or bonds have otherwise been discharged. Upon its ceasing to exist, all its rights and properties shall pass to the city. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1954, Ch. 71, § 2; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9; Laws 1958, Ch. 481, § 5; Laws 1980, Ch. 769, § 14)  
Sec. 1442. - Title not affected if in part unconstitutional or ineffective. 
If any section, clause or provision of this title shall be unconstitutional or be ineffective in whole or in part, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or ineffective, it shall be valid and effective and no other section, clause or provision shall on account thereof be deemed invalid or ineffective. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9)  
Sec. 1443. - Inconsistent provisions in other acts superseded. 
Insofar as the provisions of this title are inconsistent with the provisions of any other act, general or special, or of any local law of the city, the provisions of this title shall be controlling. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 1; Laws 1957, Ch. 914, § 9)  
Sec. 2. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1947, Ch. 888, § 2)  
DIVISION 6. - STATE LANDS CONVEYED TO CITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 779, Laws 1954, became a law April 17, 1954. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Lands conveyed.] 
The board of commissioners of the land office is hereby authorized in its discretion, in consideration of one dollar ($1.00) to be paid to the state of New York, and for the purpose of releasing and waiving the restriction as to use of the lands hereinafter mentioned for park or educational purposes, and on such terms and conditions as such board may impose, to grant, release and convey to the city of White Plains all rights and interests of the people of the state of New York in and to those parcels of land situate in the said city of White Plains the title to which was acquired by the people of the state of New York by two (2) certain deeds, one dated the thirteenth day of April, nineteen hundred twenty-two, made by Margaretta K. Welsh and Henry B. Welsh, individually and as executors of the last will and testament of Henry Welsh, deceased, and recorded in the office of the clerk of the county of Westchester (division of land records) on the fourteenth day of April, nineteen hundred twenty-two in liber 2359 of deeds, page 167, the other dated the fourteenth day of April, nineteen hundred twenty-two, made by Minnie McCabe and William F. McCabe, Jr., individually and as executors of the last will and testament of William F. McCabe, deceased, and recorded in said clerk's office on the fourteenth day of April, nineteen hundred and twenty-two in liber 2358 of deeds, page 315, which said parcels of land were given to the people of the state of New York by the said city of White Plains as a site for a state normal and training school in the county of Westchester for the education and training of teachers to be employed in the public schools of the state, authorized by chapter two hundred and thirty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred seventeen, and which said parcels of land were thereafter conveyed by the people of the state of New York to the city of White Plains, for park or educational purposes, pursuant to authorization of chapter one hundred twenty-one of the laws of nineteen hundred forty and resolution of the board of commissioners of the Land Office adopted June eighteenth, nineteen hundred forty, by conveyance dated June twenty-second, nineteen hundred forty, recorded in the said clerk's office on the thirtieth day of July, nineteen hundred forty, in liber 3848 of deeds, page 111, which lands have never been used by the state or the said city for park or educational purposes or for any other purpose. 
(Laws 1954, Ch. 779, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1954, Ch. 779, § 2)  
DIVISION 7. - STATE ARTERIAL HIGHWAYS 
 
Sec. 1. - [Highway law amended.] 
That part of section three hundred forty-nine-e of the highway law which designates state arterial highways in the city of White Plains, as last amended by chapter five hundred twelve of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two, is hereby amended to read as follows: 
CITY OF WHITE PLAINS 
(1)  Beginning at a point, to be determined by the commissioner, on the westerly line of city of White Plains, south of Old Mamaroneck road, thence northerly on new location to and on or along Bloomingdale road to Westchester avenue, thence easterly on or in the vicinity of Westchester avenue to the easterly line of the city of White Plains. Approximate length 1.5 miles. 
(2)  Beginning at or near the intersection of Westchester avenue and Bloomingdale road in the city of White Plains, thence westerly on or in the vicinity of Westchester avenue to North Broadway, thence northwesterly on or in the vicinity of North Broadway to Hamilton avenue, thence generally westerly on or in the vicinity of Hamilton avenue to Central avenue, thence northwesterly on or in the vicinity of Central avenue to the northerly city line of White Plains, west of the Bronx River parkway; also returning from a point at or near Central avenue and Hamilton avenue southeasterly along or in the vicinity of Central avenue to Main street, thence generally easterly on or in the vicinity of Main street to North Broadway, thence southeasterly on or in the vicinity of North Broadway to Armory place, thence northeasterly on or in the vicinity of Armory place to Westchester avenue. Approximate length 2.6 miles. 
(3)  Beginning with an arterial route described in paragraph two above, thence northerly on or in the vicinity of Grove street to or in the vicinity of North Lexington avenue and northwesterly on new location to Central Park avenue, thence southwesterly on or in the vicinity of Central Park avenue to the westerly city line of White Plains, state highway one thousand three hundred seventy; also returning from a point near North Lexington avenue, thence southerly on or in the vicinity of North and South Lexington avenue to the arterial route described in paragraph two above, including connections from this arterial route on or in the vicinity of South Lexington avenue and Grove street with existing streets. Approximate length 1.9 miles. 
(Laws 1944, Ch. 543, § 1; Laws 1955, Ch. 533, § 1; Laws 1961, Ch. 695, § 1; Laws 1962, Ch. 512, § 1; Laws 1969, Ch. 926, § 1; Laws 1976, Ch. 790, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1944, Ch. 543, § 1; Laws 1969, Ch. 926, § 2)  
DIVISION 8. - CAPITAL NOTES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 120, Laws of 1956 became a law March 19, 1956. Said law is set out herein as amended by the various acts included in the history notes following the sections. 
Charter reference— Department of finance; commissioner of finance; tax budget and bonds, Art. V. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Issuance; periods of probable usefulness; maturity; renewal; private sale; unpaid balance.] 
The city of White Plains is hereby authorized and empowered to issue capital notes to finance all or part of the cost of any object or purpose which has at least a five (5) year period of probable usefulness as provided in Section 11.00 of the local finance law and for which serial bonds may be issued by the city. Such notes shall mature within one year from the date of their issue and may be renewed from time to time, but each renewal shall be for a period not exceeding one year and in no event shall such notes or the renewals thereof extend more than five (5) years beyond such original date of issue. The first annual renewal note, if any, may not exceed eighty per centum (80%) of the amount of the original note; the second, if any, may not exceed sixty per centum (60%); the third, if any, may not exceed forty per centum (40%); and the fourth, if any, may not exceed twenty per centum (20%); but no annual payment on account of such note or renewals thereof shall exceed by more than fifty per centum (50%) the amount of the smallest prior annual payment. Such notes, if sold at private sale, shall bear interest at a rate not in excess of three and one-half per centum (3½%) per annum. The unpaid amount of such notes shall be included as an obligation and indebtedness of the city in computing and ascertaining its annual debt limit. 
(Laws 1956, Ch. 120, § 1; Laws 1958, Ch. 21, § 1; Laws 1966, Ch. 573, § 1) 
Cross reference— Issuance of bonds, notes, etc., by city, App. Pt. I, Sub. C.  
Sec. 2. - [Applicability of local finance law.] 
Except as herein provided, the provisions of the local finance law shall apply to such notes in relation to their authorization, terms, form, contents, sale, execution, cancellation and destruction, use of proceeds and advances from funds. 
(Laws 1956, Ch. 120, § 2) 
Editor's note— Section 2, Ch. 188, Laws of 1969 which became effective April 15, 1969, reads in part: "Notwithstanding sections **60** of the Local Finance Law, any municipality may at any time prior to the 31st day of March, 1970 agree or contract to pay interest on bonds or notes issued under such sections at such rate or rates, without limit, as may be necessary for such municipality** to sell such bonds or notes." 
State Law reference— Sale of notes, Local Finance Law, § 60.  
Sec. 3. - [Applicability, effectiveness of provisions.] 
The provisions of this act shall be effective notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, general, special or local. The power and authority granted hereunder shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other power and authority of the city under the local finance law or any other law. 
(Laws 1956, Ch. 120, § 3)  
Sec. 4. - [Issuance of serial bonds for purpose of refunding capital notes.] 
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special or local law the city of White Plains is hereby authorized to issue serial bonds for the object or purpose of refunding in whole or in part any capital note, or renewal thereof, of said city issued pursuant to this act. Subject to the requirements of section two of article eight of the constitution, such bonds shall be issued within five (5) years after the date of the original capital note and the first installment of such bonds shall mature not later than eighteen (18) months after the date of such bonds or five (5) years after the date of such original note, whichever is the earlier. Except as otherwise provided in this act, such bonds shall be issued in accordance with and subject to the provisions of section 91.00 of the local finance law. 
(Laws 1960, Ch. 227, § 1)  
Sec. 5. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1956, Ch. 120, § 3)  
DIVISION 9. - BOUNDARY LINE BETWEEN CITY OF WHITE PLAINS, CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, TOWN OF HARRISON IN THE CROSS WESTCHESTER EXPRESSWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY, BETWEEN THE FORMER CENTRAL WESTCHESTER PARKWAY AND MAPLEMOOR GOLF COURSE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 381, Laws 1960, became a law April 7, 1960. 
Charter reference— City boundaries established, § 2; city boundaries may be marked; no adverse title obtained by encroachment, § 283. 
Related laws references— Establishment of boundary line between City of White Plains and Town of North Castle, Art. B, Div. 1; boundary line between city, city school district and Town of Harrison, between a point in the center line of Cross Westchester Expressway and a point in Silver Lake, Art. A, Div. 11. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Boundary line established.] 
The boundary line between the city of White Plains, the city school district of the city of White Plains and the town of Harrison in the Cross Westchester Expressway right-of-way, formerly Westchester Avenue, between the former Central Westchester Parkway and the Maplemoor Golf Course, is hereby declared to be as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the present boundary line between the town of Harrison and the city of White Plains, north of Westchester Avenue and west of Underhill Avenue, where said boundary line is intersected by the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway at station 266+82, of said expressway center line stationing; running thence southerly and easterly along the center line of said Cross Westchester Expressway to station 374+00 of said expressway center line stationing; running thence southwesterly on a line radial to said expressway center line a distance of about three hundred ninety feet to a point in the Maplemoor Golf Course on the present boundary line between the town of Harrison and the city of White Plains. 
(Laws 1960, Ch. 381, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Territory placed within city by boundary line change to constitute part of city.] 
The additional territory placed within the city of White Plains by the said boundary line change shall be included within and constitute part of the city of White Plains and of the fifth and sixth wards, respectively, of said city, contiguous to said additional lands, and shall also be included within and constitute part of the city school district of the city of White Plains, and shall be subject to all laws applicable thereto. 
(Laws 1960, Ch. 381, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - [Territory separated from city by boundary line change to constitute part of town of Harrison.] 
The territory separated from the city of White Plains by the said boundary line change shall be part of the town of Harrison, and shall be included within and constitute part of the contiguous school districts in the said town. 
(Laws 1960, Ch. 381, § 3)  
Sec. 4. - [Referendum vote; apportionment of taxes, etc., not required.] 
It is determined that a referendum vote of residents, and apportionments of taxes or of bonded or other indebtedness, are not required, and are hereby dispensed with, inasmuch as all of the territory affected by this act is uninhabited and owned by the state of New York or county of Westchester; and none of said territory is property assessed for taxation in either the city of White Plains or town of Harrison. The territory affected by this act shall henceforth be subject to and part of the respective jurisdictions in which placed by this act and shall be subject to the respective laws and ordinances applicable to such city, city school district and town, respectively. 
(Laws 1960, Ch. 381, § 4)  
Sec. 5. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1960, Ch. 381, § 5)  
DIVISION 10. - URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 573, Laws 1963 became a law April 23, 1963. Said law is set out herein as amended by Ch. 928, laws 1964. 
Cross reference— Death benefits for beneficiaries of urban renewal agency officers and employees, Art. A, Div. 12. 
Code reference— Payments in lieu of taxes, § 2-4-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Established; purpose; composition; appointment of members; duration.] 
A municipal urban renewal agency, to be known as the White Plains urban renewal agency, is hereby established for the accomplishment of any or all of the objects or purposes specified in articles fifteen and fifteen-A of the general municipal law and in accordance with article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. Such agency shall constitute a body corporate and politic, and shall consist of five (5) members. The members of such agency shall be appointed by the mayor of such city who may appoint himself as one of such members. Such agency shall be perpetual in duration, except that in the event that the certificate to be executed and filed by such mayor pursuant to subdivision one of section five hundred fifty-three of the general municipal law is not filed and approved by the state commissioner of housing and community renewal prior to July first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, then the corporate existence of such agency shall thereupon terminate and such agency shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved. 
(Laws 1963, Ch. 573, § 1; Laws 1964, Ch. 266, § 583; Laws 1964, Ch. 928, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Powers, duties; organization.] 
Such agency shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred by article fifteen-A of the general municipal law upon municipal urban renewal agencies, and shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and shall be subject to the provisions of such article. Such agency, its members, officers and employees and its operations and activities, shall, in all respects, be governed by the provisions of articles fifteen and fifteen-A of the general municipal law. 
(Laws 1963, Ch. 573, § 2; Laws 1964, Ch. 266, § 583)  
Sec. 3. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1963, Ch. 573, § 2)  
DIVISION 11. - BOUNDARY LINE BETWEEN CITY, CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT AND TOWN OF HARRISON BETWEEN A POINT IN THE CENTER LINE OF THE CROSS WESTCHESTER EXPRESSWAY AND A POINT IN SILVER LAKE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Charter reference— City boundaries established, § 2; city boundaries may be marked; no adverse title obtained by encroachment, § 283. 
Related laws references— Boundary line between City of White Plains and Town of North Castle, Art. B, Div. 1; boundary line between city, city school district; Town of Harrison in the Cross Westchester Expressway right-of-way, between the former Central Westchester Parkway and Maplemoor Golf Course, Art. A, Div. 9. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Boundary line established.] 
The boundary line between the city of White Plains, the city school district of the city of White Plains and the town of Harrison between a point in the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway and a point in Silver Lake, is hereby declared to be as follows: 
Beginning at a point in the center line mall of the Cross Westchester Expressway, designated as an interstate road F.I.C.W.E. 56-1, at center line Sta. 266+82 as shown on sheet #35 of the construction plans for said expressway, prepared by Charles Sells, Consulting Engineers and dated October 1956; said point beginning at the intersection of the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway and the present boundary line of the town of Harrison and the city of White Plains and former center line of the Mamaroneck River, running thence in the center line mall N 34° 08' 35? W 301.47 feet; thence northerly along a section of the easterly side of the bridge ramp and continuing along the easterly edge of the concrete ramp pavement the following courses and distances: northerly on a curve to the left having a radius of 1000.00 feet a distance of 198.55 feet thence; N 67° 06' 47? W 5.70 feet, then northerly on a curve to the left having a radius of 1150.00 feet a distance of 199.56 feet; thence northerly on a curve to the left having a radius of 850.00 feet a distance of 214.41 feet, then N 1° 19' 40? E a distance of 122.61 feet, then northwesterly on a curve to the left having a radius of 859.38 feet a distance of 531.31 feet to a point thence leaving said pavement N 4° 40' 50? W a distance of 383.70 feet to the westerly edge of a travelled way; thence northerly along said westerly edge of travelled way, N 3° 40' 50? W a distance of 457.00 feet thence northerly on a curve to the right having a radius of 1200.00 feet a distance of 370.56 feet, then northerly along said westerly edge of travelled way the following courses and distances: N 17° 03' 50? E 135.00 feet; N 16° 04' 26? E 200.00 feet N 16° 25' 40? E 200.00 feet; then northeasterly on a curve to the right having a radius of 845.90 feet a distance of 385.17 feet thence leaving said travelled way and proceeding N 27° 21' 30? W a distance of 115.15 feet, then 44° 15' E a distance of 141.01 feet and crossing Lake Street thence N 74° 20' E a distance of 124.43 feet, then N 44° 48' E a distance of 40.00 feet to a point in Silver Lake on the present boundary line. Said proposed boundary line is shown on a map prepared by the Munson Co., Land Surveyors, dated March 7, 1962, revised February 10, 1964, and to be filed in the County Clerk's Office, Division of Land Records, Westchester County, New York. 
(Laws 1964, Ch. 610, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Territory placed within city by boundary line change to constitute part of city.] 
The additional territory placed within the city of White Plains by the said boundary line change shall be included within and constitute part of the city of White Plains and of the fifth ward of said city, contiguous to said additional lands, and shall also be included within and constitute part of the city school district of the city of White Plains, and shall be subject to all laws applicable thereto. 
(Laws 1964, Ch. 610, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - [Territory separated from city by boundary line change to constitute part of town of Harrison.] 
The territory separated from the city of White Plains by the said boundary line change shall be part of the town of Harrison, and shall be included within and constitute part of the contiguous school districts in the said town. 
(Laws 1964, Ch. 610, § 3)  
Sec. 4. - [Referendum vote; apportionment of taxes, etc., not required.] 
It is determined that a referendum vote of residents, and apportionments of taxes or of bonded or other indebtedness, are not required, and are hereby dispensed with, inasmuch as all of the territory affected by this act is uninhabited and owned by the state of New York or the county of Westchester; and none of said territory is property assessed for taxation in either the city of White Plains or town of Harrison. The territory affected by this act shall henceforth be subject to and part of the respective jurisdictions in which placed by this act and shall be subject to the respective laws and ordinances applicable to such city, city school districts and town, respectively. 
(Laws 1964, Ch. 610, § 4)  
Sec. 5. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1964, Ch. 610, § 5)  
DIVISION 12. - DEATH BENEFITS FOR BENEFICIARIES OF URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 475, Laws 1966 became a law May 31, 1966. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Authorized; basis for determination.] 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in addition to any benefits otherwise provided, death benefit may be payable upon the death of a paid officer or employee of the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency, hereinafter referred to as the agency, if, upon application therefor, the chairman or vice-chairman of the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency shall determine, on the basis of the evidence, that such paid officer or employee: 
(a)  Died within one year after, and as the natural and proximate result of injuries sustained at a definite time and place and incurred in the performance of duty as such paid officer or employee, and 
(b)  Did not cause such accident by his own wilful negligence. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 475, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Amount of benefit.] 
The death benefit shall be paid by the agency upon the allowance of the claim therefor, and shall consist of: 
(a)  An amount equal to the salary received by such paid officer or employee either during the year immediately preceding his death, or during the year preceding such injuries, whichever is greater and 
(b)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each child of such paid officer or employee under eighteen (18) on the date of the paid officer's or employee's death. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 475, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - [To whom benefit payable.] 
The death benefit shall be paid to: 
(a)  Such paid officer's or employee's widow, or widower, or if he or she shall leave no widow or widower, or if his widow or her widower shall die before receiving the total of the amounts provided in section two hereof, then to 
(b)  His or her child or children under age eighteen (18), in equal amounts. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 475, § 3)  
Sec. 4. - [Application for benefit—By whom made.] 
Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(a)  By such paid officer's or employee's widow or widower. 
(b)  By any of his or her children. 
(c)  By any person in behalf of the widow or widower or children. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 475, § 4)  
Sec. 5. - [Same—To whom made; time requirements.] 
Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(a)  To the chief fiscal officer of the agency, on a form to be prescribed and supplied by him requiring such information as he shall determine necessary. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after the death of such paid officer or employee, provided, however, that failure to file the application within thirty (30) days may be excused on petition to and order of a justice of the supreme court having jurisdiction, upon a showing either: 
(1)  That a sufficient reason exists why such notice was not given. 
(2)  That a report or other notice was made or given to the chairman, vice-chairman or executive director of the agency of the injuries within the thirty (30) day period. 
(3)  That the agency has not been prejudiced by the delay in giving the notice. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 475, § 5)  
Sec. 6. - [Benefits subject to availability of funds.] 
The benefits of this act are subject to the appropriate federal and state authorities making funds available for any payments to be made hereunder or permitting the use by the agency of its funds for such payments. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 475, § 6)  
Sec. 7. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 475, § 7)  
DIVISION 13. - DEATH BENEFITS FOR BENEFICIARIES OF PARKING AUTHORITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 563, Laws 1966 became a law June 14, 1966. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Authorized; basis for determination.] 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in addition to any benefits otherwise provided, death benefit may be payable upon the death of a paid officer or employee of the White Plains Parking Authority, hereinafter referred to as the authority, if, upon application therefor, the chairman or vice-chairman of the White Plains Parking Authority shall determine, on the basis of the evidence, that such paid officer or employee: 
(a)  Died within one year after, and as the natural and proximate result of injuries sustained at a definite time and place and incurred in the performance of duty as such paid officer or employee, and 
(b)  Did not cause such accident by his own wilful negligence. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 563, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Amount of benefit.] 
The death benefit shall be paid by the authority upon the allowance of the claim therefor, and shall consist of: 
(a)  An amount equal to the salary received by such paid officer or employee either during the year immediately preceding his death, or during the year preceding such injuries, whichever is greater and 
(b)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each child of such paid officer or employee under eighteen (18) on the date of the paid officer's or employee's death. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 563, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - [To whom benefit payable.] 
The death benefit shall be paid to: 
(a)  Such paid officer's or employee's widow, or widower, or if he or she shall leave no widow or widower, or if his widow or her widower shall die before receiving the total of the amounts provided in section two hereof, then to 
(b)  His or her child or children under age eighteen (18), in equal amounts. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 563, § 3)  
Sec. 4. - [Application for benefit—By whom made.] 
Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(a)  By such paid officer's or employee's widow or widower. 
(b)  By any of his or her children. 
(c)  By any person in behalf of the widow or widower or children. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 563, § 4)  
Sec. 5. - [Same—To whom made; time requirements.] 
Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(a)  To the chief fiscal officer of the authority, on a form to be prescribed and supplied by him requiring such information as he shall determine necessary. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after the death of such paid officer or employee, provided, however, that failure to file the application within thirty (30) days may be excused on petition to and order of a justice of the supreme court having jurisdiction, upon a showing either: 
(1)  That a sufficient reason exists why such notice was not given. 
(2)  That a report or other notice was made or given to the chairman, vice-chairman or executive secretary of the authority of the injuries within the thirty (30) day period. 
(3)  That the authority has not been prejudiced by the delay in giving the notice. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 563, § 5)  
Sec. 6. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 563, § 6)  
DIVISION 14. - DEATH BENEFITS FOR BENEFICIARIES OF HOUSING AUTHORITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 600, Laws 1966 became a law June 14, 1966. 
Cross reference— Housing Authority established, organized, powers and duties, App. Pt. II, Sub. D. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Authorized; basis for determination.] 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in addition to any benefits otherwise provided, death benefit may be payable upon the death of a paid officer or employee of the White Plains Housing Authority, hereinafter referred to as the authority, if, upon application therefor, the chairman or vice-chairman of the White Plains Housing Authority shall determine, on the basis of the evidence, that such paid officer or employee: 
(a)  Died within one year after, and as the natural and proximate result of injuries sustained at a definite time and place and incurred in the performance of duty as such paid officer or employee, and 
(b)  Did not cause such accident by his own wilful negligence. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 600, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Amount of benefit.] 
The death benefit shall be paid by the authority upon the allowance of the claim therefor, and shall consist of: 
(a)  An amount equal to the salary received by such paid officer or employee either during the year immediately preceding his death, or during the year preceding such injuries, whichever is greater and 
(b)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each child of such paid officer or employee under eighteen (18) on the date of the paid officer's or employee's death. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 600, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - [To whom benefit payable.] 
The death benefit shall be paid to: 
(a)  Such paid officer's or employee's widow, or widower, or if he or she shall leave no widow or widower, or if his widow or her widower shall die before receiving the total of the amounts provided in section two hereof, then to 
(b)  His or her child or children under age eighteen (18), in equal amounts. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 600, § 3)  
Sec. 4. - [Application for benefit—By whom made.] 
Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(a)  By such paid officer's or employee's widow or widower. 
(b)  By any of his or her children. 
(c)  By any person in behalf of the widow or widower or children. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 600, § 4)  
Sec. 5. - [Same—To whom made; time requirements.] 
Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(a)  To the chief fiscal officer of the authority, on a form to be prescribed and supplied by him requiring such information as he shall determine necessary. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days after the death of such paid officer or employee, provided, however, that failure to file the application within thirty (30) days may be excused on petition to and order of a justice of the supreme court having jurisdiction, upon a showing either: 
(1)  That a sufficient reason exists why such notice was not given. 
(2)  That a report or other notice was made or given to the chairman, vice-chairman or housing project manager of the authority of the injuries within the thirty (30) day period. 
(3)  That the authority has not been prejudiced by the delay in giving the notice. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 600, § 5)  
Sec. 6. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1966, Ch. 600, § 6)  
DIVISION 15. - AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT, CONVEY, LEASE OR LICENSE AIR AND BED RIGHTS IN HALE AVENUE[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— This subpart is derived from Chapter 1011 of the Laws of 1970 which became a law March 18, 1970. 
Charter reference— Public works, § 117 et seq. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Authorization.] 
Notwithstanding any provision contained in the charter of the city of White Plains, as amended, or in any other act, general, special or local, the city of White Plains is hereby permitted, authorized and empowered to grant, convey, lease or license such right, title, easement or interest at public or private sale of, in and to such part of the spaces over and in the surfaces of Hale Avenue between the westerly projection of the southerly line of Hiram Street and the easterly projection of the southerly line of lot 5, block 24, ward 5, as shown on the current tax assessment map of the city of White Plains. 
The city of White Plains in its sole discretion, may grant its consent to the grantee or grantees for the construction of an office building, parking structure and other facilities incidental thereto which will bridge such street together with any rights of support in the bed of said street for the private use of said grantee or grantees, and for the maintenance of such building, parking structure and other facilities in perpetuity or for the term of such consent and rights. 
Such consent and right, title and interest may be granted to the owner of all or part of the property immediately adjoining or adjacent to said portion of Hale Avenue and shall cover such areas in the spaces over and in the surface of said street and shall be in perpetuity or for such term of years, duration or period and upon such terms and conditions and shall be transferable and/or mortgageable to such extent as the city of White Plains, in its sole discretion, may deem expedient. 
(Laws 1970, Ch. 1011, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Condemnation of other land permitted.] 
The city of White Plains is further authorized and empowered to condemn or take any other necessary action to acquire title to any land in the bed of Hale Avenue in the city of White Plains and any or all public or private easements in said street, notwithstanding that said acquisition is for the purposes set forth in section one hereof. 
(Laws 1970, Ch. 1011, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1970, Ch. 1011, § 3)  
DIVISION 16. - DISCONTINUING THE USE FOR PARK PURPOSES OF CERTAIN LANDS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— This subpart is derived from Chapter 28 of the Laws of 1968 which became a law March 12, 1968. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Authorization.] 
Notwithstanding any inconsistent general, special or local law, the city of White Plains may by ordinance or local law discontinue as park lands the lands, hereinafter described, and heretofore acquired by such city for park purposes and no longer necessary for park purposes. For the purpose of this act sale thereof may be made at public or private sale in whole or in part and in conjunction with or without other city property for such consideration and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may deem proper and for the best interests of such city. 
(Laws 1968, Ch. 28, § 1)  
Sec. 2. - [Description.] 
The lands referred to in section one of this act are located, bounded and described as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the northerly side of Main Street distant 146.91 feet easterly from the intersection of the northerly side of Main Street with the easterly side of Church Street; thence running northerly forming an interior angle of 91° 51' 54? a distance of 258.86 feet; thence running easterly forming an interior angle of 97° 52' 40? a distance of 49.56 feet; thence running southerly forming an interior angle of 92° 09' 40? a distance of 258.63 feet to the northerly side of Main Street; thence running westerly along the northerly side of Main Street forming an interior angle of 88° 05' 46? a distance of 49.73 feet to the point and place of beginning. 
(Laws 1968, Ch. 28, § 2)  
Sec. 3. - [Effective date.] 
This act shall take effect immediately. 
(Laws 1968, Ch. 28, § 3)  
ARTICLE B. - LOCAL LAWS AND ACTS OF WESTCHESTER COUNTY  
DIVISION 1. - ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARY LINE BETWEEN CITY OF WHITE PLAINS AND TOWN OF NORTH CASTLE[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Act No. 85 of 1931 of the Westchester County Board of Supervisors was passed pursuant to Section 37 of Chapter 16 of the Laws of 1909, as amended, at a regular meeting of the Board of Supervisors of Westchester County held on December 7, 1931, thirty-eight votes (being the votes for more than two-thirds of the members elected to said board) being in favor thereof and no votes against its passage. 
Charter reference— City boundaries established, § 2; city boundaries may be marked; no adverse title obtained by encroachment, § 283. 
Related laws references— Boundary line between City of White Plains, city school district, Town of Harrison in the Cross-Westchester right-of-way, between the former Central Westchester Parkway and Maplemoor Golf Course, Art. A, Div. 9; boundary line between city, city school district and Town of Harrison between a point in the center line of the Cross-Westchester Expressway and a point in Silver Lake, Art. A, Div. 11. 
 
Sec. 1. - [Boundary line established.] 
The boundary line between Town of North Castle and the City of White Plains, in said County of Westchester, be and hereby is established and defined as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point on the center line of the original location of the Bronx River; bearing thence south 70° 52' 27? east and crossing monumented center line of the New York and Harlem Railroad Co. at Station 1279-69.10 and crossing Broadway at its intersection with Virginia Road and thru the location of the stump of an old oak tree; thence continuing on the same bearing and crossing the westerly boundary of Seneca Avenue at a point 8.69 feet southerly from the northerly line of the premises designated on Map of North White Plains, the Terminal City, filed in the office of the Register of Westchester County as Map No. 1749, at Lot No. 23, in Block 10; and thence continuing on the same bearing and crossing the westerly boundary of Cloverdale Avenue at a point 1.35 feet southerly from the northerly line of property designated on the last mentioned map as Lot No. 24, Block 12; thence continuing on the same bearing and crossing the easterly boundary line of lands belonging to the County of Westchester at a point 36.15 feet northerly from lands of the City of White Plains; thence continuing on the same bearing to a point on the easterly boundary of lands belonging to Thomas Rahily at a point 146.50 feet northerly from lands belonging to the City of White Plains which easterly boundary line of property of Thomas Rahily is also the westerly boundary line of lands belonging to the City of White Plains. 
The above described line passes thru stone monuments set in the ground, and located as follows: 
(1)  A distance of 5.05 feet and south 67° 52' 27? east from the westerly side of Broadway. 
(2)  A distance of 6.18 feet and north 67° 52' 27? west from the southeasterly side of Broadway, as established in 1931. 
(3)  A distance of 5.23 feet and south 67° 52' 27? east from the westerly side of Seneca Avenue. 
(4)  A distance of 5.23 feet and south 67° 52' 27? east from the westerly side of Cloverdale Avenue, both of said last mentioned streets being shown on a Map of North White Plains, filed in the office of the Register of Westchester County as Map No. 1749, all of which is shown on a map entitled, "Map Showing Boundary Line Between Town of North Castle and City of White Plains," made by Chas. H. Sells, Inc., Engineers and Surveyors, Pleasantville, N. Y., completed March 4, 1931. 
(Act. No. LXXXV of 1931, Westchester County Board of Supervisors)  
Sec. 2. - [Copies of act and map to be filed.] 
The Clerk of this Board [of supervisors] is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this Act and the map showing the boundary line between said municipalities in the office of the Secretary of State at Albany, New York. 
(Act No. LXXXV of 1931, Westchester County Board of Supervisors)  
Sec. 3. - [Effective date.] 
This Act shall take effect immediately. 
(Act No. LXXXV of 1931, Westchester County Board of Supervisors)  
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of Special Acts as used in the Related Laws of White Plains, Westchester County, New York, either in the text or notes following the text. 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	 Section 
this Disposition 
1932 	149 		Art. A, Div. 1(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 1, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 1, § 2 
1944 	543 	1 	Art. A, Div. 7, §§ 1, 2 
1945 	288 		Art. A, Div. 2(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 2, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 2, § 2 
1946 	200 		Art. A, Div. 3, § 2 
	539 		Art. A, Div. 3(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 3, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 3, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 3, § 3 
1947 	698 		Art. A, Div. 4(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 4, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 4, § 2 
	888 		Art. A, Div. 5(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 1, 
			Art. A, Div. 5, §§ 
			1425—1433 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 5, 
			§ 1434, Art. A, 
			Div. 5, § 2 
1948 	400 		Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1435 
1954 	71 	1 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1427 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1441 
	779 		Art. A, Div. 6(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 6, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 6, § 2 
1955 	533 	1 	Art. A, Div. 7, § 1 
1956 	120 		Art. A, Div. 8(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 8, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 8, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 8, 
			§§ 3, 5 
1957 	914 		Art. A, Div. 5(note) 
			Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1437 
		9 	Art. A, Div. 5, 
			§§ 1425—1436 
			Art. A, Div. 5, 
			§§ 14-38, 1440—1443 
	1039 	1 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1433 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1434 
1958 	21 	1 	Art. A, Div. 8, § 1 
	481 	1 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1426 
		2, 3 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1433 
		4 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1434 
		5 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1441 
1960 	227 	1 	Art. A, Div. 8, § 4 
	381 		Art. A, Div. 9(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 9, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 9, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 9, § 3 
		4 	Art. A, Div. 9, § 4 
		5 	Art. A, Div. 9, § 5 
1961 	695 	1 	Art. A, Div. 7, § 1 
1962 	310 	345 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 345 
	512 	1 	Art. A, Div. 7, § 1 
1963 	573 		Art. A, 
			Div. 10(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 10, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 10, 
			§§ 2, 3 
1964 	266 	583 	Art. A, Div. 10, 
			§§ 1, 2 
	610 	1 	Art. A, Div. 11, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 11, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 11, § 3 
		4 	Art. A, Div. 11, § 4 
		5 	Art. A, Div. 11, § 5 
	928 		Art. A, Div. 
			10(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 10, § 1 
1966 	475 		Art. A, Div. 
			12(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 12, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 12, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 12, § 3 
		4 	Art. A, Div. 12, § 4 
		5 	Art. A, Div. 12, § 5 
		6 	Art. A, Div. 12, § 6 
		7 	Art. A, Div. 12, § 7 
	563 		Art. A, Div. 
			13(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 13, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 13, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 13, § 3 
		4 	Art. A, Div. 13, § 4 
		5 	Art. A, Div. 13, § 5 
		6 	Art. A, Div. 13, § 6 
	573 	1 	Art. A, Div. 8, § 1 
	600 		Art. A, Div. 
			14(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 14, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 14, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 14, § 3 
		4 	Art. A, Div. 14, § 4 
		5 	Art. A, Div. 14, § 5 
		6 	Art. A, Div. 14, § 6 
1967 	728 	5 	Art. A, Div. 3(note) 
1968 	28 		Art. A, Div. 
			16(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 16, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 16, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 16, § 3 
1969 	188 	2 	Art. A, Div. 8, § 2 
	926 	1 	Art. A, Div. 7, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 7, § 2 
	1038 	1 	Art. A, Div. 
			5, § 1429 
1970 	1011 		Art. A, Div. 
			15(note) 
		1 	Art. A, Div. 15, § 1 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 15, § 2 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 15, § 3 
1976 	790 	1 	Art. A, Div. 7, § 1 
1980 	769 	1 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1426(6) 
		2 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1426(8)—(12) 
		3 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1427 
		4 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1428(4), (10), (13) 
		5 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1429 (3rd ¶) 
		6—8 	Art. A, Div. 5, §§ 
			1430—1432 
		9 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1433(1), (2) 
		10 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1433(3)(a)—(c), (4) 
		11       Rpld 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1434 
		12 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1435(2) 
		13 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1439(5) 
		14 	Art. A, Div. 5, § 
			1441 
  
SPECIAL LAWS NOT PRINTED 
The following Special Laws relating to the City of White Plains have not been printed in this publication. 
Year 	Chapter 	Comments 
1944 	 783 	City court 
1952 	 711 	City court, A Laws 1944, Ch. 783 
1955 	 217 	City court, A Laws 1944, Ch. 783 
1959 	 267 	City court, A Laws 1944, Ch. 783 
1962 	 481 	Supplemental Police & Fire Pensions 
1963 	 192 	City court, A Laws 1944, Ch. 783 
1964 	 591 	City court, A Laws 1944, Ch. 783 
1965 	 230 	Pension for widows of policemen & firemen 
1965 	1005 	Death benefits for survivors of city officers and employees 
1965 	1008 	Supplemental police & fire pensions, A Laws 1962, Ch. 481 
1966 	 409 	Death benefits for survivors of city officers and employees, A Laws 1966, Ch. 1005 
1969 	 121 	Supplemental police & fire pensions, A Laws 1962, Ch. 481 
1969 	 908 	Supplemental pensions for widows of policemen & firemen 
1970 	 470 	Associate city judges 
1971 	   80 	City court, A Laws 1944, Ch. 783 
  
WHITE PLAINS MUNICIPAL CODE[1] 
Title I.
General Provisions 
Title II.
Administration 
Title III.
Environmental Conservation 
Title IV.
Licenses, Permits and Business Regulations 
Title V.
Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Title VI.
Parks and Recreation 
Title VII.
Public Works 
Title VIII.
Traffic and Street Regulation 
Title IX.
Zoning, Planning, Buildings and Structures 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This is the White Plains Municipal Code and consists of ordinances, local laws adopted by the common council which do not amend the city charter, resolutions of the common council and rules and regulations promulgated by various departments and agencies of the city. The source of each section is indicated in the parenthetical history note, except as otherwise stated. The user of this Code should be aware that only the ordinances embraced in this Code are actually adopted by the adopting ordinance for this Code. Local laws, resolutions, rules and regulations have been classified according to the format of this Code and are included for the convenience of the user of this Code. Minor wording changes have been made in such resolutions, rules and regulations to facilitate incorporation into the Code. In each case, however, no substantive change has been made and the text accurately reflects the substance of the law. 
 
TITLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 
 1-1  GENERALLY  
Chapter 1-1 - GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Official map or plan, § 9-3-1. 
 
Sec. 1-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "White Plains Municipal Code" and may be so cited or cited as the "WPMC." A section of this Code may be cited by chapter and section number, to wit "WPMC 7-1-1," without being preceded by the word "section" or the symbol "§."  
Sec. 1-1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the common council: 
(1)  Generally. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Reference for interpretation and construction shall tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of the particular mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted. The provisions of the General Construction Law, as now or hereafter amended shall apply in the interpretation of the provisions of this Code and of all ordinances. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, General Construction Law, §§ 20, 25, 25-a; gender of words, General Construction Law, § 22; number of words, General Construction Law, § 35; meaning of terms "oath," "affidavit" or "swear," General Construction Law, § 36; definition of personal property, General Construction Law, § 39; definition of property, General Construction Law, § 38; definition of real property, General Construction Law, § 40; definition of signature, General Construction Law, § 46; tense of words, General Construction Law, § 48; definition of terms "writing" or "written," General Construction Law, § 56; effect of repeal of statutes, General Construction Law, § 90 et seq. 
(2)  In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(3)  Charter. The terms "Charter" or "City Charter" shall refer to The Charter of the city of White Plains. 
Editor's note— The city's Charter is Chapter 356 of the Laws of 1915, as amended. 
(4)  City. The term "city" shall refer to the city of White Plains, Westchester County, New York. 
(5)  City limits, city boundaries or corporate limits. These terms shall refer to territory included within the legal boundaries of the city. 
(6)  Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "White Plains Municipal Code." 
(7)  Common council or council. The terms "common council" or "council" shall mean the common council of the city as established by the Charter. 
(8)  County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the county of Westchester in the state of New York. 
(9)  Delegation of authority. Unless governed by other applicable law, whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designates otherwise. 
(10)  Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used, it shall mean the mayor of the city as established by the Charter. 
(11)  Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the city of White Plains" were added. 
(12)  Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(13)  NYCRR: The term "NYCRR" shall refer to the "Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York." 
(14)  Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
(15)  State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the state of New York. 
Charter reference— What are deemed public streets, § 120.  
Sec. 1-1-3. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations until such time that this Code and subsequent laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the common council. 
(b)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the White Plains Municipal Code is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which said section shall read as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. In lieu of designating the number of the section to be added, the ordinance adding the section to the Code may provide that said section may be appropriately numbered for inclusion in said Code. 
(c)  In any law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation amending this Code, or repealing a portion thereof, the first section shall state the chapter and section numbers to be amended in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  If the portion to be amended has not been amended since the adoption of this Code only the identifying section, subsection or subdivision number shall be stated. 
(2)  If the portion has been amended since the adoption of this Code only the identifying section, subsection or subdivision number together with the date of the last amendment shall be stated.  
Sec. 1-1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of the court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.  
TITLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
CHAPTER 
 2-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 2-2  PUBLIC RECORDS 
 2-3  COMMON COUNCIL 
 2-4  TAXATION AND FINANCIAL AFFAIRS 
 2-5  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
 2-6  MISCELLANEOUS BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency ambulance service, Ch. 4-2; administration of Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974, § 4-10-16 et seq.; Memorial Day and Independence Day to be holidays, § 5-1-1. 
 
Chapter 2-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 2-1-1. - Election districts. 
(a)  The following election districts are created and established in the city which districts shall be bounded and described as follows: 
(1)  Election District No. 1. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Richbell Road with the center line of Sammis Lane; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Sammis Lane to the center line of Maplemoor Lane; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Maplemoor Lane to the center line of North Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of North Street to the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains; running thence in a northeasterly and northerly direction along said division line to the center line of the Corporate Park Drive Bridge; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of the Corporate Park Drive Bridge to the center line of Havilands Lane; running thence in a westerly and northerly direction along the center line of Havilands Lane to the center line of Ridgeway; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Ridgeway to the center line of Richbell Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Richbell Road to the center line of Sammis Lane at the point or place of beginning. 
(2)  Election District No. 2. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue with the center line of Heatherbloom Road; running thence in an easterly, northerly and easterly direction along the center line of Heatherbloom Road to the center line of Hathaway Lane; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Hathaway Lane to the center line of Bryant Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Bryant Avenue to the center line of Westchester or Avenue (eastbound lane); running thence in a northwesterly direction along the center line of Westchester Avenue (eastbound lane) to the center line of the William Butcher Bridge if it were extended; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the extended center line of the William Butcher Bridge and the William Butcher Bridge to the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southerly direction along the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains to the center line of the Corporate Park Drive Bridge; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of the Corporate Park Drive Bridge to the center line of Havilands Lane; running thence in a westerly and northerly direction along the center line of Havilands Lane to the center line of Ridgeway; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Ridgeway to the center line of Hathaway Lane; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Hathaway Lane to the center line of Gedney Esplanade; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Gedney Esplanade to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Heatherbloom Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(3)  Election District No. 3. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue and the center line of Bolton Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Bolton Avenue to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Shapham Place; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Shapham Place to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Bolton Avenue, at the point or place of beginning. 
(4)  Election District No. 4. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue with the center line of Gedney Way; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Ridgeway; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Ridgeway to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Gedney Way; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Gedney Way to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue, at the point or place of beginning. 
(5)  Election District No. 5. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road with the center line of Bolton Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Hartsdale Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Hartsdale Avenue to the center line of Soundview Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Soundview Avenue to the center line of Prescott Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Prescott Avenue to the center line of Ralph Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Ralph Avenue to the center line of Bolton Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Bolton Avenue to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(6)  Election District No. 6. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road with the center line of Bryant Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Bolton Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Bolton Avenue to the center line of Smith Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Smith Avenue to the center line of Stratford Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Stratford Avenue to the center line of Ralph Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Ralph Avenue to the center line of Byron Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Byron Avenue to the center line of Howard Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Howard Avenue to the center line of Charlotte Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Charlotte Street to the center line of Bryant Avenue; running thence in a southeasterly and easterly direction along the center line of Bryant Avenue to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(7)  Election District No. 7. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road with the center line of Hartsdale Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the division line between the Town Scarsdale and the City of White Plains; running thence in a northwesterly and northerly direction along the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains to the center line of Hartsdale Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Hartsdale Avenue to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(8)  Election District No. 8. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Bryant Avenue and the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly and northwesterly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of DeKalb Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of DeKalb Avenue to the center line of Carhart Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Carhart Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Maple Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Maple Avenue to the center line of Waller Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Waller Avenue to the center line of East New York Post Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of East New York Post Road to the center line of South Broadway; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of South Broadway to the center line of Main Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Main Street to the center line of Westchester Avenue; running thence in a southerly and easterly direction along the center line of Westchester Avenue to the point of intersection between the center line of Westchester Avenue and the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains and the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway; running thence in an easterly direction along said division line and the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway to the center line of William Butcher Bridge; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of William Butcher Bridge to the center line of Westchester Avenue (eastbound); running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Westchester Avenue (eastbound) to the center line of Bryant Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly and westerly direction along the center line of Bryant Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(9)  Election District No. 9. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains with the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Ridgeway; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Ridgeway to the center line of the west branch of the Mamaroneck River; running thence in a southerly, westerly and southerly direction along the center line of said river to the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains; running thence in a northerly and westerly direction along the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(10)  Election District No. 10. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue with the center line of the roadway joining Mamaroneck Avenue with Meadow Way; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of said roadway joining Mamaroneck Avenue and Meadow Way to the center line of Meadow Way; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Meadow Way to the center line of Sammis Lane; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Sammis Lane to the center line of Maplemoor Lane; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Maplemoor Lane to the center line of North Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of North Street to the center line of Rosedale Avenue; running thence in a westerly and southwesterly direction along the center line of Rosedale Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly and northeasterly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of the roadway joining Mamaroneck Avenue with Meadow Way at the point or place of beginning. 
(11)  Election District No. 11. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue and the center line of Bryant Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Bryant Avenue to the center line of Hathaway Lane; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Hathaway Lane to the center line of Heatherbloom Road; running thence in a westerly, southerly and westerly direction along the center line of Heatherbloom Road to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Gedney Way; running thence in a westerly direction along the center of Gedney Way to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Bolton Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Bolton Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Bryant Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(12)  Election District No. 12. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Soundview Avenue and the center line of Hartsdale Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Hartsdale Avenue to the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains; running thence in a northerly direction along the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains to the center line of West New York Post Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of West New York Post Road to the center line of New York Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of New York Avenue to the center line of Vermont Avenue; running thence in an easterly and northerly direction along the center line of Vermont Avenue to the center line of Prospect Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Prospect Street to the center line of Soundview Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Soundview Avenue to the center line of Sterling Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Sterling Avenue to the center line of Byron Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Byron Avenue to the center line of Ralph Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Ralph Avenue to the center line of Stratford Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Stratford Avenue to the center line of Smith Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Smith Avenue to the center line of Bolton Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Bolton Avenue to the center line of Ralph Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Ralph Avenue to the center line of Prescott Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Prescott Avenue to the center line of Soundview Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Soundview Avenue to the center line of Hartsdale Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(13)  Election District No. 13. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Ridgeway with the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains; running thence in a westerly and southerly direction along said division line to the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains; running thence in a northerly, westerly and northerly direction along the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains to the said division line also being the center line of the west branch of the Mamaroneck River; running thence in a northerly direction along said river to the center line of Ridgeway; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Ridgeway to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(14)  Election District No. 14. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue and the center line of Gedney Esplanade; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Gedney Esplanade to the center line of Hathaway Lane; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Hathaway Lane to the center line of Ridgeway; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Ridgeway to the center line of Richbell Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Richbell Road to the center line of Sammis Lane; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Sammis Lane to the center line of Meadow Way; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Meadow Way to the center line of the roadway joining Meadow Way with Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along said road joining Meadow Way with Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Gedney Esplanade at the point or place of beginning. 
(15)  Election District No. 15. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue and the center line of Rosedale Avenue; running thence in an easterly and northeasterly direction along the center line of Rosedale Avenue to the center line of North Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of North Street to the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southerly and westerly direction along said division line to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Rosedale Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(16)  Election District No. 16. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Hillside Terrace and the center line of Ferris Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Ferris Avenue to the center line of Park Terrace; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Park Terrace to the center line of Kirby Terrace; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Kirby Terrace to the center line of Park Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Park Avenue to the center line of Hillside Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Hillside Avenue to the center line of Hillside Terrace; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Hillside Terrace to the center line of Ferris Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(17)  Election District No. 17. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue and the center line of Carhart Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Carhart Avenue to the center line of DeKalb Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of DeKalb Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly and northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Carhart Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(18)  Election District No. 18. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Hall Avenue and the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway to the division line between the Town of North Castle and the City of White Plains; running thence in an easterly, northerly, easterly and southerly direction along said division line to the center line of Hall Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Hall Avenue to the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway at the point or place of beginning. 
(19)  Election District No. 19. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Westchester Avenue and the center line of Franklin Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Franklin Avenue to the center line of Windsor Terrace; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the center line of Windsor Terrace to the center line of Broad Park Way; running thence in a southwesterly and northwesterly direction along the centerline of Broad Park Way to the center line of Main Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Main Street to the center line of Canfield Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the center line of Canfield Avenue to the center line of Lake Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Lake Street to the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway to the center line of Brockway Place; running thence in an northeasterly direction along the center line of Brockway Place to the center line of Belway Place; running thence in a northwesterly and easterly direction along the center line of Belway Place to the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southerly direction along said division line to the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway and said division line to the center line of Westchester Avenue (westbound); running thence in a westerly and northwesterly direction along the center line of Westchester Avenue to the center line of Franklin Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(20)  Election District No. 20. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Lake Street and the center line of Hall Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Hall Avenue to the division line between the Town of North Castle and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southwesterly and easterly direction along said division line to the division line between the Town of Harrison and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southwesterly direction along said division line to the center line of Belway Place; running thence in a westerly and southeasterly direction along the center line of Belway Place to the center line of Brockway Place; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Brockway Place to the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway to the center line of Lake Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Lake Street to the center line of Hall Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(21)  Election District No. 21. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Park Avenue and the center line of Church Street; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Church Street to the center line of Parkview Court; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Parkview Court to the center line of Park Circle; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Park Circle to the center line of Park Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Park Avenue to the center line of Church Street at the point or place of beginning. 
(22)  Election District No. 22. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Crane Avenue and the center line of North Broadway; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of North Broadway to the center line of Orchard Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Orchard Street to the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway to the center line of Grant Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Grant Avenue to the center line of Morningside Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Morningside Avenue to the center line of Lenox Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Lenox Avenue to the center line of Crane Avenue; running thence along the center line of Crane Avenue in a southerly and westerly direction to the center line of North Broadway at the point or place of beginning. 
(23)  Election District No. 23. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Crane Avenue and the center line of North Broadway; running thence in a northeasterly and northerly direction along the center line of Crane Avenue to the center line of Lenox Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Lenox Avenue to the center line of Morningside Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Morningside Avenue to the center line of Grant Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Grant Avenue to the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway to the center line of Hall Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Hall Avenue to the center line of Lake Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Lake Street to the center line of North Kensico Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of North Kensico Avenue to the center line of Ross Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Ross Street to the center line of Stewart Place; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Stewart Place to the center line of Lake Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Lake Street to the center line of North Broadway; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of North Broadway to the center line of Crane Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(24)  Election District No. 24. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of North Broadway and the center line of Lake Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Lake Street to the center line of Stewart Place; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Stewart Place to the center line of Ross Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Ross Street to the center line of North Kensico Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of North Kensico Avenue to the center line of Lake Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Lake Street to the center line of Canfield Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Canfield Avenue to the center line of Main Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Main Street to the center line of Westchester Avenue and North Broadway; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of North Broadway to the center line of Lake Street at the point or place of beginning. 
(25)  Election District No. 25. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Quarropas Street and the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Martine Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Martine Avenue to the center line of Bank Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Bank Street to the center line of Fisher Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Fisher Avenue to the point of intersection of the center line of South Lexington Avenue and the center line of Fisher Avenue and Quarropas Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Quarropas Street to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue at the point of place of beginning. 
(26)  Election District No. 26. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Westchester Avenue with the center line of Main Street; running thence easterly along the center line of Main Street to the center line of Broad Park Way; running thence southerly and easterly along the center line of Broad Park Way to the center line of Windsor Terrace; running thence southerly along the center line of Windsor Terrace to the center line of Franklin Avenue; running thence westerly along the center line of Franklin Avenue to the center line of Westchester Avenue; running thence northerly along the center line of Westchester Avenue to the center line of Main Street at the point or place of beginning. 
(27)  Election District No. 27. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway and the center line of Orchard Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Orchard Street to the point of intersection of the center line of North Broadway and the center line of Orchard Street and Cemetery Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Cemetery Road to the center line of the Bronx River with the division line between the Town of Greenburgh and the City of White Plains; running thence in a northerly direction along the division line between the Town of Greenburgh and the City of White Plains to the division line between the Town of North Castle and the City of White Plains; running thence in an easterly direction along the division line between the Town of North Castle and the City of White Plains to the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of the Central Westchester Parkway to the center line of Orchard Street at the point or place of beginning. 
(28)  Election District No. 28. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Ferris Avenue and the center line of Wardman Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Wardman Street to the center line of Church Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Church Street to the center line of Parkview Court; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Parkview Court to the center line of Park Circle; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Park Circle to the center line of Park Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Park Avenue to the center line of Fairview Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Fairview Avenue to the center line of Richards Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Richards Street to the center line of Ferris Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Ferris Avenue to the center line of Wardman Street at the point or place of beginning. 
(29)  Election District No. 29. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Park Avenue and the center line of North Broadway; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of North Broadway to the center line of Westview Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Westview Avenue to the center line of Church Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Church Street to the center line of Parkview Court; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Parkview Court to the center line of Park Circle; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Park Circle to the center line of Park Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Park Avenue to the center line of North Broadway at the point or place of beginning. 
(30)  Election District No. 30. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Main Street and the center line of North Broadway (northbound lane); running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of North Broadway to the center line of Park Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Park Avenue to the center line of Church Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Church Street to the center line of Rockledge Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Rockledge Avenue to the center line of Cottage Place; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Cottage Place to the center line of Hamilton Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Hamilton Avenue to the center line of Church Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Church Street to the center line of Main Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Main Street to the center line of Court Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Court Street to the center line of Martine Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Martine Avenue to the center line of South Broadway; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of South Broadway to the center line of Main Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Main Street to the center line of North Broadway (northbound lane) at the point or place of beginning. 
(31)  Election District No. 31. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Hamilton Avenue and the center line of Ferris Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Ferris Avenue to the center line of Park Terrace; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Park Terrace to the center line of Kirby Terrace; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Kirby Terrace to the center line of Park Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Park Avenue to the center line of Fairview Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Fairview Avenue to the center line of Richards Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Richards Street to the center line of Ferris Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Ferris Avenue to the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of the Cross Westchester Expressway to the center line of the Bronx River and Randall's Brook, and the division line between the Town of Greenburgh and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southerly and westerly direction along the center line of the Bronx River and Randall's Brook, and the division line between the Town of Greenburgh and the City of White Plains to the center line of Tarrytown Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Tarrytown Road to the center line of Hamilton Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Hamilton Avenue to the center line of Ferris Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(32)  Election District No. 32. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Main Street and the center line of the Bronx River Parkway; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Main Street to the center line of Bank Street; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Bank Street to the center line of Hamilton Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Hamilton Avenue to the center line of Tarrytown Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Tarrytown Road to the division line between the Town of Greenburgh and the City of White Plains; running thence southerly and westerly along said division line to the northerly side of Russell Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the northerly side of Russell Street to the westerly side of Fulton Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the westerly side of Fulton Street and its prolongation to the prolongation of the center line of Battle Avenue; running thence easterly along the prolongation of the center line of Battle Avenue to the center line of Central Park Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Central Park Avenue to the center line of Chatterton Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Chatterton Avenue to the center line of Harding Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Harding Avenue to the center line of Battle Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Battle Avenue to the center line of Whitney Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Whitney Street to the center line of Trenton Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Trenton Avenue to the center line of Hawley Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Hawley Street to the center line of Chatterton Parkway; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Chatterton Parkway to the center line of Putnam Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Putnam Avenue to the center line of Lee Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Lee Avenue to the center line of Chase Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Chase Avenue to the center line of Alexander Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Alexander Avenue to the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southeasterly direction along said division line to the intersection of said division line and the center line of the Bronx River; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of the Bronx River to a point of intersection between the center line of the Bronx River and the center line of the Bronx River Parkway; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of the Bronx River Parkway to the center line of Main Street at the point or place of beginning. 
(33)  Election District No. 33. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Central Park Avenue with the center line of Battle Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Central Park Avenue to the center line of Chatterton Avenue; thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Chatterton Avenue to the center line of Harding Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Harding Avenue to the center line of Battle Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Battle Avenue to the center line of Central Park Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(34)  Election District No. 34. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Central Park Avenue and the center line of Battle Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Battle Avenue to the center line of Whitney Street; thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Whitney Street to the center line of Trenton Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Trenton Avenue to the center line of Hawley Street; thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Hawley Street to the center line of Chatterton Parkway; thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Chatterton Parkway to the center line of Putnam Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Putnam Avenue to the center line of Lee Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Lee Avenue to the center line of Chase Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Chase Avenue to the center line of Alexander Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Alexander Avenue to the division line between the Town of Greenburgh and the City of White Plains; thence northwesterly and northerly along said division line to the prolongation of the center line of Battle Avenue; thence easterly along the prolongation of the center line of Battle Avenue to the center line of Central Park Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(35)  Election District No. 35. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of New York Avenue and the center line of West New York Post Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of West New York Post Road to the center line of Brady Place; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Brady Place to the center line of Maple Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Maple Avenue to the center line of Rathbun Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Rathbun Avenue to the center line of Osborne Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Osborne Street to the center line of Winthrop Street; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the center line of Winthrop Street to the center line of Prospect Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Prospect Street to the center line of Scott Circle; running thence in a westerly, southerly and easterly direction along the center line of Scott Circle to the center line of Vermont Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Vermont Avenue to the center line of New York Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of New York Avenue to the center line of West New York Post Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(36)  Election District No. 36. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Bryant Avenue and the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Edgewood Street; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Edgewood Street to the center line of DeKalb Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the center line of DeKalb Avenue to the center line of Livingston Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Livingston Avenue to the center line of Hale Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Hale Avenue to the center line of Maple Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Maple Avenue to the center line of Bloomingdale Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Bloomingdale Road to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Bryant Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Bryant Avenue to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(37)  Election District No. 37. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of East New York Post Road and the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Martine Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Martine Avenue to the center line of South Broadway; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of South Broadway to the center line of East New York Post Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of East New York Post Road to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(38)  Election District No. 38. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of South Lexington Avenue and the center line of East and West New York Post Road; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of East New York Post Road to the center line of Longview Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Longview Avenue to the center line of Maple Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Maple Avenue to the center line of Waller Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Waller Avenue to the center line of East New York Post Road; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of East New York Post Road to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Quarropas Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Quarropas Street to the center line of South Lexington Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of South Lexington Avenue to the intersection of the center line of East and West New York Post Road at the point or place of beginning. 
(39)  Election District No. 39. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of East New York Post Road and the center line of Longview Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Longview Avenue to the center line of Maple Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Maple Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Livingston Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Livingston Avenue to the center line of Longview Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Longview Avenue to the center line of Prospect Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Prospect Street to the center line of Davis Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Davis Avenue to the center line of East New York Post Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of East New York Post Road to the center line of Longview Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(40)  Election District No. 40. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of East New York Post Road and the center line of Davis Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Davis Avenue to the center line of Prospect Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Prospect Street to the center line of Winthrop Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Winthrop Avenue to the center line of Osborne Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Osborne Street to the center line of Rathbun Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Rathbun Avenue to the center line of Maple Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Maple Avenue to the center line of Brady Place; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Brady Place to the center line of West New York Post Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of West New York Post Road to the center line of East New York Post Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of East New York Post Road to the center line of Davis Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(41)  Election District No. 41. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of West New York Post Road and the center line of South Lexington Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of South Lexington Avenue to the center line of Fisher Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Fisher Avenue to the center line of Bank Street; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Bank Street to the center line of Main Street; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Main Street to the center line of the Bronx River Parkway; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of the Bronx River Parkway to a point of intersection between the center line of the Bronx River Parkway and the center line of the Bronx River; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of the Bronx River to the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southeasterly direction along said division line to the center line of Walworth Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Walworth Avenue to the center line of Fisher Avenue; running thence in a northeasterly direction along the center line of Fisher Avenue to the center line of Tibbits Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Tibbits Avenue to the center line of Lynton Place; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Lynton Place to the center line of West New York Post Road; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of West New York Post Road to the center line of South Lexington Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(42)  Election District No. 42. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of Soundview Avenue and the center line of Prospect Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Prospect Street to the center line of Longview Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Longview Avenue to the center line of Livingston Avenue; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Livingston Avenue to the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Mamaroneck Avenue to the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Old Mamaroneck Road to the center line of Bryant Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Bryant Avenue to the center line of South Lexington Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the center line of South Lexington Avenue to the center line of Charlotte Street; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Charlotte Street to the center line of Howard Avenue; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Howard Avenue to the center line of Byron Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of Byron Avenue to the center line of Sterling Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Sterling Avenue to the center line of Soundview Avenue; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Soundview Avenue to the center line of Prospect Street at the point or place of beginning. 
(43)  Election District No. 43. Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the center line of West New York Post Road with the center line of Quinby Avenue; running thence in a northwesterly direction along the center line of Quinby Avenue to the center line of Bogert Avenue; running thence in a southwesterly direction along the center line of Bogert Avenue to the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains; running thence in a southeasterly direction along the division line between the Town of Scarsdale and the City of White Plains to the center line of Park Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of Park Road to the center line of Winslow Road; running thence in a northwesterly and northerly direction along the center line of Winslow Road to the center line of New York Avenue; running thence in a westerly direction along the center line of New York Avenue to the center line of West New York Post Road; running thence in a northerly direction along the center line of West New York Post Road to the center line of Quinby Avenue at the point or place of beginning. 
(Res. of 6-21-82; Res. of 9-7-82; Res. of 1-5-87; Res. of 7-14-82; Res. of 1-4-93; Res. of 7-6-93; Res. of 1-3-94; Res. of 4-4-94; Res. of 1-3-95; Res. of 2-5-01; Res. of 8-6-01; Res. of 6-3-02 ) 
Charter reference— Election districts, § 12. 
State Law reference— Election districts required, Elections Law, § 4-100.  
Sec. 2-1-2. - Municipal office and business hours. 
Municipal office buildings shall be open for the transaction of business from Monday to Friday, both inclusive, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except such portions of said buildings as are required for city court, police, fire fighting, caretakers and similar services or for emergency services. The mayor may, by proclamation, designate a day, or a portion of a day, immediately preceding or succeeding a holiday, when municipal office buildings shall be closed. 
(Ord. of 2-15-47, § 301; Ord. of 12-16-74, § 1) 
Charter reference— Power of council to determine office hours, § 19. 
State Law reference— Operating hours of public offices, Public Officers Law, § 62.  
Sec. 2-1-3. - Waiver of certain fees for public agencies. 
(a)  The commissioner of public works may waive all fees specified in chapter 7-3 of this Code in connection with permits issued to or for any department or board of the city, the White Plains Parking Authority and the White Plains City School District, provided the commissioner of public works is satisfied that such waiver of fees will inure to the benefit, respectively, of the city, the White Plains Parking Authority and the White Plains City School District and not to the benefit of any contractor involved in such construction work. 
(b)  The commissioner of building is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to waive all fees specified in chapters 9-5 and 9-7 of this Code (the building code and the plumbing code) in connection with permits issued to or for any department or board of the city, the White Plains Parking Authority and the White Plains City School District, provided the commissioner of building is satisfied that such waiver of fees will inure to the benefit, respectively, of the city, the White Plains Parking Authority and the White Plains City School District and not to the benefit of any contractor involved in such construction work. 
(Res. of 3-20-67)  
Sec. 2-1-4. - Public housing agency designated. 
The city, acting through its commissioner of planning, is hereby designated as the public housing agency for the city in connection with the existing housing program of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to Section 8 of Title II of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-383). 
(Res. of 5-3-76)  
Sec. 2-1-4.1. - Municipal housing authority. 
The city, acting through its duly elected common council, for and on behalf of the city, hereby elects to have and exercise the rights, powers and privileges of a municipal housing authority, pursuant to the provisions of section 55 of the Public Housing Law, and, in connection therewith, to be subject to the duties and obligations granted to or imposed on such authorities by such law, with respect to projects designed to provide housing for eligible persons and families as defined in the United States Housing Authority Act of 1967. 
(Res. of 6-7-82, § 1)  
Sec. 2-1-5. - Corporation counsel to keep records of notices of claims. 
The corporation counsel is designated as the officer to make and keep records of notices of claim filed against the city. 
(Res. of 6-4-56) 
State Law reference— Filing of claims against city, General Municipal Law, § 50-e; designation of officer to keep record of claims filed, General Municipal Law, § 50-f.  
Sec. 2-1-6. - Enclosure of notices of newspaper pickup and glass salvaging in water and tax bills. 
When requested by the commissioner of public works, the commissioner of finance shall enclose with city tax and water bills, notices relating to the city's program of glass salvage and newspaper pickup and recycling. 
(Res. of 11-4-74) 
State Law reference— Power of council to require that notices relating to various municipal services be included in tax bill, Tax Law, § 5.  
Sec. 2-1-7. - Aid by fire department to other political subdivisions. 
The chief of the fire department may authorize and permit fire companies of the city to go to aid another city, village, town or fire district or territory outside of a city, village or fire district in extinguishing fires therein; provided, however, that no more than two companies shall be authorized and permitted to leave the city at one time without the consent of the commissioner of public safety. 
(Ord. of 8-3-31, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority of council to restrict service by fire department outside of corporate limits, General Municipal Law, § 209.  
Sec. 2-1-8. - [Authority to grant, request police assistance from and to other local governments—Delegated to chief of police.] 
The powers granted to the mayor of the city of White Plains pursuant to section 209-m of the general municipal law of the state of New York relating to the requesting and granting of police assistance from and to other local governments is hereby delegated to the chief of police. 
(L.L. No. 1-1968, § 1)  
Sec. 2-1-9. - [Same—Definition.] 
The term "chief of police" as used herein shall include any police officer in command of the police department of the city of White Plains during the absence, illness or disability of the chief of police or who is authorized by the rules and regulations of the police department of the city of White Plains to exercise the powers of the chief of police in emergency situations. 
(L.L. No. 1-1968, § 2)  
Sec. 2-1-10. - [Sale of city-owned real property—Generally.] 
Except as otherwise provided by sections 105 and 207-a of the Charter of the city of White Plains, real property owned by the city of White Plains may be sold only pursuant to the provisions of this local law [sections 2-1-10—2-1-16]. 
(L.L. No. 8-1982, § 1)  
Sec. 2-1-11. - [Same—Council resolution generally.] 
Real property owned by the city of White Plains must be sold at a public auction pursuant to the provisions of section 23(2)(b) of the General City Law unless the common council by resolution determines that: 
(a)  a private sale of a certain parcel of city-owned real property is in the best interests of the city; and 
(b)  said private sale will enhance and promote the economic well-being of the city. 
(L.L. No. 8-1982, § 2)  
Sec. 2-1-12. - [Same—Contents of resolution.] 
A resolution adopted pursuant to section 2 of this local law [division] which authorizes a private sale of certain city-owned real property shall authorize the mayor: 
(a)  to solicit proposals or to list the property with a broker for the purchase and development of said real estate; 
(b)  to receive said proposals, and to negotiate the proposed purchase price and other details of each proposal with each applicant. 
(L.L. No. 8-1982, § 3)  
Sec. 2-1-13. - [Same—Report to common council upon negotiations.] 
Upon completion of the negotiations with each applicant the mayor shall submit to the common council a report which shall contain: 
(a)  an analysis of the proposals submitted by each applicant and as changed, altered or amended thereafter; and 
(b)  a recommendation to accept one proposal or to reject all proposals, which recommendation states the reasons therefor. 
(L.L. No. 8-1982, § 4)  
Sec. 2-1-14. - [Same—Approval by common council.] 
The common council, by resolution, may approve the recommended proposal and authorize the mayor to execute any and all necessary documents on behalf of the city as may be needed to complete the sale of the premises, subject to: 
(a)  the applicant complying with all codes, ordinances and zoning procedures of the city of White Plains; and 
(b)  satisfaction of such other conditions as may be imposed by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 8-1982, § 5)  
Sec. 2-1-15. - [Same—Payment of recording tax, etc.] 
The purchaser or purchasers on any such sale shall pay the mortgage recording tax and recording fees and pay for and affix to such instruments any and all revenue stamps that may be necessary. 
(L.L. No. 8-1982, § 6)  
Sec. 2-1-16. - [Same—Mortgage, etc.] 
As a part of the purchase price for the sale of real property, the city, when so authorized by the common council, shall have the right and it is hereby authorized to take, in the name of the city, a purchase money bond and mortgage or bonds and mortgages in an amount or amounts not to exceed sixty per centum of the sale price, due as to principal not more than five years from the date of the closing of title, to bear interest at a rate to be stated, and upon such other terms and conditions as may be authorized and fixed by the common council. 
(L.L. No. 8-1982, § 8)  
Sec. 2-1-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the city, § 2-1-17 is hereby repealed. Said provisions pertained to authorizing the corporation counsel to employ special counsel to provide services relating to the disposition of cases involving injuries or long term illness in the department of public safety and derived from Ord. of 7-5-16 , §§ 1, 2.  
Chapter 2-2 - PUBLIC RECORDS  
ARTICLE I. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Apr. 3, 1989, repealed §§ 2-2-1, 2-2-2, relating to retention of records, derived from Ordinances adopted Feb. 26, 1975, and July 10, 1978, and a resolution adopted June 16, 1975, and added new §§ 2-2-1—2-2-7. Section 2 renumbered former § 2-2-3 as § 2-2-8. 
 
Sec. 2-2-1. - Records management officer. 
The city clerk is hereby designated the Records Management Officer of the City of White Plains; and he shall be responsible for administering the City of White Plains' non-current and archival public records and records storage facilities in accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2-2. - Powers and duties. 
The records management officer shall carry out the efficient administration, determination of value, use, preservation, storage and disposition of the non-current and archival public records kept, filed or received by the offices and departments of The City of White Plains. 
The records management officer shall: 
(a)  Continually survey and examine public records to recommend their classification so as to determine the most suitable methods to be used for the maintaining, storing and servicing of archival material. Records shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Obsolete and unnecessary records according to New York State Records Retention and Disposition Schedules, thereby subject to disposition; or 
(2)  Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research historical or educational value which warrant their permanent retention; or 
(3)  Records not subject to disposition according to state law. 
(b)  Establish guidelines for proper records management in any department or agency of the City of White Plains in accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines. 
(c)  Report annually to the chief executive official and the governing body on the powers and duties herein mentioned. 
(d)  Operate records management centers for the storage, processing and servicing of all non-current and archival records for all departments and agencies. 
(e)  Establish a City of White Plains Archives and perform the following functions: 
(1)  Advise and assist departments in reviewing and selecting material to be transferred to the archives for preservation. 
(2)  Continually survey and examine public records to determine the most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining, storing and servicing of archival materials. 
(3)  Establish and maintain an adequate repository(ies) for the proper storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival records. 
(4)  Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records in the archives, subject to the approval of the records advisory board. 
(5)  Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated confidential, providing such policy does not conflict with any federal or state statutes. 
(6)  Provide information services to other city offices. 
(7)  Collect archival materials which are not official City of White Plains records but which have been associational value to the city or a close relationship to the existing archival collection. Such collecting shall be subject to archive space, staff, and cost limitations, and to the potential endangerment of such materials if they are not collected by the archives. 
(8)  Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to be identified at the point of generation. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2-3. - Records advisory board. 
There shall be a records advisory board designated to work closely with and provide advice to the records management officer. The board shall consist of the city clerk, corporation counsel, commissioner of finance, commissioner of public safety, and the mayor or his designee. The board shall meet periodically and have the following duties: 
(a)  Provide advice to the records management officer on the development of the records management program. 
(b)  Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and propose changes and improvements. 
(c)  Review retention periods proposed by the records management officer for records not covered by state archives' schedules. 
(d)  Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and to be the final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2-4. - Custody. 
(a)  Non-Current Public Records: Each department is the legal custodian of its records and shall retain custody of records deposited in the records center. 
(b)  Archival Public Records: Records transferred to or acquired by the archives shall be under the custody and control of the archives rather than the department which created or held them immediately prior to being transferred to the archives. 
(1)  Records shall be transferred to the archives upon the recommendation of the records management officer, with approval of the head of the department which has custody of the records and the approval of the records advisory board. 
(2)  Records may be permanently removed from the archives at the request of the records management officer or the head of the department which had custody of the records immediately prior to the transfer of those records to the archives, subject to the approval of the records advisory board. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2-5. - Replevin. 
The law department may take steps to recover local government records which have been alienated from proper custody, and may, when necessary, institute actions of replevin. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2-6. - Disposal of records. 
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of the City of White Plains unless approval has been obtained from the records management officer. No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the records management officer without the express written consent of the department head having authority. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1) 
Editor's note— By a resolution adopted Apr. 3, 1979, the city adopted the Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 pursuant to Art. 57-A of the Arts & Cultural Affairs Law.  
Sec. 2-2-7. - Definitions. 
(a)  Archives means those official records which have been determined by the records management officer and records advisory board to have sufficient historical or other value to warrant their continued preservation by the government. 
(b)  Records means any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound recordings, microforms, computer tapes/disks, or any other materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official city business. 
(c)  Records management means the planning, controlling, directing, organizing, training, promotion and other managerial, use and records disposition, including records preservation, records disposal and records center or other storage facilities. 
(d)  Records disposition means: 
(1)  The removal in accordance with approved records control schedules, of records no longer necessary for the conduct of general municipal business by methods which may include: 
(i)  The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation; or 
(ii)  The transfer of records to the records center/archives for temporary storage of inactive records and permanent storage of records determined to have historical or other sufficient value warranting continued preservation; and 
(2)  The transfer of records from one city department or agency to any other city department or agency. 
(e)  Records center means an establishment(s) maintained by the City of White Plains for the storage, servicing, security and processing of non-current or archival public records. 
(f)  Servicing means making information in records available for official or public use. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2-8. - Fee for obtaining certain documents from department of public safety. 
(a)  The following fees are hereby established for the issuance of transcripts of such police & fire records as are available to the public, non-criminal multiple record searches, accident reports, aided cases, detective reports, photographs, good conduct certificates, miscellaneous public safety reports, incident reports (UF-6's), processing gun permits, non-criminal fingerprinting and basic field incident reports, etc.: 
Non-criminal multiple record searches ..... $25.00 
Copy of accident report ..... 10.00 
Each additional copy ..... 2.00 
Copy of aided case ..... 5.00 
Copy of statements or reports in the detective division ..... 10.00 
Each additional copy ..... 2.00 
Photographs—per print ..... 20.00 
Each additional print (copy) ..... 5.00 
Good conduct certificates ..... 25.00 
Miscellaneous public safety reports ..... 3.00 
Incident reports (UF-6) ..... 5.00 
Each additional copy ..... 1.00 
Processing pistol permits (original) ..... 100.00 
Amending pistol permits ..... 20.00 
Non-criminal fingerprinting (per card) ..... 25.00 
Basic field incident report ..... 10.00 
(b)  The department of public safety shall daily report to the commissioner of finance as to the issuance of such transcripts, letters, prints or photographs and remit the fees therefor to the commissioner of finance. 
(c)  Such fees shall be waived by the department of public safety for transcripts, prints or photographs furnished to departments, boards or offices of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-1-61, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 8-3-64, § 1; Ord. of 1-16-67, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-71, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 8-3-82, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-16-83; Ord. of 4-3-89, § 2; Ord. of 5-22-08, § 1; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 5)  
Secs. 2-2-9—2-2-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rules and regulations for public access to records required, Public Officers Law, § 87. 
 
Sec. 2-2-16. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  This article is established pursuant to Article 6 of the Public Officers Law, known as the Freedom of Information Law. 
(b)  This article provides for the procedure by which records of the city may be obtained for inspection and copies thereof obtained. It does not apply to the White Plains Parking Authority, White Plains Housing Authority, the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency, the City Court of White Plains or the White Plains Public Schools all of which are subject to their own or other regulations. 
(c)  Personnel of the city shall furnish to the public the information and records required by law and those which were furnished to the public prior to enactment of the Freedom of Information Law, subject to the conditions contained in subdivisions 3 and 7 of Section 88 of the Freedom of Information Law, or other provisions of law. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 1) 
State Law reference— Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law, § 84 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2-17. - Records access officer. 
(a)  The mayor shall be responsible for assuring compliance with this article and shall designate one or more persons, by name or by specific job title, and official address, as records access officers. 
(b)  The records access officer shall be responsible for assuring appropriate response to public requests for access to records. The records access officers shall assure that appropriate personnel are adequately instructed in and properly perform the functions described in sections 2-2-21 and 2-2-22 of this Code, and shall supervise the administration of this article. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 2)  
Sec. 2-2-18. - Fiscal officer. 
The mayor shall designate some person who is charged with certifying the payroll as the "fiscal officer" for the purposes of the Freedom of Information Law. Such officer shall: 
(a)  Respond in accordance with section 2-2-21 of this Code, to written requests for an itemized record setting forth the name, address, title and salary of every officer or employee of the city; and 
(b)  Make the payroll items listed above available to any person including bona fide members of the news media as provided in Sections 88(1)(g) and 88(10) of the Freedom of Information Law. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 3) 
State Law reference— Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law, § 84 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2-19. - Location. 
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at: City Hall, 255 Main Street, White Plains, N. Y.; Municipal Building Annex, rear of City Hall; Public Safety, 279 Hamilton Avenue, White Plains, N. Y.; Police Headquarters, 279 Hamilton Avenue, White Plains, N. Y.; Department of Recreation, Gedney Way, White Plains, New York; Fire Headquarters, Mamaroneck Avenue, White Plains, N. Y.; Public Library, Martine Ave., W. P., N. Y. or at the location where they are kept. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 4)  
Sec. 2-2-20. - Hours for public inspection. 
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records produced during all hours regularly open for business except that all records must be returned to their proper custodian at least five (5) minutes before closing time. 
Hours regularly open for business are 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 5)  
Sec. 2-2-21. - Requests for public access to records. 
(a)  All requests for records pursuant to the provisions hereof shall be in writing. A records access form will be provided to the requester by the records access officer. Such form may provide for the signature, name and address of the requester. 
(b)  Except under extraordinary circumstances, officials shall respond to a request for records no more than five business days after receipt of the request, whether the request is oral or in writing. 
If, because of extraordinary circumstances, more than five business days are required to respond to a request, receipt of the request shall be acknowledged within five (5) business days after the request is received. The acknowledgement shall state the reason for delay and estimate the date when a replay will be made. A request for voluminous records or any request which would, in the opinion of the appropriate records access officer disrupt or interrupt the regular functioning of the city agency to whom such request is directed if complied with within five (5) days, shall be considered an extraordinary circumstance. 
(c)  A request for access to records shall be sufficiently detailed to identify the records. Where possible, the requester should supply information regarding dates, titles, file designations or other information which may help identify the records. The records access officer may in his discretion, require that a request for any or all records falling within a specific category be revised to provide the details referred to above, and shall aid the requester in complying. 
(d)  A current list, by subject matter, of all records produced, filed, or first kept or promulgated after September 1, 1974 shall be available for public inspection and copying. The list shall contain sufficient detail to permit the requester to identify the file category of the records sought. The list may also specify those categories of records of any agency which are not publicly available, by reason of any statute, rule, regulation or privilege not in conflict with the Freedom of Information Law. 
The subject matter list shall be updated periodically and the date of the most recent updating shall appear on the first page. The updating of the subject matter list shall not be less than semiannual. 
(e)  Appropriate personnel of the city shall assist the requester in identifying requested records. 
(f)  Upon locating the requested records the appropriate personnel of the city shall, as promptly as possible, and within the time limits set in subsection (b) above, either: 
(1)  Make the records available for inspection, or, 
(2)  Deny access in whole or part, and explain in writing the reasons therefor. 
(g)  Upon failure to locate records the appropriate official shall certify that: 
(1)  The city is not the legal custodian of the requested records; or, 
(2)  The requested records, after diligent search, cannot be found. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 6) 
State Law reference— Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law, § 84 et seq.  
Sec. 2-2-22. - Inspection and copying of records. 
(a)  A person who has requested access to the public records of this city shall be given full opportunity to see and inspect such records, unless access is denied as provided in section 2-2-23 of this Code. 
(b)  The requester may also make a copy of the records he inspects, but no record may be removed from the office where it is located without the written permission of the person in charge of the office at that time. 
(c)  Upon request and payment of the established fee, if any, the appropriate officer or employee shall prepare and deliver a transcript of such records. 
(d)  Upon request and payment of the established fee, if any, an appropriate official of the city shall certify as correct a transcript prepared by the custodian of the records. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 7)  
Sec. 2-2-23. - Denial of access to records. 
(a)  Denial of access to records shall be in writing stating the reason therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the individual or body established to hear appeals. 
(b)  If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in section 2-2-21, subsection (b) of this Code, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access. 
(c)  The mayor shall designate a person or body to hear appeals from denial of access to records. 
(d)  The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated to hear appeals shall commence upon receipt of written appeal identifying: 
(1)  The date of the appeal. 
(2)  The date and location of the requests for records. 
(3)  The records to which the requester was denied access. 
(4)  Whether the denial of access was in writing or was by failure to provide records promptly as required by such section 2-2-21, subsection (b). 
(5)  The name and return address of the requester. 
(e)  The individual or body designated to hear appeals shall inform the requester of its decision in writing within seven business days of receipt of an appeal. 
(f)  A final denial of access to a requested record, as provided for in subdivision (e) of this section, shall be subject to court review, as provided for in Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 8)  
Sec. 2-2-24. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically authorized by law, including but not limited to, those fees established by section 2-2-8 or 2-3-21 of this Code, and section 50 of the Charter or by established practice prior to September 1, 1974, there shall be no fee charged for: 
(1)  Inspection of records; 
(2)  Search for records; 
(3)  Any certification pursuant to this part. 
(b)  The fee for a photocopy transcript of records shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) per page for pages not exceeding eight and one-half (8½) by fourteen (14) inches. 
(c)  The fee for photocopies of records exceeding eight and one-half (8½) by fourteen (14) inches per page shall be the actual cost of such photocopies, which shall be deemed to be the average unit cost for making such a photocopy, excluding fixed costs such as operator salaries. 
(d)  The fee for a transcript that is typed, hand-written, or otherwise prepared by hand shall cover the clerical time involved in making the transcript, including comparison for accuracy. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 9)  
Sec. 2-2-25. - Public notice. 
A notice containing the job title or name and business address of the records access officers and "fiscal officer"; the name, job title, business address and telephone number of the appeal person or persons or body; and the location where records can be seen or copies [copied], shall be posted in a conspicuous location wherever records are kept, and/or published in a newspaper. 
(Res. of 6-16-75, § 10)  
Secs. 2-2-26—2-2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CYBER INFORMATION SECURITY BREACH AND NOTIFICATION POLICY 
 
Sec. 2-2-41. - Cyber information security breach and notification policy. 
This policy is consistent with the State Technology Law § 208 as added by Chapters 442 and 491 of the Laws of 2005. This policy requires notification to affected New York residents and non-residents. New York State and the City of White Plains value the protection of private information of individuals. The City of White Plains is required to notify an individual when data, which is maintained by the city and contains the individual's private information, has been, or is reasonably believed to have been, compromised. 
The city, after consulting with the state's office of cyber security and critical infrastructure coordination (CSCIC) to determine the scope of the breach and restoration measures of its compromised data, must notify an individual, when it has been determined that there has been, or is reasonably believed to have been, a compromise of the individual's private information through unauthorized disclosure. 
A compromise of private information means the unauthorized acquisition of unencrypted computerized data with private information. 
If encrypted data is compromised along with the corresponding encryption key, the data is considered unencrypted and thus falls under the notification requirements. 
Notification may be delayed if a law enforcement agency determines that the notification impedes a criminal investigation. In such case, notification will be delayed only as long as needed to determine that notification no longer compromises any investigation. 
The city will notify the affected individual directly by one of the following methods: 
a.  Written notice; 
b.  Electronic notice, provided that the person to whom notice is required has expressly consented to receiving notice in electronic form and a log of each notification is kept by the city that notifies affected persons in such form; 
c.  Telephone notification, provided that a log of each notification is kept by the city that notifies affected persons; or 
d.  Substitute notice, if the city demonstrates to the state attorney general that the cost of providing notice would exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), that the affected class of persons to be notified exceeds five hundred thousand (500,000), or that the city does not have sufficient contact information. The following constitute sufficient substitute notice: 
i. E-mail notice when the city has an e-mail address for the subject persons: 
ii. Conspicuous posting of the notice on the city's web site page, if the city maintains one; and 
iii. Notification to major statewide media. 
The city must notify, CSCIC as to the timing, content and distribution of the notices and approximate number of affected persons. 
The city must notify the attorney general and the consumer protection board, whenever notification to a New York resident is necessary, as to the timing, content and distribution of the notices and approximate number of affected persons. 
Regardless of the method by which notice is provided, the notice must include contact information for the city making the notification and a description of the categories of information that were, or are reasonably believed to have been, acquired by a person without valid authorization, including specification of which elements of personal information and private information were, or are reasonably believed to have been, so acquired. 
This policy applies not only to information maintained by the city itself, but also to information maintained on behalf of the city by a third party. 
When more than five thousand (5,000) New York residents must be notified at one time, then the city must notify the consumer reporting agencies as to the timing, content and distribution of the notices and the approximate number of affected individuals. This notice, however, will be made without delaying notice to the individuals. 
Definitions: 
a.  Consumer reporting agency: Any person which, for monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties, and which used any means or facility of interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing consumer reports. The state Attorney General is responsible for compiling a list of consumer reporting agencies and furnishing the list, upon request, to the city. 
b.  Data: Any information created, stored (in temporary or permanent files), filed, produced or reproduced, regardless of the form or media. Data may include, but is not limited to, personally identifying information, reports, files, folders, memoranda, statements, examinations, transcripts, images, communications, electronic or hard copy. 
c.  Information: The representation of facts, concepts, or instructions in a formalized manner suitable for communication, interpretation, or processing by human or automated means. 
(Res. of 4-3-06, §§ I—XII)  
Chapter 2-3 - COMMON COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Common council generally, § 28 et seq. 
Cross reference— Election districts, § 2-1-1; citizen's advisory budget committee, § 2-4-26 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-3-1—2-3-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Power of council to determine its rules of procedure, § 29. 
State Law reference— Open Meetings Law, Public Officers Law, § 95 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-3-16. - Stated meetings. 
Stated meetings of the common council shall be held on the first Monday of each month, except that should the first Monday be a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next day. Stated meetings shall be called to order at 7:30 p.m., and the common council shall attempt to adjourn no later than 12:00 a.m. (midnight). If there is any unfinished business still remaining, the common council shall reconvene the following evening at 7:30 p.m. to take up such unfinished business, unless an alternative date and/or time certain is voted upon by a majority of the members of the common council prior to the adjournment of the stated meeting. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 1; Res. of 11-21-77; Res. of 3-7-88; Res. of 9-6-01) 
Charter reference— Power of common council to set meeting date, § 28.  
Sec. 2-3-17. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be called by the mayor, as provided for in the city charter, and shall be called by him at the request of any two (2) councilmen by their giving the mayor written notice thereof, which such written notice shall contain a statement of the object for which the special meeting shall be called and also shall state the time and place for the holding of such meeting. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 2) 
Charter reference— Calling of special meetings, § 28.  
Sec. 2-3-18. - Notice of special meetings. 
The mayor shall cause written notice of a special meeting to be left at the residence or place of business of each member of the common council at least six (6) hours before the time for which the meeting is called. Such notice shall state the object for which such special meeting is called and shall also state the time and place of the holding of such meeting. In lieu of the aforesaid method of service of notice of a special meeting, the mayor may cause written notice of such special meeting to be sent to each member of the common council by special delivery mail, directed to the residence or place of business of the member, at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time for which the meeting is called. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 3) 
Charter reference— Council to designate notice of special meetings, § 28.  
Sec. 2-3-19. - Transaction of business at special meetings. 
At special meetings the business to be transacted thereat shall be only that stated in the notice of such meeting, except that any other business may be transacted at such special meeting by the unanimous consent of all of the members of the common council. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 4)  
Sec. 2-3-20. - Calendar. 
(a)  The clerk shall prepare a calendar for each stated meeting of the common council, which shall list the matters to be considered by the council at such meeting and which shall include a reference to all communications and other matters in writing which shall have been received by the clerk not later than noon of the seventh business day preceding the date of the meeting. Said calendar shall list the matters to be considered by the council insofar as is possible in the order set forth in section 2-3-22 of this Code. The clerk shall arrange for the delivery of a copy of the calendar to each member of the council not later than the morning of the third day preceding the date of the meeting. No matters shall be considered at a stated meeting of the council unless listed in the calendar, except by unanimous consent of all members of the council present at the meeting. 
(b)  Requests by members of the public to address the common council may be in writing, stating: (i) name and address of the applicant; (ii) subject matter; and (iii) approximate time requested to address the council which shall not exceed five (5) minutes. At the council meeting, it is recommended that the applicant submit to the city clerk a written copy of his or her statement to the common council. 
(Res. of 5-4-64, Rule 5; Res. of 3-7-88)  
Sec. 2-3-21. - Copies of calendar matters. 
At any time after 9:00 a.m. of the third day preceding the date of each stated meeting, the city clerk shall during his regular office hours furnish to any person appearing personally at his office and requesting the same, a copy of any communication or other written document which accompanies or is part of any item appearing on the common council calendar, which has not yet been adopted by the common council. The person appearing and making such request shall pay to the clerk the sum of twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each page or part thereof of each copy of the communication or other written document which is requested by and furnished to him. 
This section is not to be construed to require the city clerk to reproduce any documents, communications or matters which contain pictures or other items not readily reproduced by the average reproduction machine. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 5A; Res. of 11-4-68; Res. of 3-7-88)  
Sec. 2-3-22. - Order of business. 
The order of business at stated meetings of the common council shall be as follows: 
(a)  Roll call. 
(b)  Action upon date and time for adjournment of meeting. 
(c)  Introduction of local laws. 
(d)  Messages from the mayor in relation to local laws. 
(e)  Reports of committees in relation to local laws. 
(f)  Public hearings in relation to local laws. 
(g)  Discussion and action on local laws. 
(h)  Public hearings in relation to matters other than local laws. 
(i)  Correction or amendment of minutes. 
(j)  Action upon ordinances introduced at a prior meeting. 
(k)  Action upon ordinances not previously introduced. 
(l)  Action upon resolutions. 
(m)  Communications from the mayor and heads of departments and reports of committees. 
(n)  Miscellaneous business. 
(o)  Consideration of matters not listed on calendar, if unanimous consent given by members of council present at meeting. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 6; Res. of 3-7-88)  
Sec. 2-3-23. - Suspension of regular order of business. 
The regular order of business at a stated meeting may at any time be suspended by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the common council present at such meeting. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 7)  
Sec. 2-3-24. - Order of business at special meetings. 
The order of business at special meetings of the common council shall be as follows: 
(a)  Roll call. 
(b)  Consideration of business specified in the notice of the special meeting. 
(c)  Consideration of other business, if unanimous consent given by all members of the council. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 8)  
Sec. 2-3-25. - Every member present to vote. 
Every member of the common council present at any meeting thereof, when a question is put, shall vote for or against the same unless excused by the council. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 9)  
Sec. 2-3-26. - Withdrawal of member from meeting. 
No member shall withdraw from a meeting of the common council without the permission of the mayor. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 10)  
Sec. 2-3-27. - Robert's Rules of Order Revised for Deliberative Assemblies to be used. 
All questions of order or procedure of the common council not herein provided for shall be decided in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order Revised for Deliberative Assemblies. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 11)  
Sec. 2-3-28. - Local laws generally. 
In introducing, presenting and transmitting local laws, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(a)  Every local law shall be introduced by a member or on the report of a committee. 
(b)  If a local law purports to change or supersede any provision of an act of the legislature or to amend an existing local law it shall show all the new matter underscored and all the matter to be eliminated in brackets and when such local law is printed or reprinted all new matter must appear in italics and all matter to be eliminated in brackets. 
(c)  Every local law introduced shall be deposited with the city clerk and shall be read in its order of introduction when the order of business "Introduction of local laws" shall be reached. 
(d)  The clerk shall cause every local law immediately upon its introduction to be copied (or printed) and placed on the desks of the members; he shall number them consecutively as received. Such number shall be retained as an introductory number. Each local law shall also have a print (or draft) number, and if the same is printed (or redrafted), the original print (or draft) number shall be retained and there shall be added its new print (or draft) number. 
(Res. of 12-6-43)  
Sec. 2-3-29. - [Notice of hearing on enactment of local laws.] 
When a proposed local law shall be in its final form, the common council shall fix a day for a public hearing before it concerning such local law. The city clerk shall cause public notice of the time of such hearing to be published in the official newspaper for at least three (3) days. Such hearing shall be had not earlier than five (5) days after the day of the last publication of such notice. Such notice shall contain the title of such local law and an explanatory statement thereof prepared by the city clerk. 
(L.L. No. 1-1924, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1939, § 1)  
Sec. 2-3-30. - Procedure relative to retirement from police force and fire department. 
(a)  An application to the common council, as the board of trustees of the police pension fund or of the fire department pension fund, by a member of the police force or of the fire department for retirement shall be in writing and shall contain as a minimum the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  Address of applicant. 
(3)  Rank in the police force or in the fire department, as the case may be. 
(4)  Present salary (on an annual basis). 
(5)  Date of birth. 
(6)  Date of becoming a member of the police force or of the fire department. 
(7)  If and when applicant signed a consent that two (2) per centum of his salary be taken for the benefit of the pension fund and whether he continued to permit the same to be taken so long as he has been an active member of the police force or fire department. 
(8)  Whether applicant has been continuously a member of the force or department since he became a member thereof and, if not, specific information as to the dates of service. 
(9)  Whether applicant is applying for retirement because of physical or mental disability and if so the nature and extent of the disability. 
(10)  If application is made for retirement because of permanent physical or mental disability caused while in the actual performance of police or fire duty full particulars with reference to same. 
(11)  When applicant desires retirement to be effective. 
(12)  Whether any previous application has been made by applicant for retirement and if so date or dates when application or applications made and disposition thereof. 
The application must be signed by the person applying for retirement and it must be verified by him before an officer duly authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(13)  An agreement by applicant that, upon request of the medical board, said applicant will furnish a statement of the names and addresses of all physicians who have been consulted by and all hospitals and institutions which have rendered treatment to said applicant, with a brief statement of the nature of the condition which required each consultation or treatment. Applicant shall also furnish a consent and waiver authorizing and directing such physicians, hospitals and institutions to disclose to the medical board of the city any and all information and records relating to diagnosis, treatment or case history that they may have concerning said applicant, said consent and waiver to further provide that the medical board may disclose to the common council, as trustees of the police pension fund or of the fire department pension fund, as the case may be, and/or to the commissioner of public safety of the city all or such part of said information as said board may deem advisable. 
(b)  A request by the commissioner of public safety for retirement from service of a member of the police force or of the fire department because of permanent disability of such member must be in writing and must contain such matters as are set forth in the preceding paragraph as are pertinent. Such request must state with sufficient detail the nature and extent of the disability and shall be accompanied by a certificate of the surgeon of the police force or fire department, as the case may be, or of a duly licensed physician or surgeon, certifying that the member is physically or mentally unfit for duty and the reasons therefor. Such request of the commissioner need not be verified. 
(c)  An application for retirement of a member of the police force or of the fire department, when received by the common council, shall be referred to the commissioner of public safety and to the corporation counsel for investigation and report. The report of the commissioner of public safety shall indicate whether the application meets with his approval. The common council may refer an application of a member for retirement or a request of the commissioner of public safety that a member be retired to the medical board established pursuant to the provisions of Local Law Number Two of The City of White Plains of 1943, for appropriate action pursuant to such law. 
(Res. of 12-6-43) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 2-1943 is embodied in sec. 302 of the Charter.  
Sec. 2-3-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of 7-5-06, rescinded § 2-3-31, which pertained to recording proceedings of meetings and derived from Res. of Dec. 6, 1943, Rule 15; Res. of Oct. 7, 1963.  
Sec. 2-3-32. - Executive sessions. 
Executive sessions of the common council shall be held in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Public Officers Law. 
(Res. of 12-6-43, Rule 16; Res. of 4-7-75; Res. of 3-7-88) 
State Law reference— Executive sessions of public bodies, Public Officers Law, § 100.  
Secs. 2-3-33—2-3-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, Ch. 2-5. 
 
Sec. 2-3-51. - Established; composition. 
There is established a personnel committee of the common council which shall consist of a total of five (5) members as follows: 
(1)  The personnel officer; 
(2)  The mayor or a representative of the mayor; 
(3)  Three (3) council members to be appointed by the mayor, one of whom shall be a member of a minority party, if any such party is represented on the council; 
Members shall serve for two (2) year terms. 
(Res. of 8-8-75)  
Sec. 2-3-52. - Functions. 
The personnel committee shall review such personnel matters as the mayor from time-to-time refer to it. 
(Res. of 8-8-75)  
Chapter 2-4 - TAXATION AND FINANCIAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Related laws reference— Capital notes, Art. A, Div. 8. 
Cross reference— Notice of newspaper pickup and glass salvaging authorized to be placed in tax bill, § 2-1-6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-4-1. - Distribution of tax on fire insurance companies. 
(a)  The commissioner of finance is hereby authorized and directed to receive all sums of money known as the fire department tax on premiums on foreign and alien fire insurance companies pursuant to section 553 of the Insurance Law and all sums of money known as the fire insurance premium tax; foreign mutual fire insurance companies, pursuant to section 554 of the Insurance Law. 
(b)  The commissioner of finance is further authorized and directed to distribute the total amount of the aforementioned sums of money as follows: The total amount of all money received pursuant to both section 553 and section 554 of the Insurance Law in each calendar year shall be divided by the total number of paid members of the fire department, as certified by the commissioner of public safety, plus the total number of active volunteer members of the fire department as certified by the commissioner of public safety. The result of the aforesaid division shall be designated one share. 
(c)  The commissioner of finance shall, on or before July 1 of each calendar year, pay to the treasurer of the Uniformed Firemen's Benevolent Association, Inc., of White Plains such sum of money for the use and benefit of the paid members of the fire department as shall be equal to one (1) share as previously defined for each paid member of the fire department. The commissioner of finance shall pay to the treasurer of each of the seven (7) presently existing volunteer fire companies for the use and benefit of the active volunteer members of the fire department a sum of money equal to one (1) share as previously defined for each active volunteer member in that company as certified by the commissioner of public safety. 
(Res. of 6-3-68) 
Related laws reference— Tax on fire insurance companies, Art. A, Div. 4.  
Sec. 2-4-2. - Power of city to issue bonds, notes, etc. 
Neither Local Law Number 3 of the city of White Plains for the year 1939, entitled "A local law to amend the charter of the city of White Plains in relation to annual estimate; tax budget; reserve for uncollected taxes; surplus revenues; expenditure of money raised other than by municipal tax; estimates of expenditures by officers and departments; discount on prepayment of second half of city tax; disposition of water rents" nor any other local law of the city shall in any way or manner be deemed to restrict or limit in any way the power of the city to issue its bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness or other obligations for any purpose under the charter of the city, being chapter 356 of the laws of 1915, as amended, or any general or special law. 
(L.L. No. 4-1939, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 3-1939 is embodied in §§ 60, 61, 65 and 84 of the Charter.  
Sec. 2-4-3. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-4-4. - Conversion of unregistered bonds to registered bonds. 
(a)  All serial bonds of the city authorized by the common council on or prior to April 24, 1972, shall be issued in bearer coupon form with the privilege of conversion into bonds registered as to both principal and interest and shall be payable as to both principal and interest in lawful money of the United States of America at The County Trust Company, in White Plains, New York, or, at the option of the holder, at Bankers Trust Company, in New York, New York, which by contract are the paying agents of the issuer. Such bonds shall be signed in the name of the city by its mayor and commissioner of finance; and a facsimile of its corporate seal shall be imprinted thereon and attested by its city clerk. The interest coupons shall bear the facsimile signature of the commissioner of finance. Such bonds shall contain substantially the recital of validity clause provided for in section 52.00 of the Local Finance Law and shall otherwise be in such form and contain such recitals, in addition to those required by section 51.00 of the Local Finance Law, as the commissioner of finance shall determine. 
(b)  All other matters relating to serial bonds of the city duly authorized by the common council thereof, including, but not limited to, the date, denominations, maturities and interest payment dates, within the limitations prescribed by the common council, and also including the consolidation with other issues, shall be determined by the commissioner of finance. 
(c)  The powers and duties of advertising such bonds for sale, conducting the sale and awarding the bonds are hereby delegated to the commissioner of finance, who shall advertise such bonds for sale, conduct the sale and award the bonds in such manner as he shall deem best for the interests of the city; however, in the exercise of these delegated powers, he shall comply fully with the provisions of the Local Finance Law and any order or rule of the state comptroller applicable to the sale of municipal bonds. The receipt of the commissioner of finance shall be a full acquittance to the purchaser of such bonds, who shall not be obliged to see to the application of the purchase money. 
(Ord. of 4-24-72, §§ 1—3) 
State Law reference— Serial bonds, Local Finance Law, § 21.00; conversion of coupon bonds into registered bonds, § 71.00.  
Sec. 2-4-5. - Check images in lieu of cancelled checks. 
The commissioner of finance is authorized to receive, retain and/or produce check images in lieu of cancelled checks for examination or audit. 
(Ord. of 11-3-97, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 3, 1997, which pertained to check images did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion as § 2-4-5 has been at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 2-4-6—2-4-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANNUAL BUDGET[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Budget, § 68 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-4-16. - Amount in annual budget for snow removal. 
There shall be included in the annual budget for each fiscal year an amount equal to at least the average of all expenditures for the removal of snow and ice, exclusive of salaries and wages of regular employees, except for overtime work and work on Sundays and holidays, during each of the five (5) preceding fiscal years. 
(Ord. of 1-19-48, § 1) 
Cross reference— Snow removal from streets by owners of abutting property, § 7-2-1. 
State Law reference— Power of city to pass ordinance to this effect, Local Finance Law, § 29.00, subsec. b.  
Secs. 2-4-17—2-4-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to its revision by a resolution adopted Jan. 18, 1994, this division was entitled "Citizens' Voluntary Budget Advisory Committee." 
 
Sec. 2-4-26. - Established; members. 
(a)  A permanent budget and management advisory committee is hereby established to consist of nine (9) residents of the city. 
(b)  The members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the common council and serve for a term of one (1) year commencing January first and terminating December thirty-first. Of the nine (9) members, two (2) shall be members of the common council. 
(Res. of 11-4-74; Res. of 1-18-94; Res. of 1-3-95)  
Sec. 2-4-27. - Functions. 
The functions of the budget and management advisory committee will be to provide in-depth analyses and recommendations for the city's fiscal and programmatic operations. 
(Res. of 11-4-74; Res. of 1-18-94)  
Sec. 2-4-28. - Budget director to file copy of proposed budget with committee. 
The budget director shall file with the budget and management advisory committee a copy of the proposed budget at the time it is submitted to the common council in April of each year. 
(Res. of 11-4-74; Res. of 3-7-88; Res. of 1-18-94)  
Secs. 2-4-29—2-4-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TAXATION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation generally, § 74 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-4-41. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
(a)  From and after February 1, 1981, the City of White Plains elects to adopt the provisions of titles 2 and 3 of article 11 of the Real Property Tax Law for the purpose of enforcing the collection of delinquent taxes in such tax district. 
(b)  The four-year period referred to in subdivision 1 of section 1120 of the Real Property Tax Law be reduced to a period of two (2) years; however, for the first calendar year for which the resolution is to be effective, a tax lien owned by the tax district may be foreclosed as provided in title 3 of article 11 of the Real Property Tax Law only if there has been due and unpaid for a period of at least three (3) years from the date on which the tax on other legal charges represented thereby became a lien. 
(Res. of 2-2-81)  
Sec. 2-4-42. - Special exemption for person sixty-five years of age or older. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, as amended, real property in the city owned by a person or persons who qualify under that law and meet the requirements for obtaining an exemption set forth in such law, as amended, shall be exempt from general taxes levied under section 84 of the Charter of the City of White Plains to the extent of fifty (50) percent of the assessed valuation thereof, provided that the income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the property for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of making application for exemption is less than the sum of twenty-one thousand five hundred dollars ($21,500.00). 
(b)  Pursuant to section 467 of the Real Property Tax Law for assessment rolls prepared on the basis of a taxable status date occurring on or after December 1, 2002, the exemptions provided by section 467 of the Real Property Tax Law shall be as follows: 
Maximum 
Income 
Exemption 
Eligibility 	Percentage 
Assessed 
Valuation 
Exempt 
from 
Taxation 
Not more than $21,500 	50% 
$21,500.01 - $22,499.00 	45% 
$22,500.00 - $23,499.99 	40% 
$23,500.00 - $24,499.99 	35% 
$24,500.00 - $25,399.99 	30% 
$25,400.00 - $26,299.99 	25% 
$26,300.00 - $27,199.99 	20% 
$27,200.00 - $28,099.99 	15% 
$28,100.00 - $28,999.99 	10% 
$29,000.00 - $29,899.99 	 5% 
 
(Ord. of 10-18-71, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-72, § 1; Ord. of 10-20-75, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-77, § 1; Ord. of 6-18-79, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-80, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-82, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-3-97, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-6-99, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-4-01, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-4-02, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 2-4-43. - Tax abatement for rent-regulated property occupied by senior citizens. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of section 467-b of the Real Property Tax Law, there shall be an abatement of the taxes of the city authorized to be imposed pursuant to section 84 of the city charter upon real property containing one (1) or more dwelling units as such term is defined in section 467-b(1)(a) of the Real Property Tax Law by an amount not in excess of that portion of any increase in maximum rent or legal regulated rent as such term is defined in section 467-b(1)(e) of the Real Property Tax Law which causes such maximum rent or legal regulated rent to exceed one-third of the combined income of all members of the household occupying such dwelling unit. 
(b)  No tax abatement shall be granted hereunder if the combined income of all members of the household occupying any such dwelling unit for the income tax year immediately preceding the date of making application for such abatement exceeds eighteen thousand five hundred dollars ($18,500.00) providing that, in the event the head of the household occupying such dwelling unit retired before the commencement of such year and the date of filing the application, the income for such year may be adjusted by excluding the salary or earnings and projecting his or her retirement income over the entire period of such year. 
(c)  Upon the issuance of a tax abatement certificate as provided in subdivision 4 of section 467-b of the Real Property Tax Law, the amount of increase in the legal regulated rent set forth in said certificate shall be deducted from the legal regulated rent chargeable for any such dwelling unit to which the tax abatement certificate applies. 
(d)  As of each tax payment date subsequent to the eligibility date set forth below the amount deducted from the legal regulated rent for any such dwelling units, in accordance with a tax abatement certificate duly issued as set forth in subsection (c) above shall be deducted from the taxes levied on the real property containing such dwelling unit by or on behalf of the city pursuant to section 84 of the City Charter, upon presentation to the city by the owner of such real property of the appropriate documentation. 
(e)  Eligibility for an abatement of taxes and the issuance of a tax abatement certificate in accordance with the provisions of section 467-b of the Real Property Tax Law and of this section shall be determined as of January 1, 1976, for dwelling units subject to the Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974 (EPTA) and July 1, 1976, for dwelling units subject to the Emergency Housing Rent Control Law (EHRCL). 
(Ord. of 4-19-76, §§ 1—6; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 1; Ord. of 1-19-81, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-82, § 1; Ord. of 1-5-87; Ord. of 9-6-88, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-92, § 1; Ord. of 1-5-98, § 1) 
Cross reference— Housing and rent control, Ch. 4-10. 
State Law reference— Emergency Housing Rent Control Law, Unconsol. L., §§ 8581—8597 (McKinney).  
Sec. 2-4-44. - Tax exemption from real property taxes for property owned or occupied by certain physically disabled persons. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 459 of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, an improvement to real property used solely for residential purposes as a one-, two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvement if such improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and accommodating the use and accessibility of such real property by (a) a resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled, or (b) a member of the resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if such member resides in the real property. 
(b)  The common council desires to extend to its residents the benefits authorized pursuant to said section of the Real Property Tax Law. 
(c)  The provisions of section 459 of the Real Property Tax Law are made applicable to improvements to real property in the city. 
(d)  Such exemption shall apply to improvements constructed prior to and after the effective date of this section [March 5, 1984]. 
(L.L. No. 1-1984, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— L.L. 1-1984 did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1—4 as § 2-4-44 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-4-44.1. - Partial exemption from real property tax for real certain persons with limited income and with disabilities. 
1.  Pursuant to section 459-c of the New York State Real Property Tax Law for assessment rolls prepared on the basis of a tax status date occurring on or after January 1, 2000, real property in the City of White Plains owned by a person or persons who qualify under said law and meet the requirements for obtaining an exemption set forth in said law shall be exempt from general taxes levied under section 84 of the Charter of the City of White Plains to the extent set forth in the following schedule: 
Annual Income 	Percentage of Assessed 
Value Exempt from Taxation 
Not more than $19,500 	50% 
$19,500.01 — $20,499.99 	45% 
$20,500.00 — $21,499.99 	40% 
$21,500.00 — $22,499.99 	35% 
$22,500.00 — $23,399.99 	30% 
$23,400.00 — $24,299.99 	25% 
$24,300.00 — $25,199.99 	20% 
$25,200.00 — $26,099.99 	15% 
$26,100.00 — $26,999.99 	10% 
$27,000.00 — $27,899.99 	 5% 
 
(L.L. No. 3-2000, § 1) 
Editor's note— L. L. 3-2000, § 1, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 2-4-44.1 was at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 2-4-45. - Maximum alternate veterans' real property tax exemption. 
The maximum exemption from taxation allowable in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of subdivision 2 of section 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York is hereby increased to twenty-seven thousand dollars ($27,000.00), eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00) and ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00). 
(L.L. No. 4-1984, § 1; L.L. No. 4-1997, § 1; L.L. No. 3-2003, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. 4-1984 did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of § 1 as § 2-4-45 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-4-46. - Increase, decrease of veterans' real property tax exemption. 
If the ratio between the exemption granted under section 458 of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York and the total assessed value of the real property for which such exemption has been granted increases or decreases due only to a full value assessment in the tax district in which such property is located, the amount of the exemption heretofore or hereafter granted shall be increased or decreased in such subsequent year in the same proportion as the total assessed value has been increased or decreased. Such adjustment shall be made by the assessor in the manner provided in paragraph (3) of subdivision 1 of section 458 of the Real Property Tax Law; and no application therefor need be filed by or on behalf of any owner of any eligible property. 
(L.L. 2-1985, § 1) 
Editor's note— L.L. 2-1985 did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of § 1 as § 2-4-46 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-4-47. - Installment payment of delinquent real property taxes. 
(a)  The City of White Plains hereby elects to provide for the installment payment of eligible delinquent taxes by delinquent taxpayers, pursuant to Section 1184 of the Real Property Tax Law, as effective January 1, 1995. 
(b)  The maximum term of the installment agreement shall be twenty-four (24) months. 
(c)  The payment schedule for the installment agreement may be either monthly or quarterly. 
(d)  The required initial down payment shall be twenty-five (25) percent of eligible delinquent taxes. 
(e)  The properties to which local law shall apply shall be all properties within this tax district. 
(L.L. 2-1994, §§ 1—6) 
Editor's note— L.L. 2-1994, §§ 1—6, adopted Dec. 5, 1994, provided for installment payment of delinquent property taxes. Such law did not specify manner of codification; hence, designation as § 2-4-47 has been at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 2-4-48. - On-line payment of real property taxes. 
(a)  As authorized by General Municipal Law §§ 5 and 5-b and Real Property Tax Law § 925-c, it is in the best interests of the city to pursue and implement a program where real property tax payments (including interest and collection fees) can be completed by electronic means both by e-checks and credit cards. 
(b)  All payments of real property taxes via the internet shall be by a method, in compliance with article 3 of the Technology Law, which, among other requirements, 
(1)  Authenticates the identity of the sender or is accompanied by sufficient language to identify the property and tax levy; 
(2)  Ensures the security of the information transmitted; 
(3)  Provides a confirmation page to the taxpayer following completion of the internet transaction which includes the date the internet transaction was completed and sent by the taxpayer and a notice to the taxpayer to print out and retain a copy of page as a receipt; 
(4)  Provides that on-line payments shall be considered as received by the finance department and paid by the taxpayer, subject to receipt of funds in full, at the time the internet transaction is completed and sent by the taxpayer. 
(c)  In addition, the finance department is authorized to collect or allow the processing agent to collect a service/convenience fee from the taxpayer for payment of real property taxes (including interest and collection fees) in the same amount as the fee which would otherwise be charged the city by the vendor processing the payment on behalf of the city. 
(d)  The mayor of the City of White Plains, or his designee, is hereby authorized to enter into contracts with vendors, including but not limited to, JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. and Paymenttech, LLC to provide for the on-line payment of real property taxes (including interest and collection fees) due or to become due. All such contracts are to be in a form acceptable to the corporation counsel. 
(Ord. of 7-25-08, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— Ord. of July 25, 2008 did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1—4 as § 2-4-48 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 2-4-49—2-4-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The first board of assessment review was appointed on January 10, 1972. (1972 Minutes p. 27) 
Charter reference— Board of assessment review, § 74. 
 
Sec. 2-4-51. - Compensation. 
The members of the board of assessment review shall be paid for their respective services in attending hearings of the board at the rate of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each full day's services and fifty dollars ($50.00) for a portion of a day for its services rendered, and at the same rate for not more than an aggregate of five (5) full days of executive sessions subject to further resolution of the common council. 
(Res. of 2-2-76)  
Secs. 2-4-52—2-4-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF TAXES BY URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Assessment, levy and collection of taxes generally, § 74 et seq. 
Related laws reference— Urban renewal agency, Art. A, Div. 10. 
 
Sec. 2-4-61. - Payment authorized. 
For the purposes stated in and equal to the limits prescribed by section 555 subdivision 1(b) of the General Municipal Law, the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency is required to pay annual sums in lieu of taxes to The City of White Plains and to the City School District of The City of White Plains, New York. 
(L.L. No. 3-1968, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-62. - Effect upon other assessments or charges. 
This act [division] does not affect taxes, special assessments or other charges lawfully assessed or levied against property of the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency. 
(L.L. No. 3-1968, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-63. - Date requirement for payment effective. 
This requirement [see section 2-4-61] for payment is effective commencing with the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1966. 
(L.L. No. 3-1968, § 3)  
Secs. 2-4-64—2-4-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TAX EXEMPTION FOR COMMERCIAL BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 2-4-71. - Reduced to zero percent. 
As provided in subdivision (7) of section 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law, the percentage of exemption otherwise allowed pursuant to section 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law shall be reduced with respect to taxes of The City of White Plains to zero (0) percent. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-72. - Certification. 
Upon the adoption of this local law [division], the City Clerk of The City of White Plains is directed, in addition to the requirements of the municipal home rule law, to file a certified copy thereof with the state board of equalization and assessment. 
(L.L. No. 3-1977, § 2)  
Secs. 2-4-73—2-4-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SALES AND USE TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that a resolution adopted May 20, 1999, provided that the council of the city expressed its intention not to elect to participate in the elimination of the local compensating use and sales tax on clothing and footwear up to one hundred ten dollars. 
 
Sec. 2-4-81. - Definitions. 
(a)  When used in this division, the term "person" includes an individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee, and any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing. 
(b)  When used in this division for the purposes of the taxes imposed by subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section 2-4-82 of this Code and by section 2-4-84 hereof, the following terms shall mean as follows: 
(1)  Purchase at retail. A purchase by any person for any purpose other than those set forth in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph a. of paragraph (4) of this subdivision. 
(2)  Purchaser: A person who purchases property or to whom are rendered services, the receipts from which are taxable under this division. 
(3)  Receipt: The amount of the sale price of any property and the charge for any service taxable under this division, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including any amount for which credit is allowed by the vendor to the purchaser, without any deduction for expenses or early payment discounts, but excluding any credit for tangible personal property accepted in part payment and intended for resale and excluding the cost of transportation of tangible personal property sold at retail where such cost is separately stated in the written contract, if any, and on the bill rendered to the purchaser. For special rules governing computation of receipts, see section 2-4-85 of this Code. 
(4)  Retail sale: 
a.  A sale of tangible personal property to any person for any purpose, other than: 
(i)  For resale as such or as a physical component part of tangible personal property; or 
(ii)  For use by that person in performing the services subject to tax under paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and (5) of subdivision (c) of section 2-4-82 of this Code where the property so sold becomes a physical component part of the property upon which the services are performed or where the property so sold is later actually transferred to the purchaser of the service in conjunction with the performance of the service subject to tax. 
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this paragraph, a sale of any tangible personal property to a contractor, subcontractor or repairman for use or consumption in erecting structures or buildings, or building on, or otherwise adding to, altering, improving, maintaining, servicing or repairing real property, property or land, as the terms real property, property or land are defined in the Real Property Tax Law, is deemed to be a retail sale regardless of whether the tangible personal property is to be resold as such before it is so used or consumed. 
b.  The term "retail sale" does not include: 
(i)  The transfer of tangible personal property to a corporation, solely in consideration for the issuance of its stock, pursuant to a merger or consolidation effected under the law of New York or any other jurisdiction. 
(ii)  The distribution of property by a corporation to its stockholders as a liquidating dividend. 
(iii)  The distribution of property by a partnership to its partners in whole or partial liquidation. 
(iv)  The transfer of property to a corporation upon its organization in consideration for the issuance of its stock. 
(v)  The contribution of property to a partnership in consideration for a partnership interest therein. 
(5)  Sale, selling or purchase: Any transfer of title or possession or both, exchange or barter, rental lease or license to use or consume, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration, or any agreement therefor, including the rendering of any service, taxable under this division for a consideration or any agreement therefor. 
(6)  Tangible personal property: Corporeal personal property of any nature. However, except for purposes of the tax imposed by subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code, such terms shall not include gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam. 
(7)  Use: The exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property by the purchaser thereof and includes, but is not limited to, the receiving, storage or any keeping or retention for any length of time, withdrawal from storage, any installation, any affixation to real or personal property, or any consumption of such property. 
(8)  Vendor: 
a.  The term "vendor" includes: 
(i)  a person making sales of tangible personal property or services, the receipts from which are taxed by this division. 
(ii)  A person maintaining a place of business in the state and making sales, whether at such place of business or elsewhere, to persons within the city of tangible personal property or services, the use of which is taxed by this division. 
(iii)  A person who solicits business either by employees, independent contractors, agents or other representatives or by distribution of catalogs or other advertising matter and by reason thereof makes sales to persons within the city of tangible personal property or services, the use of which is taxed by this division. 
(iv)  Any other person making sales to persons within the city of tangible personal property or services, the use of which is taxed by this division, who may be authorized by the tax commission to collect such tax. 
(v)  The State of New York, any of its agencies, instrumentalities, public corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another state or Canada) or political subdivisions when such entity sells services or property of a kind ordinarily sold by private persons. 
b.  Any salesman, representative, peddler, or canvasser, who is treated by the state tax commission as a vendor, pursuant to the provisions of section 1101(b)(8)(ii) of the Tax Law. 
(c)  When used in this division for the purposes of the tax imposed under subdivision (e) of section 2-4-82 of this Code, the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  Hotel: A building or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel, a motel, boarding house or club, whether or not meals are served. 
(2)  Occupancy: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel. 
(3)  Occupant: A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
(4)  Operator: Any person operating a hotel. 
(5)  Permanent resident: Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least ninety (90) consecutive days shall be considered a permanent resident with regard to the period of such occupancy. 
(6)  Rent: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise. 
(7)  Room: Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel, which is available for or let out for any purpose other than a place of assembly. 
(d)  When used in this division for purposes of the tax imposed under subdivision (f) of section 2-4-82 of this Code, the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  Active annual member: A member who is not a life member but who enjoys full club privileges as distinguished from the privileges enjoyed by a person holding a nonresident membership, an associate membership, or other partial or restricted membership. 
(2)  Admission charge: The amount paid for admission, including any service charge and any charge for entertainment or amusement or for the use of facilities therefor. 
(3)  Amusement charge: Any admission charge, dues or charge of roof garden, cabaret or other similar place. 
(4)  Charge of a roof garden, cabaret or other similar place: Any charge made for admission, refreshment, service, or merchandise at a roof garden, cabaret or other similar place. 
(5)  Dramatic or musical arts admission charge: Any admission charge paid for admission to a theatre opera house, concert hall or other hall or place of assembly for a live dramatic, choreographic or musical performance. 
(6)  Dues: Any dues or membership fee including any assessment, irrespective of the purpose for which made, and any charges for social or sports privileges or facilities. Dues of a life member shall be an annual equivalent to the amount paid as dues, within this definition, by an active annual member, whether or not the life member paid for his life membership prior to the imposition of the tax by this division. 
(7)  Initiation fee: Any payment, contribution, or loan, required as a condition precedent to membership, whether or not such payment, contribution or loan is evidenced by a certificate of interest or indebtedness or share of stock, and irrespective of the person or organization to whom paid, contributed or loaned. 
(8)  Lessor: Any person who is the owner, licensee, or lessee of any place of amusement or roof garden, cabaret or other similar place which he leases, subleases or grants a license to use to other persons who make amusement charges or admission charges. 
(9)  Patron: Any person who pays an amusement charge or who is otherwise required to pay the tax imposed under of subdivision (f) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
(10)  Place of amusement: Any place where any facilities for entertainment, amusement, or sports are provided. 
(11)  Recipient: Any person who collects or receives or is under a duty to collect an amusement charge. 
(12)  Roof garden, cabaret or other similar place: Any roof garden, cabaret or other similar place which furnishes a public performance for profit. 
(13)  Social or athletic club: Any club or organization of which a material purpose or activity is social or athletic. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1101.  
Sec. 2-4-82. - Imposition of sales tax. 
On and after September 1, 1993, there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of one and one-half percent upon, and for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid an additional tax of one-half percent upon: 
(a)  The receipts from every retail sale of tangible personal property, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(b)  The receipts from every sale, other than sales for resale, of gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric, refrigeration and steam service of whatever nature, and from every sale, other than sales for resale, or telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service of whatever nature except interstate and international telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph services. 
(c)  The receipts from every sale, except for resale, of the following services: 
(1)  The furnishing of information by printed, mimeographed or multigraphed matter or by duplicating written or printed matter in any other manner, including the services of collecting, compiling or analyzing information of any kind or nature and furnishing reports thereof to other persons, but excluding the furnishing of information which is personal or individual in nature and which is not or may not be substantially incorporated in reports furnished to other persons, and excluding the services of advertising or other agents, or other persons acting in a representative capacity, and information services used by newspapers, radio broadcasters and television broadcasters in the collection and dissemination of news. 
(2)  Producing, fabricating, processing, printing or imprinting tangible personal property, performed for a person who directly or indirectly furnishes the tangible personal property, not purchased by him for resale, upon which such services are performed. 
(3)  Installing tangible personal property, or maintaining, servicing, repairing tangible personal property not held for sale in the regular course of business, whether or not the services are performed directly or by means of coin-operated equipment or by any other means, and whether or not any tangible personal property is transferred in conjunction therewith, except such services rendered by an individual who is engaged directly by a private home owner or lessee in or about this residence and who is not in a regular trade or business offering his services to the public, and except any receipts from laundering, dry cleaning, tailoring, weaving, pressing, shoe repairing and shoe shining, and except for installing property which, when installed, will constitute an addition or capital improvement to real property, property or land, as the terms real property, property or land are defined in the Real Property Tax Law, and except such services rendered with respect to commercial vessels primarily engaged in interstate or foreign commerce and property used by or purchased for the use of such vessels for fuel, provisions, supplies, maintenance and repairs (other than with respect to articles purchased for the original equipping of a new ship); however, nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed to exclude from tax under this paragraph or under subdivision (b) of this section any charge, made by a person furnishing service subject to tax under subdivision (b) of this section, for installing property at the premises of a purchaser of such a taxable service for use in connection with such service. 
(4)  Storing all tangible personal property not held for sale in the regular course of business and the rental of safe deposit boxes or similar space. 
(5)  Maintaining, servicing or repairing real property, property or land, as such terms are defined in the Real Property Tax Law, whether the services are performed in or outside of a building, as distinguished from adding to or improving such real property, property or land, by a capital improvement, but excluding services rendered by an individual who is not in a regular trade or business offering his services to the public, and excluding interior cleaning and maintenance services performed on a regular contractual basis for a term of not less than thirty (30) days, other than window cleaning, rodent and pest control and trash removal from buildings. 
Wages, salaries and other compensation paid by an employer to an employee for performing as an employee the services described in paragraphs (1) through (5) above are not receipts subject to the taxes imposed under such subsection. 
(d)  (1)  The receipts from every sale of beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages or any other drink of any nature, or from every sale of food and drink of any nature or of food alone, when sold in or by restaurants, taverns or other establishments in this city, or by caterers, including in the amount of such receipts any cover, minimum, entertainment or other charge made to patrons or customers (except those receipts taxed pursuant to subdivision (f) of this section): 
a.  In all instances where the sale is for consumption on the premises where sold; 
b.  In those instances where the vendor or any person whose services are arranged for by the vendor, after the delivery of the food or drink by or on behalf of the vendor for consumption off the premises of the vendor, serves or assists in serving, cooks, heats or provides other services with respect to the food or drink; and 
c.  In those instances where the sale is for consumption off the premises of the vendor, except where food (other than sandwiches) or drink or both are: 
(i)  Sold in an unheated state; and 
(ii)  Of a type commonly sold for consumption off the premises and in the same form and condition, quantities and packaging, in establishments which are food stores other than those principally engaged in selling foods prepared and ready to be eaten. 
(2)  The tax imposed by this subdivision shall not apply to: 
a.  Food or drink which is sold to an airline for consumption while in flight. 
b.  Food or drink sold to a student of a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary or secondary school at a restaurant or cafeteria located on the premises of such a school, or food or drink, other than beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages, sold at a restaurant, tavern or other establishment located on the premises of a college, university or a school (other than a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary or secondary school) to a student enrolled therein who purchases such food or drink under a contractual arrangement whereby the student does not pay cash at the time he is served, provided the school, college or university described in this subparagraph is operated by an exempt organization described in subdivision (a) of section 1116 of the Tax Law, or is created, incorporated, registered, or licensed by the state legislature or pursuant to the Education Law or the regulations of the commissioner of education, or is incorporated by the Regents of the University of the State of New York or with their consent or the consent of the commissioner of education as provided in section 216 of the Education Law. 
c.  Food or drink sold through coin-operated vending machines at ten cents ($0.10) or less, provided the vendor is primarily engaged in making such sales and maintains records satisfactory to the state tax commission. 
(e)  The rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in this city, except that the tax shall not be imposed upon: 
(1)  A permanent resident; or 
(2)  Where the rent is not more than at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per day. 
(f)  (1)  Any admission charge where such admission charge is in excess of ten cents ($0.10) to or for the use of any place of amusement in the city, except charges for admission to race tracks, boxing, sparring or wrestling matches or exhibitions which charges are taxed under the laws of this state except taxes imposed by article 28 of the Tax Law, or dramatic or musical arts performances, or motion picture theaters, and except charges to a patron for admission to, or use of, facilities for sporting activities in which such patron is to be a participant, such as bowling alleys and swimming pools. For any person having the permanent use or possession of a box or seat or a lease or a license, other than a season ticket, for the use of a box or seat at a place of amusement, the tax shall be upon the amount for which a similar box or seat is sold for each performance or exhibition at which the box or seat is used or reserved by the holder, licensee or lessee, and shall be paid by the holder, licensee or lessee. 
(2)  The dues paid to any social or athletic club in this city if the dues of an active annual member, exclusive of the initiation fee, are in excess of ten dollars ($10.00) per year, and on the initiation fee alone, regardless of the amount of dues, if such initiation fee is in excess of ten dollars ($10.00); except that the tax shall not apply to a fraternal society, order or association operating under the lodge system or any fraternal association of students of a college or university. Where the tax on dues applies to any such social or athletic club, the tax shall be paid by all members thereof regardless of the amount of their dues, and shall be paid on all dues or initiation fees for a period commencing on or after September 1, 1973. In the case of a life membership, the tax shall be upon the annual amount paid by active annual members as dues, whether or not the life member paid for or was admitted to such membership prior to the imposition of the tax under this division, and shall be paid annually by the person holding such life membership at the time for payment of dues by active annual members. 
(3)  The amount paid as charges of a roof garden, cabaret or other similar place in the state. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 2; Ord. of 7-28-93, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-82, § 1; Ord. of 5-29-97, § 1; Ord. of 5-20-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-29-01, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-03, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-05, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 1, eff. 9-1-13; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 1, eff. 9-1-15; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1, eff. 9-1-17 ) 
State Law reference— Local sales tax authorized, Tax Law, § 1210.  
Sec. 2-4-83. - Transitional provisions for sales tax. 
(a)  The taxes imposed under subdivisions (a), (c) and (d) of section 2-4-82 of this Code shall be paid upon all sales made and services rendered on or after September 1, 1973, although made on or rendered under a prior contract, except as provided in section 2-9-92 of this Code, and except that a delivery or transfer of possession of tangible personal property made after that date pursuant to an agreement for the sale of said property made before the date four (4) months earlier than September 1, 1973 shall not be subject to tax if: 
(1)  Such agreement for the sale of the property was made in writing; 
(2)  The particular item or items of property so sold or agreed to be sold were segregated, before May 1, 1973, from any other similar property in the possession of the vendor and identified as having been appropriated to such sale or agreement of sale; and 
(3)  The purchaser, before September 1, 1973, shall have paid to the vendor not less than ten (10) percent of the sale price of said property. 
(b)  The tax imposed under subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code shall be paid with respect to receipts for property or services sold on or after September 1, 1973, although made under a prior contract. Where property or service is sold on a monthly, quarterly or other term basis and the bills for such property or service are based on meter readings, the amount received on each bill for such property or service for a month or other term shall be a receipt subject to the tax; but such tax shall be applicable to all bills based on meters read on or after September 1, 1973, only where more than one-half (½) of the number of days included in the month or other period billed are days subsequent to August 31, 1973; however, where such bills are for telephone or telegraph service, the tax shall apply to all receipts on such bills dated on or after September 1, 1973, for which no previous bill was rendered, excepting, however, charges for services furnished before the date of the first of such bills. 
(c)  The tax imposed under subdivision (e) of section 2-4-82 of this Code shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after September 1, 1973, although such occupancy is pursuant to a prior contract, lease or other arrangement. Where rent is paid on a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent shall be subject to the tax imposed under such subdivision (e) to the extent that it covers any period on and after September 1, 1973; and such rent shall be apportioned on the basis of the ratio of the number of days falling within that period to the total number of days covered thereby. 
(d)  Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the tax imposed under subdivision (f) of section 2-4-82 of this Code shall be applicable to any admission to or the use of facilities of a place of amusement occurring on or after September 1, 1973, whether or not the admission charge has been paid prior to such date, unless the tickets were actually sold and delivered (other than for resale) prior to September 1, 1973, to a person attending the performance occurring on or after such date. 
(e)  A refund or credit equal to the amount of the sale or compensating use tax paid on the sale or use of tangible personal property, under a local law, ordinance or resolution imposed pursuant to the authority of chapter 873 of the Laws of 134, as amended, or chapter 278 of the Laws of 1947, as amended, shall be allowed, upon application to the tax commission as provided for herein, where such property has been used by the purchaser or user in performing the services subject to tax under paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and (5) of subdivision (c) of section 2-4-82 of this Code and such property has become a physical component part of the property upon which the services are performed or has been transferred to the purchaser of the service in conjunction with the performance of the service subject to tax; except that such refund or credit may not exceed the combined state and local taxes, if any, paid, pursuant to article 28 of the Tax Law and under the tax imposed by this division, on the sale or use of the service in connection with which such property was used. No interest shall be allowed or paid upon any refund made or credit allowed pursuant to this subdivision. 
(f)  With respect to the additional tax of one-half percent imposed for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, the provisions of subdivisions (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section apply, except that for the purposes of this subdivision, all references in said subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) to an effective date shall be read as referring to September 1, 1993, all references in said subdivision (a) to the date four months prior to the effective date shall be read as referring to May 1, 1993, and the reference in subdivision (b) to the date immediately preceding the effective date shall be read as referring to August 31, 1993. Nothing herein shall be deemed to exempt from tax at the rate in effect prior to September 1, 1993, any transaction which may not be subject to the additional tax imposed effective on that date. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 3; Ord. of 7-28-93, § 2; Ord. of 5-24-95, § 2; Ord. of 5-29-97, § 2; Ord. of 5-20-99, § 2; Ord. of 5-29-01, § 2; Ord. of 5-5-03, § 2; Ord. of 5-25-05, § 2; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 2, eff. 9-1-13; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 2, eff. 9-1-15; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1, eff. 9-1-17 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1106.  
Sec. 2-4-84. - Imposition of compensating use tax. 
(a)  Except to the extent that property or services have already been or will be subject to the sales tax under this enactment, there is hereby imposed on every person a use tax for the use within this taxing jurisdiction on and after September 1, 1993, except as otherwise exempted under this enactment: (A) of any tangible personal property purchased at retail, (B) of any tangible personal property (other than computer software used by the author or other creator) manufactured, processed or assembled by the user, (i) if items of the same kind of tangible personal property are offered for sale by him in the regular course of business or (ii) if items are used as such or incorporated into a structure, building or real property, by a contractor, subcontractor or repairman in erecting structures or buildings, or building on, or otherwise adding to, altering, improving, maintaining, servicing or repairing real property, property or land, as the terms real property, property or land are defined in the real property tax law, if items of the same kind are not offered for sale as such by such contractor, subcontractor or repairman or other user in the regular course of business, (C) of any of the services described in paragraphs (1), (7) and (8) of subdivision (c) of section two, (D) of any tangible personal property, however acquired, where not acquired for purposes of resale, upon which any of the services described under paragraphs (2), (3) and (7) of subdivision (c) of section two have been performed, (E) of any telephone answering service described in subdivision (b) of section two and (F) of any computer software written or otherwise created by the user if the user offers software of a similar kind for sale as such or as a component part of other property in the regular course of business. 
(b)  For purposes of clause (A) of subdivision (a) of this section, for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of two percent, and on and after September 1, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of one and one-half percent, of the consideration given or contracted to be given for such property, or for the use of such property, including any charges for shipping or delivery as described in paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section one, but excluding any credit for tangible personal property accepted in part payment and intended for resale. 
(c)  For purposes of subclause (i) of clause (B) of subdivision (a) of this section, for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of two percent, and on and after September 1, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of one and one-half percent, of the price at which items of the same kind of tangible personal property are offered for sale by the user, and the mere storage, keeping, retention or withdrawal from storage of tangible personal property by the person who manufactured, processed or assembled such property shall not be deemed a taxable use by him. 
(d)  For purposes of subclause (ii) of clause (B) of subdivision (a) of this section, for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of two percent, and on and after September 1, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of one and one-half percent, of the consideration given or contracted to be given for the tangible personal property manufactured, processed or assembled into the tangible personal property the use of which is subject to tax, including any charges for shipping or delivery as described in paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section one. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, for purposes of clause (B) of subdivision (a) of this section, there shall be no tax on any portion of such price which represents the value added by the user to tangible personal property which he fabricates and installs to the specifications of an addition or capital improvement to real property, property or land, as the terms real property, property or land are defined in the real property tax law, over and above the prevailing normal purchase price prior to such fabrication of such tangible personal property which a manufacturer, producer or assembler would charge an unrelated contractor who similarly fabricated and installed such tangible personal property to the specifications of an addition or capital improvement to such real property, property or land. 
(f)  For purposes of clauses (C), (D) and (E) of subdivision (a) of this section, for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of two percent, and on and after September 1, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of one and one-half percent, of the consideration given or contracted to be given for the service, including the consideration for any tangible personal property transferred in conjunction with the performance of the service and also including any charges for shipping and delivery of the property so transferred and of the tangible personal property upon which the service was performed as such charges are described in paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section one. 
(g)  For purposes of clause (F) of subdivision (a) of this section, for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of two percent, and on and after September 1, 2019, the tax shall be at the rate of one and one-half percent, of the consideration given or contracted to be given for the tangible personal property which constitutes the blank medium, such as disks or tapes, used in conjunction with the software, or for the use of such property, and the mere storage, keeping, retention or withdrawal from storage of computer software described in such clause (F) by its author or other creator shall not be deemed a taxable use by such person. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 4; Ord. of 7-28-93; Ord. of 5-24-95, § 3; Ord. of 15-29-97, § 4; Ord. of 5-20-99, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 5-29-01, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 5-5-03, § 3; Ord. of 5-25-05, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 3, eff. 9-1-13; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 3, eff. 9-1-15; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1, eff. 9-1-17 )  
Sec. 2-4-84-A. - Imposition of additional rate of sales and compensating use taxes. 
Pursuant to the authority of section 1210 of the Tax Law, in addition to the sales and compensating use taxes imposed by sections 2-4-82 and 2-4-84 of this chapter, there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid an additional one-quarter percent rate of such sales and compensating use taxes, for the period beginning June 1, 2008, and ending August 31, 2019. Such additional taxes shall be identical to the taxes imposed by such sections 2-4-82 and 2-4-84 and shall be administered and collected in the same manner as such taxes. All of the provisions of this ordinance relating or applicable to the administration and collection of the taxes imposed by such sections 2-4-82 and 2-4-84 shall apply to the additional taxes imposed by this section, including the applicable transitional provisions, limitations, special provisions, exemptions, exclusions, refunds and credits as are set forth in this resolution, with the same force and effect as if those provisions had been incorporated in full into this section and had expressly referred to the additional taxes imposed by this section. 
(Ord. of 5-30-13, § 4, eff. 9-1-13; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 4, eff. 9-1-15; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1, eff. 9-1-17 )  
Sec. 2-4-84-B. - Imposition of additional rate of sales and compensating use taxes. 
Pursuant to the authority of section 1210 of the Tax Law, in addition to the sales and compensating use taxes imposed by sections 2-4-82, 2-4-84, and 2-4-84-A of this chapter, there is imposed and there shall be paid an additional one-quarter percent rate of such sales and compensating use taxes, for the period beginning June 1, 2010, and ending August 31, 2019. Such additional taxes shall be identical to the taxes imposed by such sections 2-4-82, 2-4-84, and 2-4-84-A and shall be administered and collected in the same manner as such taxes. All of the provisions of this ordinance relating or applicable to the administration and collection of taxes imposed by such sections 2-4-82, 2-4-84, and 2-4-84-A shall apply to the additional taxes imposed by this section, including the applicable transitional provisions, limitations, special provisions, exemptions, exclusions, refunds and credits as set forth in this ordinance, with the same force and effect as if those provisions had been incorporated in full into this section and had expressly referred to the additional taxes imposed by this section. 
(Ord. of 5-30-13, § 5, eff. 9-1-13; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 5, eff. 9-1-15; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1, eff. 9-1-17 )  
Sec. 2-4-85. - Special rules for computing receipts and consideration. 
(a)  The retail sales tax imposed under subdivision (a) of section 2-4-82 of this Code and the compensating use tax imposed under section 2-4-84 of this Code, when computed in respect to tangible personal property whenever manufactured, processed or assembled and used by such manufacturer, producer or assembler in the regular course of business within this city, shall be based on the price at which items of the same kind of tangible personal property are offered for sale by him, except to the extent otherwise provided in section 2-4-84 of this Code. 
(b)  Tangible personal property, which has been purchased by a resident of this city outside of this city for use outside of this city and subsequently becomes subject to the compensating use tax imposed under this division shall be taxed on the basis of the purchase price of such property, provided, however: 
(1)  That where a taxpayer affirmatively shows that the property was used outside this city by him for more than six (6) months prior to its use within this city such property shall be taxed on the basis of current market value of the property at the time of its first use within this city. The value of such property, for compensating use tax purposes, may not exceed its cost. 
(2)  That the compensating use tax on such tangible personal property brought into this city other than for complete consumption or for incorporation into real property located in this city and used in the performance of a contract or subcontract within this city by a purchaser or user for a period of less than six (6) months may be based, at the option of the taxpayer, on the fair rental value of such property for the period of use within this city. 
(c)  With respect to property leased, or sold under a contract deferring payment, tax shall be payable at such times and in such amounts as may be prescribed by the state tax commission as provided in section 1132 of the Tax Law. 
(d)  If the state tax commission has prescribed or shall prescribe schedules of the amount of tax to be collected upon each gallon of motor fuel and diesel motor fuel sold at retail service stations, and upon each pack of cigarettes, as provided in section 1111 of the Tax Law, the tax thereon shall be collected as prescribed in such schedules. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 5) 
State Law reference— Compensating use tax authorized, Tax Law, § 1210.  
Sec. 2-4-86. - Exemptions from sales and use taxes. 
(a)  Receipts from the following shall be exempt from the tax on retail sales imposed under subdivision (a) of section 2-4-82 of this Code and the compensating use tax imposed under section 2-4-84: 
(1)  Food, food products, beverages, dietary foods and health supplements, sold for human consumption but not including: 
a.  Candy and confectionery; 
b.  Fruit drinks which contain less than seventy (70) percent of natural fruit juice; 
c.  Soft drinks, sodas and beverages such as are ordinarily dispensed at soda fountains or in connection therewith (other than coffee, tea or cocoa); and 
d.  Beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages; 
all of which shall be subject to the retail sales and compensating use taxes, whether or not the item is sold in liquid form. Nothing herein shall be construed as exempting food or drink from the tax imposed under subdivision (d) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
(2)  Water, when delivered to the consumer through mains or pipes. 
(3)  Drugs and medicines intended for use, internally or externally, in the cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of illnesses or diseases in human beings and products consumed by humans for the preservation of health but not including medical equipment and supplies other than such drugs and medicines, or cosmetics or toilet articles notwithstanding the presence of medicinal ingredients therein. 
(4)  Prosthetic aids, hearing aids, or eyeglasses and artificial devices designed for the use of a particular individual to correct or alleviate physical incapacity. 
(5)  Newspapers and periodicals. 
(6)  Tangible personal property, except property incorporated in a building or structure, for the use or consumption directly and exclusively in the production for sale of tangible personal property by farming, including stock, dairy, poultry, fruit, fur bearing animal, and truck farming. The term "farming" shall also include ranching, operating nurseries, greenhouses or other similar structures used primarily for the raising of agricultural, horticultural or floricultural commodities, and operating orchards. 
(7)  Tangible personal property sold by a mortician, undertaker or funeral director. However, all tangible personal property sold to a mortician, undertaker or funeral director for use in the conducting of funerals shall not be deemed a sale for resale within the meaning of paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of section 2-4-81 of this Code and shall not be exempt from the retail sales tax. 
(8)  Commercial vessels primarily engaged in interstate or foreign commerce and property used by or purchased for the use of such vessels for fuel, provisions, supplies, maintenance and repairs (other than articles purchased for the original equipping of a new ship). 
(9)  Fuel sold to an airline for use in its airplanes. 
(10)  Tangible personal property purchased for use or consumption directly and exclusively in research and development in the experimental or laboratory sense. Such research and development shall not be deemed to include the ordinary testing or inspection of materials or products for quality control, efficiency surveys, management studies, consumer surveys, advertising, promotions or research in connection with literary, historical or similar projects. 
(11)  The flags of the United States of America and the State of New York. 
(12)  Tangible personal property sold through coin-operated vending machines at ten cents ($0.10) or less, provided the retailer is primarily engaged in making such sales and maintains records satisfactory to the state tax commission. 
(13)  Motor vehicles, as such term is defined in section 125 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, sold by a husband or wife to his or her spouse, or by a parent to his or her child, or by a child to his or her parent; however, this exemption shall not apply if the vendor is a dealer as defined in section 415 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(14)  Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or repairman for use in erecting a structure or building of an organization described in subdivision (a) of section 2-4-87 of this Code, or adding to, altering or improving real property, property or land of such an organization, as the terms real property, property or land are defined in the Real Property Tax Law; however, no exemption shall exist under this paragraph unless such tangible personal property: 
a.  Is to become an integral component part of such structure, building or real property; and 
b.  Is to be resold to such organization as tangible personal property before it has become a part of such structure, building or real property. 
(15)  Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or repairman for use in maintaining, servicing or repairing real property, property or land of an organization described in subdivision (a) of section 2-4-87 of this Code, as the term "real property," "property" or "land" is defined in the Real Property Tax Law. 
(16)  Tangible personal property sold by a contractor, subcontractor or repairman to a person other than an organization described in subdivision (a) of section 2-4-87 of this Code, for whom he is adding to or improving real property, property or land by a capital improvement, or for whom he is about to do any of the foregoing, if such tangible personal property is to become an integral component part of such structure, building or real property; however, if such sale is made pursuant to a contract irrevocably entered into before September 1, 1969, no exemption shall exist under this paragraph. 
(b)  (1) Telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service used by newspapers, radio broadcasters and television broadcasters in the collection or dissemination of news shall be exempt from the tax imposed under subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code if the charge for such services is a toll charge or a charge for mileage services, including the associated station terminal equipment. 
(2)  Gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric, refrigeration and steam service of whatever nature for use or consumption directly and exclusively in research and development in the experimental or laboratory sense shall be exempt from the tax imposed under subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. Such research and development shall not be deemed to include the ordinary testing or inspection of materials or products for quality control, efficiency surveys, management studies, consumer surveys, advertising, promotions or research in connection with literary, historical or similar projects. 
(c)  All sales of tangible personal property for use or consumption directly and exclusively in the production of tangible personal property, gas, electricity, refrigeration or steam, for sale, by manufacturing, processing, generating, assembling, refining, mining, extracting, farming, agriculture, horticulture or floriculture, and all sales of telephone central office equipment and station apparatus or comparable telegraph equipment for use directly and exclusively in receiving at destination or in initiating and switching telephone or telegraph communication shall be exempt from the taxes imposed under subdivisions (a) and (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
(d)  Services otherwise taxable under paragraph (1), (2) or (3) of subdivision (c) of section 2-4-82 of this Code shall be exempt from tax under this division if the tangible personal property upon which services were performed is delivered to the purchaser outside the city for use outside the city. 
(e)  Telephone and telegraph service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones where the charge is ten cents ($0.10) or less shall be exempt from the tax imposed under subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
(f)  Services rendered by a veterinarian licensed and registered as required by the Education Law which constitute the practice of veterinary medicine as defined in said law, including hospitalization for which no separate boarding charge is made, shall not be subject to tax under paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of section 2-4-82 of this Code; but the exemption allowed by this subdivision shall not apply to other services provided by a veterinarian to pets and other animals, including, but not limited to, boarding, grooming and clipping. Articles of tangible personal property designed for use in some manner relating to domestic animals or poultry, when sold by such a veterinarian, shall not be subject to tax under subdivision (a) of section 2-4-82 of this Code or under section 2-4-84 of this Code. However, the sale of any such articles of tangible personal property to a veterinarian shall not be deemed a sale for resale within the meaning of paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of section 2-4-81 of this Code and shall not be exempt from retail sales tax. 
(g)  Services otherwise taxable under paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of section 2-4-82 of this Code shall be exempt from tax if performed upon prosthetic aids, hearing aids, or eyeglasses and artificial devices designed for the use of a particular individual to correct or alleviate physical incapacity. 
(h)  (1) Receipts from the retail sale or use of fuel oil (excluding diesel motor fuel) and coal used for residential purposes and the receipts from the retail sale or use of wood used for residential heating purposes shall be exempt from the tax on retail sales imposed by subdivision (a) of section 2-4-82, and the compensating use tax imposed under section 2-4-84 of this Code, and the receipts from every sale, other than for resale, of propane (except when sold in containers of less than one hundred (100) pounds), natural gas, electricity, steam and gas, electric and steam services used for residential purposes shall be exempt from the tax imposed by subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
(2)  The exemption set forth in this subdivision shall apply to receipts from all retail sales and uses described in paragraph (1) above made, rendered or arising therefrom on or after September 1, 1981, the effective date, although made or rendered under a prior contract, if a delivery or transfer of possession of such property or services is made after said date. Where such property or service is sold on a monthly, quarterly or other term basis and the bills for such property or service are based on meter readings, the amount received on each bill for such property or service for a month or quarter or other term shall be exempt, but such exemption shall be applicable to all bills based on meters read on or after September 1, 1981, the effective date, only where more than one-half of the number of days included in the month or other period billed are days subsequent to August 31, 1981. 
(3)  Where a residence is a part of a multiple dwelling or other premises consisting of residential and nonresidential units, or where a portion of a residence is used for nondwelling purposes including the conduct of a trade or business, the same rules and regulations shall be applicable that have been established by the tax commission in order to allocate to such residence the portion of the sale of energy sources or services attributable to the residential portion. 
(4)  If the tax commission has prescribed a certificate to be taken by the vendor of the energy sources or services specified in paragraph (1) above from the purchaser of such energy sources or services, such certificate shall be applicable for the purposes of this section. Where a certificate is required, unless such vendor shall have received such certificate in such form as the tax commission may prescribe, signed by the purchaser and setting forth his name and address, together with such other information as such commission may require, stating that the premises, for which such energy sources or services are purchased, is used solely as a residence or identifying the residential portion of premises, for which such energy sources or services are purchased including instances where a multiple dwelling unit or other premises consists of residential and nonresidential units or where a portion of a residence is used for nondwelling purposes, such as the conduct of a trade or business, the provisions of this section shall not apply and the tax shall be imposed at the rate provided for in sections 2-4-82 and 2-4-84 of this Code. 
No further certificate need be furnished for any subsequent purchase for such premises if the information set forth in the certificate last furnished the vendor has not materially changed. 
(i)  Exemption of certain energy sources and related services from additional one-half percent rate of tax. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this resolution, receipts from the retail sale or use of fuel oil and coal used for residential purposes; the receipts from the retail sale or use of wood used for residential heating purposes; and the receipts from every sale, other than for resale, or use of propane (except when sold in containers of less than one hundred (100) pounds), natural gas, electricity, steam and gas, electric and steam services used for residential purposes shall be exempt from the additional one-half percent rate of sales and compensating use taxes imposed by sections (b) and (d), respectively, of this ordinance for the period commencing September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 6; Ord. of 4-27-81, § 1; Ord. of 7-28-93; Ord. of 5-24-95, § 5; Ord. of 5-29-97, § 5; Ord. of 5-20-99, § 5; Ord. of 5-29-01, § 5; Ord. of 5-5-03, § 5; Ord. of 5-25-05, § 5; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 6; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 6, eff. 9-1-15; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1, eff. 9-1-17 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1115.  
Sec. 2-4-87. - Exempt organizations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, any sale or amusement charge by or to any of the following or any use or occupancy by any of the following shall not be subject to the sales and compensating use taxes imposed under this division. 
(1)  The state or any of its agencies, instrumentalities, public corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another state or Canada) or political subdivisions where it is the purchaser, user or consumer, or where it is a vendor of services or property of a kind not ordinarily sold by private persons; 
(2)  The United States of America, and any of its agencies and instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation where it is the purchaser, user or consumer, or where it sells services or property of a kind not ordinarily sold by private persons; 
(3)  The United Nations or any international organization of which the United States of America is a member where it is the purchaser, user or consumer, or where it sells services or property of a kind not ordinarily sold by private persons; and 
(4)  Any corporation, association, trust, or community chest, fund or foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing for public safety, literary or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual, no substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, and which does not participate in, or intervene in (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall exempt: 
(1)  Retail sales of tangible personal property by any shop or store operated by an organization described in paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of this section; or 
(2)  Sales of food or drink in or by a restaurant, tavern or other establishment operated by an organization described in paragraph (1) or paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of this section, other than sales exempt under paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of section 2-4-82 of this Code, from the taxes imposed hereunder, unless the purchaser is an organization exempt under this section. 
(c)  Where any organization described in paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of this section carries on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was organized, in premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a hotel, occupancy of rooms in the premises and rents therefrom received by such corporation or association shall not be subject to tax hereunder. 
(d)  (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subdivision, any admissions all of the proceeds of which inure exclusively to the benefit of any of the following organizations shall not be subject to any of the taxes imposed under subdivision (f) of section 2-4-82 of this Code: 
a.  An organization described in paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of this section. 
b.  A society or organization conducted for the sole purpose of maintaining symphony orchestras or operas and receiving substantial support from voluntary contributions. 
c.  National guard organizations, posts or organizations of war veterans, or auxiliary units or societies of any such posts or organizations if such posts, organizations, units or societies are organized in the state, and if no part of their net earnings inures to the benefit of a private stockholder or individual. 
d.  A police or fire department of a political subdivision of the state, or a voluntary fire or ambulance company or exclusively to a retirement, pension or disability fund for the sole benefit of members of a police or fire department or to a fund for the heirs of such members. 
(2)  The exemption provided under paragraph (1) of this subdivision shall not apply in the case of admissions to either of the following: 
a.  Any athletic game or exhibition unless the proceeds shall inure exclusively to the benefit of elementary or secondary schools or unless in the case of an athletic game between two (2) elementary or secondary schools, the entire gross proceeds from such game shall inure to the benefit of one (1) or more organizations described in paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of this section. 
b.  Carnivals, rodeos, or circuses in which any professional performer or operator participates for compensation. 
(3)  Admission charges for admission to the following places or events shall not be subject to any of the taxes imposed under subdivision (f) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
a.  Any admission to agricultural fairs if no part of the net earnings thereof inures to the benefit of any stockholders or members of the association conducting the same, provided the proceeds therefrom are used exclusively for the improvement, maintenance and operation of such agricultural fairs. 
b.  Any admission to a home or garden which is temporarily open to the general public as a part of a program conducted by a society or organization to permit the inspection of historical homes and gardens, provided no part of the net earnings thereof inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual. 
c.  Any admissions to historic sites, houses and shrines, and museums conducted in connection therewith, maintained and operated by a society or organization devoted to the preservation and maintenance of such historic sites, houses, shrines and museums, provided no part of the net earnings thereof inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1116.  
Sec. 2-4-88. - Deliveries outside the city; deliveries within the city of property sold or serviced elsewhere. 
(a)  Where a sale of tangible personal property or services other than those described in subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code, including an agreement therefor, is made in this city, but the property sold or the property upon which the services were performed is or will be delivered to the purchaser elsewhere, such sale shall not be subject to tax under this division. However, if delivery occurs or will occur in a city, county or school district imposing a tax on the sale or use of such property, pursuant to the authority of article 29 of the Tax Law, the vendor shall be required to collect from the purchaser, as provided in section 1254 of the Tax Law, the aggregate sales or compensating use taxes imposed by the city, if any, county and school district in which delivery occurs or will occur, for distribution by the state tax commission to such taxing jurisdiction or jurisdictions. 
(b)  Where a sale of tangible personal property or services other than those described in subdivision (b) of section 2-4-82 of this Code, including an agreement therefor, is made outside this city, but the property sold or the property upon which the services were performed is or will be delivered to the purchaser in this city, such sale and use of such property or services shall be subject to tax under this division, and the vendor shall be required to collect from the purchaser, as provided in section 1254 of the Tax Law the sale or use tax imposed by this division, for distribution by the state tax commission to this city. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, delivery shall be deemed to include transfer of possession to the purchaser and the receiving of the property by the purchaser. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 8) 
State Law reference— Deliveries outside city, Tax Law, § 1213.  
Sec. 2-4-89. - Certain sales of motor vehicles; proof required for registration of motor vehicles. 
(a)  Where a sale of a motor vehicle, including an agreement therefor, is made in this city to a nonresident thereof, such sale shall not be subject to tax under this division, despite the fact that such motor vehicle is delivered to the purchaser within this city provided the purchaser furnishes to the vendor, prior to taking delivery, proof satisfactory to the tax commission that the purchaser: 
(1)  Is a nonresident of this city. 
(2)  Has no permanent place of abode within this city. 
(3)  Is not engaged in carrying on in this city any employment, trade, business or profession in which the motor vehicle will be used in this city, and such other proof as the tax commission may require to ensure proper administration of the taxes imposed under subdivision (a) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
However, if the purchaser resides in a city, county or school district imposing a tax on the use of such motor vehicle, the vendor shall be required to collect from the purchaser, as provided in section 1254 of the Tax Law, the aggregate compensating use taxes imposed by the city, if any, county and school district in which the purchaser resides, for distribution by the state tax commission to such taxing jurisdiction or jurisdictions. 
(b)  A vendor shall not be liable for failure to collect tax on such sale of a motor vehicle provided the proof furnished to him by the purchaser pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section shows that the purchaser's residence is not in any city, county or school district which imposes a tax on the use of such motor vehicle, and provided the vendor keeps such proof available for inspection by the state tax commission and further provided that such proof is not known by the vendor, prior to making physical delivery of the motor vehicle, to be false. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "motor vehicle" shall include a motor vehicle as defined in section 125 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law and a trailer as defined in section 156 of such law. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1214.  
Sec. 2-4-90. - Territorial limitations. 
Any tax imposed under the authority of this article shall apply only within the territorial limits of this city, except that any establishment located partially within this city and partially within a town or towns and receiving any services or utilities provided by this city shall be deemed to be wholly within the city for the purposes of the taxes imposed by subdivisions (b) and (e) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1220.  
Sec. 2-4-91. - Exemptions from use tax. 
The following uses of property shall not be subject to the compensating use tax imposed under this division: 
(1)  (A)  In respect to the use of property used by the purchaser in this city prior to September 1, 1973. 
(B)  With respect to the additional tax of one-half percent imposed for the period beginning September 1, 1993, and ending August 31, 2019, in respect to the use of property used by the purchaser in this city prior to September 1, 1993. 
(C)  With respect to the additional tax of one-quarter percent imposed for the period beginning June 1, 2008, and ending August 31, 2019, in respect to the use of property used by the purchaser in this city prior to June 1, 2008. 
(D)  With respect to the additional tax of one-quarter percent imposed for the period beginning June 1, 2010, and ending August 31, 2019, in respect to the use of property used by the purchaser in this city prior to June 1, 2010. 
(2)  In respect to the use of property purchased by the user while a nonresident of this city, except in the case of tangible personal property which the user, in the performance of a contract, incorporates into real property located in the city. A person while engaged in any manner in carrying on in this city any employment, trade, business or profession, shall not be deemed a nonresident with respect to the use in this city of property in such employment, trade, business or profession. 
(3)  In respect to the use of property or services upon the sale of which the purchaser would be expressly exempt from the taxes imposed under subdivision (a), (b) or (c) of section 2-4-82 of this Code. 
(4)  In respect to the use of property which is converted into or becomes a component part of a product produced for sale by the purchaser. 
(5)  In respect to the use of paper in the publication of newspapers and periodicals. 
(6)  a. 
In respect to the use of property or services to the extent that a retail sales tax or a compensating use tax was legally due and paid thereon, without any right to a refund or credit thereof, to any municipal corporation in this state or any other state or jurisdiction within any other state, but only when it is shown that such other state or jurisdiction allows a corresponding exemption with respect to the sale or use of tangible personal property or of any of the services upon which such a sale or compensating use tax was paid to this state and any of its municipal corporations, except as provided in subparagraph b. of this paragraph (6). 
b.  To the extent that a compensating use tax imposed by this division and the compensating use tax imposed by article 28 of the Tax Law are at a higher aggregate rate than the rate of tax imposed in any other state or jurisdiction within any other state, the exemption provided in subparagraph a. of this paragraph (6) shall be inapplicable and the taxes imposed by this division and by article 28 shall apply to the extent of the difference between such aggregate rate and the rate paid in such other state or jurisdiction. Where a retail sales tax or a compensating use tax was legally due and paid to any municipal corporation in this state, without any right to a refund or credit thereof, with respect to the sale or use of tangible personal property or any of the services subject to sales or compensating use tax, if the use of such property or services is then subject to the compensating use tax imposed by this division and such tax is at a higher rate than the rate of tax imposed by the first municipal corporation, the tax imposed by this division shall also apply but only to the extent of the difference in such rates. 
c.  For the purposes of this paragraph, a payment to the state tax commission of a tax imposed by a municipal corporation shall be deemed a payment to such municipal corporation. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 11; Ord. of 7-28-93, § 5; Ord. of 5-24-95, § 6; Ord. of 5-29-97, § 6; Ord. of 5-20-99, § 6; Ord. of 5-29-01, § 6; Ord. of 5-5-03, § 6; Ord. of 5-25-05, § 6; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 7, eff. 9-1-13; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 7, eff. 9-1-15; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1, eff. 9-1-17 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1118.  
Sec. 2-4-92. - Refunds or credits based on proof of certain uses. 
(a)  Subject to the conditions and limitations provided for herein, a refund or credit shall be allowed for a tax paid pursuant to subdivision (a) of section 2-4-82 of this Code or section 2-4-84 of this Code: 
(1)  On the sale or use within this city of tangible personal property if the purchaser or user, in the performance of a contract, later incorporates that tangible personal property into real property located outside this city. 
(2)  On the sale or use of tangible personal property purchased in bulk, or any portion thereof, which is stored and not used by the purchaser or user within this city if that property is subsequently reshipped by such purchaser or user to a point outside this city for use outside this city. 
(3)  On the sale to or use by a contractor or subcontractor of tangible personal property if that property is used by him solely in the performance of a preexisting lump sum or unit price construction contract. 
(4)  On the sale or use within this city of tangible personal property, not purchased for resale, if the use of such property in this city is restricted to fabricating such property (including incorporating it into or assembling it with other tangible personal property), processing, printing or imprinting such property and such property is then shipped to a point outside this city for use outside this city. 
(For the purposes of clause (3) of the preceding sentence, the term "preexisting lump sum or unit price construction contract" shall mean a contract for the construction of improvements to real property under which the amount payable to the contractor or subcontractor is fixed without regard to the costs incurred by him in the performance thereof, and which: 
(i)  Was irrevocably entered into prior to April 30, 1973, or the enactment of a law increasing the rate of tax imposed under this division; or 
(ii)  Resulted from the acceptance by a governmental agency of a bid accompanied by a bond or other performance guaranty which was irrevocably submitted prior to such date.) 
Where the tax on the sale or use of such tangible personal property has been paid to the vendor, to qualify for such refund or credit, such tangible personal property must be incorporated into real property as required in clause (1) above, reshipped as required in clause (2) above or used in the manner described in clause (3) or (4) above within three (3) years after the date such tax was payable to the state tax commission by the vendor pursuant to section 1137 of the Tax Law. Where the tax on the sale or use of such tangible personal property was paid by the applicant for the credit or refund directly to the state tax commission, to qualify for such refund or credit, such tangible personal property must be incorporated into real property as required in clause (1) above, reshipped as required in clause (2) above or used in the manner described in clause (3) or (4) above within three (3) years after the date such tax was payable to the state tax commission by such applicant pursuant to article 28 of the Tax Law. With respect to a sale or use described in clause (3) above, the purchaser or user shall be entitled to a refund or credit of the amount of the taxes imposed by this division if enacted later than the date of such contract or bid, or of the amount reflecting an increase in the rate of tax enacted later than that date, as the case may be, but only to the extent that all such sales and use taxes paid on such sale or use under the aggregate statewide and local taxes imposed under article 28 and by authority of article 29 exceeded an amount computed by applying against such sale or use the aggregate of the rates of statewide and local sales and use taxes that were in effect at the time such contract was entered into or such bid was submitted. 
(b)  A refund or credit equal to the amount of sales or compensating use tax imposed by article 28 of the Tax Law and under this division, and paid on the sale or use of tangible personal property, shall be allowed the purchaser where such property is later used by the purchaser in performing a service subject to tax under paragraph (1), (2), (3) or (5) of subdivision (c) of section 2-4-82 of this Code and such property has become a physical component part of the property upon which the service is performed or has been transferred to the purchaser of the service in conjunction with the performance of the service subject to tax or if a contractor, subcontractor or repairman purchases tangible personal property and later makes a retail sale of such tangible personal property, the acquisition of which would not have been a sale at retail to him but for the last sentence of subparagraph a. of paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of section 2-4-81 of this Code. An application for the refund or credit provided for herein must be filed with the tax commission within the time provided by subdivision (a) of section 1139 of the Tax Law. Such application shall be in such form as the tax commission may prescribe. Where an application for credit has been filed, the applicant may immediately take such credit on the return which is due coincident with or immediately subsequent to the time that he files his application for credit. However, the taking of the credit on the return shall be deemed to be part of the application for credit. The procedure for granting or denying such applications for refund or credit and review of such determinations shall be as provided in subdivision (e) of section 1139 of the Tax Law. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Tax Law, § 1119.  
Sec. 2-4-93. - Administration and collection. 
The taxes imposed by this division under the authority of article 29 of the Tax Law shall be administered and collected by the state tax commission in the same manner as the taxes imposed under article 28 of the Tax Law are administered and collected by such commission. All of the provisions of article 28 relating to or applicable to the administration and collection of the taxes imposed by that article shall apply to the taxes imposed by this division, including sections 1101, 1106(e), 1111, 1118(b), 1119 and 1131 through 1147, together with any amendment thereto, with the same force and effect as if those provisions had been incorporated in full into this division except as otherwise provided in section 1250 of the Tax Law. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 13)  
Sec. 2-4-94. - Disposition of revenues. 
Net collections distributed to this city by the state tax commission pursuant to section 1261 of the Tax Law shall be paid into the treasury of the city, shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund thereof, and shall be available for any city purpose. Expenditures from the proceeds of the taxes imposed by this division shall not be considered as part of the cost of government within the meaning of any limitation on expenditures contained in any general, special or local law applicable to this city. As used in this section, "net collections" shall mean the moneys collected from the taxes imposed pursuant to this division, after deducting therefrom expenses of administration and collection and amounts refunded or to be refunded. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 14)  
Sec. 2-4-95. - Construction and enforcement. 
This division shall be construed and enforced in conformity with articles 28 and 29 of the Tax Law pursuant to which the same is enacted. 
(Ord. of 4-30-73, § 15)  
Secs. 2-4-96—2-4-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TAX ON FURNISHING OF UTILITY SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-4-106. - Tax imposed. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by section 20-b of the General City Law of the State of New York, as amended, a tax equal to one (1) percent of its gross income from and after July 1, 1937, is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business in The City of White Plains which is subject to the supervision of the state department of public service which has a gross income for the twelve (12) months ending May 31 in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), except bus lines, stage routes, motor vehicle routes subject to such supervision under article 3-A of the Public Service Law and motor carriers or brokers subject to such supervision under article 3-B of the Public Service Law, and a tax equal to one (1) percent of its gross operating income is hereby imposed from and after July 1, 1937, upon every other utility doing business in The City of White Plains which has a gross operating income for the twelve (12) months ending May 31 in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which taxes shall have application only within the territorial limits of The City of White Plains, and shall be in addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision of law for the same period. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating or consummated outside of the territorial limits of The City of White Plains, notwithstanding that some act be necessarily performed with respect to such transaction within such limits. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1938, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1938, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1939, § 1; L.L. No. 2-1940, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1941, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1942, § 2; L.L. No. 4-1942, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1944, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1945, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1946, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1947, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1948, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1949, § 1; L.L. No. 10-1950, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1957, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-107. - Definitions. 
As used in this local law [division]: 
(a)  The word "utility" includes every person subject to the supervision of either division of the state department of public service, except persons engaged in the business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads, and also includes every person (whether or not such person is subject to such supervision) who sells gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, delivered through mains, pipes or wires, or furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service, by means of mains, pipes or wires; regardless of whether such activities are the main business of such person or are only incidental thereto, or of whether use is made of the public streets. 
(b)  The word "person" means persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint stock associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their assignees, lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court whatsoever, or by any other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality, and public districts. 
(c)  The words "gross income" mean and include receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross income), made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser in The City of White Plains, other than receipts from the transportation of children to and from school, at a five cent ($0.05) fare, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities; also profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such property; also profit from the sale of personal property (other than property of a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the period for which a return is made); also receipts from interest, dividends and royalties, derived from sources within The City of White Plains other than such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose voting stock is owned by the tax paying utility, without any deduction therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the receipt thereof, and also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and rentals) within The City of White Plains whatsoever. 
(d)  The words "gross operating income" mean and include receipts received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or telegraphy, or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service in The City of White Plains, including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1937, § 1; L.L. No. 3-1938, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1941, § 2)  
Sec. 2-4-108. - Records required; preservation. 
Every utility subject to tax under this local law [division] shall keep such records of its business and in such form as the commissioner of finance of The City of White Plains may require, and such records shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years; except that the commissioner of finance may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 3)  
Sec. 2-4-109. - Returns required; due dates, contents. 
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file, on or before the twenty-fifth day in the months of June, September, December and March hereafter, a return for the three (3) calendar months preceding each such return date, including any period for which the tax imposed hereby or by any amendment hereof is effective, each of which returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income for the period covered by each such return. Returns shall be filed with the commissioner of finance on a form to be furnished by him for such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as the commissioner of finance may require to be included therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any utility whose average gross income or average gross operating income, as the case may be, for the aforesaid three (3) months' periods is less than fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) may file its returns for such periods as of June 25 in each year. The commissioner of finance may require at any time a further or supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified by the commissioner of finance. Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation, if such business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the statements contained therein are true. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 4; L.L. No. 1-1938, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1938, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1939, § 2; L.L. No. 2-1940, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1941, § 3; L.L. No. 3-1942, § 3; L.L. No. 1-1944, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1945, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1946, § 2; L.L. No. 3-1947, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1948, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1949, § 2; L.L. No. 10-1950, § 2)  
Sec. 2-4-110. - Due date, payment of tax. 
At the time of filing a return as required by this local law [division], each utility shall pay to the commissioner of finance the tax imposed by this local law [division] for the period covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which the return is required to be filed. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 5)  
Sec. 2-4-111. - Determination by commissioner of finance of tax due. 
In case any return filed pursuant to this local law [division] shall be insufficient or unsatisfactory to the commissioner of finance, and if a corrected or sufficient return is not filed within twenty (20) days after the same is required by notice from the commissioner of finance, or if no return is made for any period, the commissioner of finance shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is able to obtain, and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of external indices or otherwise. The commissioner of finance shall give notice of such determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax, unless the person against whom it is assessed shall, within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice of such determination, apply to the commissioner of finance for a hearing, or unless the commissioner of finance, of his own motion shall reduce the same. After such hearing, the commissioner of finance shall give notice of his decision to the person liable for the tax. The decision of the commissioner of finance may be reviewed by a proceeding under article 78 of the Civil Practice Act* of the State of New York if application therefor is made within thirty (30) days after the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the commissioner of finance and an undertaking filed with him, in such amount and with such sureties as a justice of the supreme court shall approve, to the effect that, if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or at the option of the applicant, such undertaking may be in sum sufficient to cover the tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties as a condition precedent to the granting of such order. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 6; L.L. No. 1-1939, § 3) 
Editor's note— This is now known as Civil Practice Law and Rules.  
Sec. 2-4-112. - Manner of giving notice; effect of notice. 
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this local law [division] may be given by mailing the same to the person for whom it is intended, in a postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him in the last return filed by him under this local law [division], or, if no return has been filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the provisions of this local law [division] by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from the date of mailing such notice. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 7)  
Sec. 2-4-113. - Penalties for failure to file return, pay tax. 
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return, or to pay any tax or any portion thereof, within the time required by this local law [division] shall be subject to a penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of tax due, plus one (1) percent of such tax for each month of delay or fraction thereof, excepting the first month, after such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the commissioner of finance, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of such penalty. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 8)  
Sec. 2-4-114. - Refunds. 
If, within one (1) year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof shall make application for a refund thereof and the commissioner of finance or the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof was erroneously or illegally collected, the commissioner of finance shall refund the amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund may be so made on the initiative of the commissioner of finance. However, no refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of the commissioner of finance as hereinbefore provided unless the commissioner of finance, after a hearing as hereinbefore provided, or of his own motion, shall have reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding under article 78 of the Civil Practice Act of the State of New York that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made out of moneys collected under this section. An application for a refund, made as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision of any tax or penalty complained of and the commissioner of finance may receive additional evidence with respect thereto. After making this determination, the commissioner of finance shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under article 78, subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained relating to the granting of such an order. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 9; L.L. No. 1-1939, § 4)  
Sec. 2-4-115. - Tax declared part of operating cost of utility. 
The tax imposed by this local law [division] shall be charged against and be paid by the utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating costs of such utility. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 10)  
Sec. 2-4-116. - Proceedings to enforce payment of tax. 
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this local law [division] the corporation counsel shall, upon the request of the commissioner of finance, bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the commissioner of finance. Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the tax and penalty imposed by section 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 11)  
Sec. 2-4-117. - Administration of provisions by commissioner of finance. 
In the administration of this local law [division] the commissioner of finance shall have power to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance of his duties, and to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his official duty under this local law [division], and to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 12)  
Sec. 2-4-118. - Secrecy provisions; penalties for violation thereof. 
Except in accordance with the proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the commissioner of finance, or any agent, clerk or employee of The City of White Plains to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating income, or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this local law [division]. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of The City of White Plains in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this local law [division] or on behalf of the state tax commission in action or proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New York, or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this local law [division] when the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding, and no more. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized representative, of a copy of any return filed by him, nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular returns and the items thereof, or the publication of delinquent lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at the time and in the manner provided for by this local law [division], together with any relevant information which in the opinion of the commissioner of finance may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection by the corporation counsel or other legal representatives of The City of White Plains of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action has been instituted in accordance with the provisions of this local law [division]. 
Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both; and if the offender be an officer, agent, clerk or employee of The City of White Plains he shall be dismissed from office, and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in The City of White Plains for a period of five (5) years thereafter. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this local law [division] the commissioner of finance may exchange with the chief fiscal officer of any other city in the State of New York information contained in returns filed under this local law [division], provided such other city grants similar privileges to The City of White Plains, and provided such information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the commissioner of finance shall, upon request, furnish the state tax commission with any information contained in such returns. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 13)  
Sec. 2-4-119. - Disposition of funds. 
Revenues resulting from the imposition in The City of White Plains of taxes authorized by section 20-b of the General City Law of the State of New York heretofore or hereafter imposed shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(L.L. No. 1-1937, § 14; L.L. No. 3-1942, § 4)  
DIVISION 7. - ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 2-4-120. - Definitions. 
When used in this law [division], the following terms shall mean: 
(1)  Commissioner of finance. The commissioner of finance of the City of White Plains or such other person as may be designated by the common council to administer and collect the tax provided for herein. 
(2)  Effective date. The date on which the Secretary of State files this law [division] herein. 
(3)  Exempt occupant. Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel whose rent is paid from public assistance from the County of Westchester shall be deemed an "exempt occupant" with respect to the period of such occupancy, regardless of the length thereof. 
(4)  Hotel. A building or portion thereof, which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests. For the purposes of this law [division], the term "hotel" includes apartment hotels, motels, boarding houses, tourist homes, motel courts, clubs or similar facilities with at least four (4) rentable rooms for lodging, whether or not meals are served to guests or residents thereof. 
(5)  Occupancy. The use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room in a hotel. 
(6)  Occupancy. A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise. 
(7)  Operator. Any person operating a hotel in the City of White Plains, including, but not limited to, an owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
(8)  Permanent resident. Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel at least ninety (90) consecutive days shall be considered a "permanent resident" with regard to the period of such occupancy. 
(9)  Person. An individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity; whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing. 
(10)  Commissioner of public safety. The commissioner of public safety of the City of White Plains or his/her successor in office. 
(11)  Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, for the occupancy of a room in a hotel for any period of time. 
(12)  Return. Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
(13)  Room. Any room or rooms or suite of rooms with sleeping accommodations, whether or not such accommodations are used, of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel which is available for or let out for any purpose. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-121. - Imposition of tax. 
On and after the 1 st day of October 2009, there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of three (3) percent upon the rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in this city, except that the tax shall not be imposed upon a permanent resident or an exempt occupant. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of L.L. No. 2-2015, adopted June 29, 2015, provided for the extension of the 3% occupancy tax through Dec. 31, 2018.  
Sec. 2-4-122. - Transitional provisions. 
The tax imposed by this law [division] shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after the 1 st day of October 2009, although such occupancy is pursuant to a prior contract, lease or other arrangement. Where rent is paid on a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent shall be subject to the tax imposed by this law [division] to the extent that it covers any period on and after the 31 st day of December 2018. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1; L.L. No. 2-2012, § 1; L.L. No. 2-2015, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-123. - Exempt organizations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any use or occupancy by any of the following shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this law [division]: 
(1)  The State of New York, or any of its agencies or instrumentalities, public corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another state or Canada), improvement districts or political subdivisions of the state; 
(2)  The United States of America, or any of its agencies and instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation; 
(3)  Any corporation, association, trust or community chest, fund or foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or education purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall include an organization operated for the primary purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit, whether or not all of its profits are payable to one (1) or more organizations described in this subsection. Where any organization described in this subsection carries on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was organized in premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a hotel, occupancy of rooms in the premises and rents therefrom received by such corporation or association shall not be subject to tax hereunder; any corporation, association, trust or community chest, fund or foundation, organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or education purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall include an organization operated for the primary purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit, whether or not all of its profits are payable to one (1) or more organizations described in this subsection. Where any organization described in this subsection carries on its activities in furtherance of the purposes for which it was organized in premises in which, as part of said activities, it operates a hotel, occupancy of rooms in the premises and rents therefrom received by such corporation or association shall not be subject to tax hereunder; 
(4)  A hotel, as defined in this law [division], having fewer than four (4) rentable rooms. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-124. - Territorial limits. 
The tax imposed by this law [division] shall apply only within the territorial limits of the City of White Plains. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-125. - Registration. 
(1)  Within ten (10) days after the effective date of this law [division], or, in the case of operators commencing business after such effective date, within three (3) days after such commencement or opening, every operator shall file with the commissioner of finance a certificate of registration in a form prescribed by the commissioner of finance. 
(2)  The commissioner of finance shall, within five (5) days after such registration, issue without charge to each operator a certificate of authority empowering such operator to collect the tax from the occupant and a duplicate thereof for each additional hotel of such operator. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the hotel to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be prominently displayed by the operator in such manner that it may be seen and come to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the commissioner of finance upon the cessation of business at the hotel named or upon its sale or transfer. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-126. - Administration and collection. 
(1)  The tax imposed by this law [division] shall be administered and collected by the commissioner of finance or such other city employee as he/she may designate by such means and in such manner as are other taxes which are now collected and administered or as otherwise are provided by this law [division]. 
(2)  The tax to be collected shall be stated and charged separately from the rent and shown separately on any record thereof, at the time when the occupancy is arranged or contracted for and charged for, and upon every evidence of occupancy or any bill or statement of charges made for said occupancy issued or delivered by the operator, and the tax shall be paid by the occupant to the operator as trustee for and on account of the city, and the operator shall be liable for the collection thereof and for the tax. The operator and any officer of any corporate operator shall be personally liable for the tax collected or required to be collected under this law [division], and the operator shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from the occupant, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the occupant, as if the tax were part of the rent for the occupancy payable at the time such tax shall become due and owing, including all rights of eviction, dispossession, repossession and enforcement of any innkeeper's lien that he/she may have in the event of nonpayment of rent by the occupant; provided, however, that the commissioner of finance or employees or agents duly designated by him/her shall be joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought by the operator to collect or enforce collection of the tax. 
(3)  The commissioner of finance may, wherever he/she deems it necessary for the proper enforcement of this law [division], provide by regulation that the occupant shall file returns and pay directly to the commissioner of finance the tax imposed at such times as returns are required to be filed and payment over made by the operator. 
(4)  The tax imposed by this law [division] shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after October 1, 2009, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. Where rent is paid or charged or billed or falls due on either a weekly, monthly or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall be subject to the tax herein imposed to the extent that it covers any portion of the period on and after October 1, 2009. Where any tax has been paid hereunder upon any rent which has been ascertained to be worthless, the commissioner of finance may, by regulation, provide for credit and/or refund of the amount of such tax upon application therefor as provided in section 2-4-132 of this law [division]. 
(5)  For the purpose of the proper administration of this law [division] and to prevent evasion of the tax hereby imposed, it shall be presumed that all rents are subject to tax until the contrary is established, and the burden of proving that a rent for occupancy is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the operator or occupant. Where an occupant claims exemption from the tax under the provisions of subsection (3) of section 2-4-123 of this law [division], the rent shall be deemed taxable hereunder unless the operator shall receive from the occupant claiming such exemption a copy of a New York State sales tax exemption certificate. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-127. - Records to be kept. 
Every operator shall keep records of every occupancy and of all rent paid, charged or due thereon and of the tax payable thereon, in such form as the commissioner of finance may by regulation require. Such records shall be available for inspection and examination at any time upon demand by the commissioner of finance or his/her duly authorized agent or employee and shall be preserved for a period of three (3) years, except that the commissioner of finance may consent to their destruction within that period or may require that they be kept longer. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-128. - Returns. 
(1)  Every operator shall file with the commissioner of finance a return of occupancy and of rents and of the taxes payable thereon for the three-month periods ending the last day of March, June, September, and December on and after, October 1, 2009. Such returns shall be filed within twenty (20) days from the expiration of the period covered thereby. The commissioner of finance may permit or require returns to be made by other periods and upon such dates as he/she may specify. If the commissioner of finance deems it necessary in order to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by this law [division], he/she may require returns to be made for shorter periods than those prescribed pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this section and upon such dates as he/she may specify. 
(2)  The forms of return shall be prescribed by the commissioner of finance and shall contain such information as he/she may deem necessary for the proper administration of this law [division]. The commissioner of finance may require amended returns to be filed within twenty (20) days after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice. 
(3)  If a return required by this law [division] is not filed, or if a return is incorrectly filed or is insufficient on its face, the commissioner of finance shall take such steps as he/she deems necessary to enforce the filing of such return or of a corrected return. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-129. - Payment of tax. 
At the time of filing a return of occupancy and of rents, each operator shall pay to the commissioner of finance the taxes imposed by this law [division] upon the rents required to be included in such return, as well as all other moneys collected by the operator acting or purporting to act under the provisions of this law [division]; even though it be judicially determined that the tax collected is invalidly required to be filed, it shall be due from the operator and payable to the commissioner of finance on the date prescribed herein for the filing of the return for such period, without regard to whether a return is filed or whether the return which is filed correctly shows the amount of rents and taxes due thereon. Where the commissioner of finance in his/her discretion deems it necessary to protect revenues to be obtained under this law [division], he/she may require any operator required to collect the tax imposed by this law [division] to file with him/her a bond, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state and approved by the superintendent of insurance of this state as to solvency and responsibility, in such amount as the commissioner of finance may find to secure the payment of any tax and/or penalties and interest due or which may become due from such operator. In the event that the commissioner of finance determines that an operator is to file such bonds, he/she shall give notice to such operator to that effect, specifying the amount of the bond required. The operator shall file such bond within five (5) days after the giving of such notice unless, within such five (5) days, the operator shall request in writing a hearing before the commissioner of finance at which the necessity, propriety and amount of the bond shall be determined by the commissioner of finance. Such determination shall be final and shall be complied with within fifteen (15) days after the giving of notices thereof. In lieu of such bond, securities approved by the commissioner of finance or cash in such amount as he/she may prescribe may be deposited with him/her, which shall be kept in the custody of the commissioner of finance, who may at any time, without notice of the depositor, apply them to any tax and/or interest or penalties due, and for that purpose the securities may be sold by him/her at public or private sale without notice to the depositor thereof. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-130. - Determination of tax. 
If a return required by local law is not filed or if a return, when filed, is incorrect or insufficient, the amount of tax due shall be determined by the commissioner of finance from such information as may be obtainable, and, if necessary, the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as number of rooms, locations, scale of rents, comparable rents, type of accommodations and service, number of employees and/or other factors. Notice of such determination shall be given to the person liable for the collection and/or payment of the tax. Such determination shall finally and irrevocably fix the tax unless the person against whom it is assessed, within thirty (30) days after giving notice of such determination, shall apply to the commissioner of finance for a hearing or unless the commissioner of finance on his/her own motion shall redetermine the same. After such hearing, the commissioner of finance shall give notice of his/her determination to the person against whom the tax is assessed. The determination of the commissioner of finance shall be reviewable for error, illegality, unconstitutionality or any other recognizable basis whatsoever by proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules if application therefor is made to the Supreme Court within thirty (30) days after the giving of the notice of such determination. A proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules shall not be instituted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with penalties and interest thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with the commissioner of finance and there shall be filed with the commissioner of finance an undertaking, issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state and approved by the superintendent of insurance of this state as to solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve to the effect that, if such proceedings be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue, including reasonable counsel fees, in the prosecution of the proceeding, or, at the option of the applicant, such undertaking filed with the commissioner of finance may be in a sum sufficient to cover the taxes, penalties and interest thereon stated in such determination plus the costs and charges, including reasonable counsel fees, which may accrue against it in the prosecution of the proceedings, in which event the applicant shall not be required to deposit such taxes, penalties and interest as a condition precedent to the application. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-131. - Disposition of revenues. 
All revenue resulting from the imposition of the tax under this law [division] shall be paid into the treasury of the city and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-132. - Refunds. 
(1)  In the manner provided in this section, the commissioner of finance shall refund or credit, without interest, any tax penalty or interest erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected or paid if application to the commissioner of finance for such refund shall be made within one (1) year from the payment thereof. Whenever a refund is made by the commissioner of finance, he/she shall state his/her reason therefor in writing. Such application may be made by the occupant, operator or other person who has actually paid the tax. Such application may also be made by an operator who has collected and paid over such tax to the commissioner of finance, provided that the application is made within one (1) year of the payment by the occupant to the operator, but no actual refund of moneys shall be made to such operator until he/she shall first establish to the satisfaction of the commissioner of finance, under such regulations as the commissioner of finance may prescribe, that he/she has repaid to the occupant the amount for which the application for refund is made. The commissioner of finance may, in lieu of any refund required to be made, allow credit therefor on payments due or to become due from the applicant. 
(2)  An application for a refund or credit made as herein provided shall be deemed an application for a revision of any tax, penalty or interest complained of, and the commissioner of finance may receive evidence with respect thereto. After making his/her determination, the commissioner of finance shall give notice thereof to the applicant, who shall be entitled to review such determination by a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, provided that such proceeding is instituted within thirty (30) days after the giving of the notice of such determination, and provided that a final determination of tax due was not previously made. Such a proceeding shall not be instituted unless an undertaking is filed with the commissioner of finance in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme Court shall approve to the effect that, if such proceedings be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay costs and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding. 
(3)  A person shall not be entitled to a revision, refund or credit under this section of a tax, interest or penalty which had been determined to be due pursuant to the provisions of section 2-4-130 of this law [division] where he/she has had a hearing or an opportunity for a hearing, as provided in said section, or has failed to avail himself of the remedies therein provided. No refund or credit shall be made of a tax, interest or penalty paid after a determination by the commissioner of finance made pursuant to section 2-4-130 of this law [division] unless it be found that such determination was erroneous, illegal or unconstitutional or otherwise improper by the commissioner of finance after a hearing or on his/her own motion or in a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, pursuant to the provisions of said section, in which event refund or credit without interest shall be made of the tax, interest or penalty found to have been overpaid. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-133. - Reserves. 
In cases where the occupant or operator has applied for a refund and has instituted a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules to review a determination adverse to him/her on his/her application for refund, the commissioner of finance shall have the option of crediting future tax payments to meet the cost of any settlements or judgments or, at his/her option, may, in the first instance, set up appropriate reserves to meet any decision adverse to the city. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-134. - Remedies exclusive. 
The remedies provided by sections 2-4-130 and 2-4-132 of this law [division] shall be the exclusive remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed by this law [division], and no determination or proposed determination of tax or determination on any application for refund shall be enjoined or reviewed by an action for declaratory judgment, an action for money had and received or by any action or proceeding other than a proceeding in a nature of a certiorari proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules; provided, however, that a taxpayer may proceed by declaratory judgment if he/she institutes suit within thirty (30) days after a deficiency assessment is made and pays the amount of the deficiency assessment to the commissioner of finance prior to the institution of such suit and posts a bond for costs as provided in section 2-4-132 of this law [division]. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-135. - Proceedings to recover tax. 
(1)  Whenever any operator or any officer of a corporate operator or any occupant or other person shall fail to collect and pay over any tax and/or to pay any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this law [division] as therein provided, the city corporation counsel shall, upon the request of the commissioner of finance, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of the same on behalf of the City of White Plains in any court of the State of New York or of any other state or of the United States. If, however, the commissioner of finance in his/her discretion believes that any such operator, officer, occupant or other person is about to cease business, leave the state or remove or dissipate the assets out of which the tax or penalties might be satisfied, and that any such tax or penalty will not be paid when due, he/she may declare such tax or penalty to be immediately due and payable and may issue a warrant immediately. 
(2)  As an additional or alternate remedy, the commissioner of finance may direct the city assessor to, in the preparation of the next assessment roll, assess the amount of such tax or penalty upon the property occupied by business giving rise to such tax or penalty, and this amount shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner as taxes upon said property for city purposes are levied collected, and enforced. 
(3)  Whenever an operator shall make a sale, transfer or assignment in bulk of any part of the whole of his/her hotel or its assets or his/her lease, license or other agreement or right to possess or operate such facility or of the equipment, furnishings, fixtures, supplies or stock of merchandise or the said premises or lease, license or other agreement or right to possess or operate such hotel and the equipment, furnishings, fixtures, supplies and stock or merchandise pertaining to the conduct or operation of said hotel otherwise than in the ordinary and regular prosecution of business, the purchaser, transferee or assignee shall, at least ten (10) days before taking possession of the subject of said sale, transfer or assignment or paying therefor, notify the commissioner of finance by registered mail of the proposed sale and of the price, terms and conditions thereof, whether or not the seller, transferor or assignor has represented to or informed the purchaser, transferee or assignee that it owes any tax pursuant to this law [division] and whether or not the purchaser, transferee or assignee has knowledge that such taxes are owing and whether any such taxes are in fact owing. 
(4)  Whenever the purchaser, transferee or assignee shall fail to give notice to the commissioner of finance as required by the preceding subsection or whenever the commissioner of finance shall inform the purchaser, transferee or assignee that a possible claim for such tax or taxes exists, any sums of money, property or [chooses] in action, or other consideration, which the purchaser, transferee or assignee is required to transfer over, the seller, transferor or assignor shall be subject to a first priority right and lien for any such taxes theretofore or thereafter determined to be due from the seller, transferor or assignor to the city, and the purchaser, transferee or assignee is forbidden to transfer to the seller, transferor or assignor any such sums of money, property or [chooses] in action to the extent of the amount of the city's claim. For failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection, the purchaser, transferee or assignee, in addition to being subject to the liabilities and remedies imposed under the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, shall be personally liable for the payment to the city of any such taxes theretofore or thereafter determined to be due to the city from the seller, transferor or assignor, and such liability may be assessed and enforced in the same manner as the liability for tax under this law [division]. Whenever the purchaser, transferee or assignee shall fail to give notice to the commissioner of finance as required by the preceding subsection or whenever the commissioner of finance shall inform the purchaser, transferee or assignee that a possible claim for such tax or taxes exists, any sums of money, property or [chooses] in action, or other consideration, which the purchaser, transferee or assignee is required to transfer over, the seller, transferor or assignor shall be subject to a first priority right and lien for any such taxes theretofore or thereafter determined to be due from the seller, transferor or assignor to the city, and the purchaser, transferee or assignee is forbidden to transfer to the seller, transferor or assignor any such sums of money, property or [chooses] in action to the extent of the amount of the city's claim. For failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection, the purchaser, transferee or assignee, in addition to being subject to the liabilities and remedies imposed under the provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code, shall be personally liable for the payment to the city of any such taxes theretofore or thereafter determined to be due to the city from the seller, transferor or assignor, and such liability may be assessed and enforced in the same manner as the liability for tax under this law [division]. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-136. - Additional powers of the commissioner of finance. 
In addition to the powers granted to the commissioner of finance by the General City Law, the White Plains Charter and Municipal Code, and this law [division] herein, he/she is hereby authorized and empowered: 
(1)  To make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the carrying out of this law [division] and the purposes thereof; 
(2)  To extend, for cause shown, the time of filing any return for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days; and, for cause shown, to remit penalties but not interest computed at the rate of one (1) percent per annum per month or fraction thereof during which a tax is unpaid although due; and to compromise disputed claims in connection with the taxes hereby imposed; 
(3)  To request information from the Tax Commission of the State of New York or the Treasury Department of the United States relative to any person; and to afford information to such tax commission or such treasury department relative to any person, any other provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding; 
(4)  To delegate his/her functions hereunder to any employee or employees of the City of White Plains as the common council may approve; 
(5)  To prescribe methods for determining the rents for occupancy and to determine the taxable and nontaxable rents; 
(6)  To require any operator within the city to keep detailed records of the nature and type of hotel maintained, nature and type of service rendered, the rooms available and rooms occupied daily, leases or occupancy contracts or arrangements, rents received, charged and accrued, the names and addresses of the occupants, whether or not any occupancy is claimed to be subject to the tax imposed by this law [division], and to furnish such information upon request to the commissioner of finance; 
(7)  To assess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed under this law [division]; 
(8)  To require any operator to submit with the return required hereunder a copy of any tax return for sales, occupancy or use taxes submitted to the tax commission or other instrumentality of the State of New York. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-137. - Administration of oaths and compelling testimony. 
(1)  The commissioner of finance or his/her employees or agents duly designated and authorized by him/her shall have power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of their powers and duties under this law [division]. The commissioner of finance shall have power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents, to secure information pertinent to the performance of his/her duties hereunder and of the enforcement of this law [division] and to examine then in relation thereto and to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of the state or unable to attend before him/her or excused from attendance. 
(2)  A Justice of the Supreme Court, either in court or at chambers, shall have power summarily to enforce by proper proceedings the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production and examination of books, papers and documents called for by the subpoena of the commissioner of finance under this law [division]. 
(3)  Any person who shall refuse to testify or to produce books or records or who shall testify falsely in any material matter pending before the commissioner of finance under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishment for which shall be a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(4)  The officers who serve the summons or subpoena of the commissioner of finance and witnesses attending in response thereto shall be entitled to the same fees as are allowed to officers and witnesses in civil cases in courts of record, except as herein otherwise provided. Such officers shall be the commissioner of public safety and his/her duly appointed deputies or any officers, employees or other persons of the commissioner of finance designated by him/her to serve such process. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-137. - Reference to tax. 
Wherever reference is made in placards or advertisements or in any other publications to this tax, such reference shall be substantially in the following form: "Tax on occupancy of hotel rooms," except that in any bill, receipt, statement or other evidence or memorandum of occupancy or rent charge issued or employed by the operator, the term "city tax" will suffice. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-138. - Penalties and interest. 
(1)  Any person failing to file a return or to pay or pay over any tax to the commissioner of finance within the time required by this law [division] shall be subject to a penalty of five (5) percent of the amount of tax due per month or any fraction of a month to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent for each year; plus interest at the rate of one (1) percent of such tax for each month of delay or fraction of a month after such return was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the commissioner of finance, if satisfied that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any part of such penalty; but not interest. Such net penalties and interest shall be paid and disposed of in the same manner as other revenues from this law [division]. Unpaid penalties and interest may be enforced in the same manner as the tax imposed by this law [division]. 
(2)  Any operator or occupant and any officer of an operator or occupant failing to file a return required by this law [division], or filing or causing to be filed or making or causing to be made or giving or causing to be given any return, certificate, affidavit, representation, information, testimony or statement required or authorized by this law [division] which is willfully false, and any operator and any officer of a corporate operator willfully failing to file a bond required to be filed pursuant to section 2-4-130 of this law [division] or failing to file a registration certificate and such data in connection therewith as the commissioner of finance may by regulation or otherwise require to display or surrender the certificate of authority as required by this law [division] or assigning or transferring such certificate of authority; and any operator or any officer of a corporate operator willfully failing to charge separately from the rent the tax herein imposed or willfully failing to state such tax separately on any evidence of occupancy and on any bill or statement or receipt of rent issue or employed by the operator or willfully failing or refusing to collect such tax from the occupant, any operator or any officer of a corporate operator who shall refer or cause reference to be made to this tax in a form or manner other than that required by this law [division], and any such person or operator failing to keep records required by this law [division] shall, in addition to the penalties herein or elsewhere prescribed, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Officers of a corporate operator shall be personally liable for the tax collected or required to be collected by such corporation under this law [division] and penalties and interest thereon and subject to the fines and imprisonment herein authorized. 
(3)  The certificate of the commissioner of finance to the effect that a tax has not been paid, that a return, bond or registration certificate has not been filed or that information has not been supplied pursuant to the provisions of this law [division] shall be presumptive evidence thereof. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-139. - Returns to be secret. 
(1)  Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the commissioner of finance or employee or designee of the commissioner of finance to divulge or make known in any manner the rents or other information relating to the business of a taxpayer contained in any return required under this law [division]. The officers charged with the custody of such returns shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the commissioner of finance in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this law [division] or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the provisions of this law [division] when the returns or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events the court may require the production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the delivery to a taxpayer or his/her duly authorized representative of a certified copy of any return filed in connection with his/her tax nor to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified to prevent the identification of particular returns and items thereof or the inspection by the city corporation counsel or other legal representatives of the city or by the district attorney of any county of the return of any taxpayer who shall bring action to set aside or review the tax based thereon, or against whom an action or proceeding has been instituted for the collection of a tax or penalty. Returns shall be preserved for three (3) years and thereafter until the commissioner of finance permits them to be destroyed. 
(2)  Any violation of subsection (1) of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or both, in the discretion of the court, and if the offender be an officer or employee of the city, he/she may be removed from office in accordance with law. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-140. - Notices and limitations of time. 
(1)  Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this law [division] may be given to the person to whom it is intended in a postpaid envelope addressed to such person at the address given in the last return filed by him/her pursuant to the provisions of this law [division] or in any application made by him/her or, if no return has been filed or application made, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to who addressed. Any period of time which is determined according to the provisions of this law [division] by the giving of notice shall commence five (5) days after the date of mailing of such notice. 
(2)  The provisions of the Civil Practice Law and Rules or any other law relative to limitations of time for the enforcement of a civil remedy shall not apply to any proceeding or action taken by the city to levy, appraise, assess, determine or enforce the collection of any tax or penalty provided by this law [division]. However, except in the case of a willfully false, fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the expiration of more than three (3) years from the date of filing of a return; provided, however, that, in the case of a return which should have been filed and has not been filed as provided by law, the tax may be assessed at any time. 
(3)  Where, before expiration of the period prescribed herein for the assessment of an additional tax, a taxpayer has consented in writing that such period be extended, the amount of such additional tax due may be determined at any time within such extended period. The period so extended may be further extended by subsequent consents in writing made before the expiration of the extended period. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 2-4-141. - Severability. 
If any provision of this law [division], or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this law [division], and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 
(L.L. No. 2-2009, § 1)  
Chapter 2-5 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Officers and employees generally, §§ 6 et seq., 238-f et seq. 
Cross reference— Personnel committee of common council, § 2-3-51; compensation of members of board of assessment review, § 2-4-51. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-5-1. - Personnel officer authorized to appoint representative. 
The personnel officer is hereby authorized to appoint a representative who when so appointed shall be authorized to act generally for and in the place of said personnel officer. 
(Res. of 7-10-72)  
Sec. 2-5-2. - Pay periods. 
(a)  The salaries of all officers and employees of the city, except as herein set forth, shall be payable, in pro rata portions, on the terminating day of each fourteen (14) day period succeeding the initial payment day of each fiscal year except that the initial payment period and the last payment period of each fiscal year may be less than fourteen (14) day periods. 
(b)  In computing the compensation for said fourteen (14) day or less pay periods, the number of working days shall be determined on the basis of the number of normal working days included in said payroll period, the working day rate to be determined by dividing the respective annual salary by the number of normal working days in the particular fiscal year. A holiday occurring on a work day or celebrated on a work day, shall be considered a working day for purposes of this section. 
(c)  The first payment for new employees and the last payment for employees terminating their service shall be pro rated at the daily rate. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the payment of salaries on different days of the fourteen (14) day periods, for administrative convenience. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to the salaries paid to members of the board of review, the secretary of the zoning appeal board, the examiners of the examining board of plumbers, the civil service commissioners, including the chairman, the civil service commission medical examiner and the members of the common council, other than the mayor. 
(Res. of 6-17-63)  
Sec. 2-5-3. - Compensation for use of privately owned vehicles. 
(a)  Officers and employees of the city who are required to use private vehicles in the performance of their regularly assigned duties shall be compensated at the rate of twenty-two and one-half cents ($0.225) per mile for use of such vehicles. 
(b)  Before any such officer or employee shall be eligible for such compensation, he shall be certified by the head of the department or the officer in charge thereof. Upon application, such employee shall produce for inspection and notation to the department head his motor vehicle registration, his operator's license and his policy of motor vehicle liability insurance. Such person's eligibility shall be certified by the department head for a period of one (1) year, after which a new application must be made. 
(c)  Each officer or employee certified for compensation shall submit, at regular intervals to be determined by the commissioner of finance, to the commissioner of finance a claim, in the form customarily used by the city, which shall set forth the number of miles of operation and the total amount claimed, computed at the rate of twenty-two and one-half cents ($0.225) per mile. 
(d)  The commissioner of finance is hereby authorized, upon audit by him, to pay such claims. 
(e)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, the commissioner of public safety, or his representative for this purpose, may authorize a member of the police department to use the member's personally owned motor vehicle for police duties provided a record of such authorization and usage shall be currently maintained. In lieu of any other form of reimbursement, the commissioner of public safety is hereby authorized to replenish such vehicle with gasoline estimated to have been consumed on such duty, by drawing on departmental motor fuel supply. Records shall be maintained of motor fuel so used. 
(Ord. of 9-23-74, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 5-17-76, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-78, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-15-81, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-4-85, § 1) 
State Law reference— Expenses of public officers, Public Officers Law, § 64.  
Sec. 2-5-4. - Workmen's compensation coverage—Generally. 
(a)  The intention of this section is to confirm and to consolidate all prior resolutions bringing employees, officers, elective or appointed, within the coverage of the Workmen's Compensation Law, and not in any way to diminish, cancel or terminate any existing election by the city to bring such persons within such coverage. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the definitions of the terms "employer," "employee" or "employment," in subdivisions 3, 4 and 5 of section 2 of the Workmen's Compensation Law, and, notwithstanding the fact that they may or may not be enumerated within any of the groups of employees defined in subdivision 1 of section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Law, the city does hereby bring within the coverage of the Workmen's Compensation Law, all of its employees, officers, elective or appointed or otherwise, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, all of the members of its police department and paid members of its fire department. 
(Res. of 9-6-66) 
State Law reference— Power of city to provide for general coverage of Workmen's Compensation Law, Workmen's Compensation Law, § 3, subdiv. 1, group 19.  
Sec. 2-5-5. - Same—Civil defense workers. 
(a)  The intention of this section is to confirm and consolidate all prior resolutions bringing auxiliary police and other civil defense volunteers within the coverage of the Workmen's Compensation Law, and not in any way to diminish, cancel or terminate any existing election by the city to bring such persons within such coverage or expanded coverage permitted by the sections of law referred to herein. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the definitions of "employer" or "employee" in subdivisions 3, 4 and 5 of section 2 of the Workmen's Compensation Law, the city brings within the coverage of the Workmen's Compensation Law all civil defense volunteers not enumerated in section 3, subdivision 1, group 17, of the Workmen's Compensation Law, who are personnel of a volunteer agency of the office of civil defense of the city as to their authorized civil defense services to the extent not covered under article 10 of the Workmen's Compensation Law. 
(Res. of 9-6-66) 
State Law reference— Power of city to provide extension of coverage of a Workmen's Compensation Law to civil defense workers, Workmen's Compensation Law, § 3, subdiv. 1, group 19.  
Sec. 2-5-5.1. - City as self-insurer. 
(a)  The city does hereby elect to become a self-insurer pursuant to subdivisions 3 and 4a of section 50 of the Workmen's Compensation Law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the definitions of the term "employer", "employee" or "employment", in subdivisions 3, 4 and 5 of section 2 of the Workmen's Compensation Law, and, notwithstanding the fact that they may or may not be enumerated within any of the groups of employees defined in subdivision 1 of section 3 of the Workmen's Compensation Law, the city, as a self-insurer, does hereby bring within the coverage of the Workmen's Compensation Law, the members of all elected or appointed boards and commissions, and all officials, officers, employees and volunteers, both individually and collectively, when acting or deemed to be acting within the scope and performance of their duties for the city and the parking authority. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized to direct the commissioner of finance to expend sufficient monies to pay the cost of any and all proper claims, statutory assessments and administrative charges against the city arising out of its obligations as a self-insurer under the Workmen's Compensation Law. 
(Res. of 6-21-85)  
Sec. 2-5-6. - Restriction on activities of policemen. 
No police officer shall, in the course of his employment, exercise any authority as a police officer of the city outside the boundaries of the city, except: 
(1)  When following in hot pursuit a person who has committed a crime, offense or violation within the limits of the city; 
(2)  When specifically authorized by the mayor, president of the common council, commissioner of public safety, chief of police, deputy chief of police, a captain, lieutenant or sergeant of police, to undertake the particular duty which will require the police officer to operate beyond the territorial limits, providing authority so exercised is directly or incidentally related to the authority so granted such police officer. 
(Ord. of 12-17-62, § 1) 
State Law reference— Benefits for police officers for injuries or death outside city, Unconsol. L., § 5701 et seq. (McKinney).  
Sec. 2-5-7. - Unemployment insurance payment reserve fund. 
Pursuant to the authority of Chapter 616 of the Laws of 1967, there is hereby established in the city a reserve fund to be known as the "unemployment insurance payment reserve fund." 
(Ord. of 2-8-78, § 1) 
State Law reference— Unemployment Insurance Law, Labor Law, § 500 et seq.  
Sec. 2-5-8. - Defense and indemnification—Generally. 
(a)  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the term "employee" shall mean any person holding a position by election, appointment or employment in the service of the city, whether or not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a municipally-sponsored volunteer program, but shall not include an independent contractor. The term, "employee" shall include a former employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative. 
(b)  At the request of the employee and upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of subsection (d), the city shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil action or proceeding in any municipal, state or federal court, including actions or proceedings brought to enforce the provisions of sections 1981 through 1988 of Title 42 of the United States Code arising out of any act or omission alleged to have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment and in discharge of his duties. This duty to provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the city. 
Subject to the conditions set forth in the preceding paragraph, the employee shall be entitled to be represented by the corporation counsel, provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial proceeding whenever the corporation counsel determines, based upon his investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that representation by the corporation counsel would be inappropriate, or whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by a special proceeding determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his choice. The corporation counsel shall notify the employee in writing of such determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his choice. If the employee is entitled to representation by private counsel under the provisions of this subsection, the corporation counsel shall so certify to the common council. Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the city to such private counsel from time-to-time during the pendency of the civil action or proceeding subject to approval by the common council. 
Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the corporation counsel as required by subsection (d), the corporation counsel shall take all necessary steps on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a defense. 
(c)  The city shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any municipal, state or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public employment or duties; the duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this subsection shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the employee. 
An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be submitted to the corporation counsel any proposed settlement which may be subject to indemnification by the city. The corporation counsel shall review such proposed settlement as to form and amount, and shall give his approval if in his judgment, the settlement is in the best interest of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the city to indemnify or save harmless an employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by the corporation counsel. 
Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee, or upon the settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered mail within thirty (30) days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the mayor; and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such judgment or settlement shall be submitted for authorization for payment by the common council. If the common council authorizes payment thereof, the judgment or settlement shall be paid by the commissioner of finance. 
(d)  The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this section shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  Delivery to the corporation counsel or his assistant, at his office, by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five (5) days after he is served with such document; and 
(2)  The full cooperation of the employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense of any action or proceeding against the city based upon the same act or omission, and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee that the city provide for his defense pursuant to this section. 
(e)  The benefits of this section shall inure only to employees as defined herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any provision of this section be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision of the Workmen's Compensation Law. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all actions and proceedings pending upon September 15, 1980, or thereafter instituted. 
(h)  Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the provisions of this section shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit, entity, officer or employee of the city, or any right to defense and/or indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in accordance with, or by reason of, any other provision of state or federal statutory or common law. 
(Ord. of 9-15-80, §§ 1—8)  
Sec. 2-5-8.1. - Same—Adoption of state law. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 18 of the Public Officers Law, the common council hereby agrees to be held liable for costs incurred under the provisions of such section, by conferring upon the officers and employees of such city the benefits of Section 18 of such law. Such benefits shall supplement, and be available in addition to, defense or indemnification protection conferred by section 2-5-8. 
(Ord. of 10-5-81, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-9. - Assignment of policemen or firemen to public events. 
The chief of the police department or the chief of the fire department, as the case may be, may upon written request of an individual citizen or organization, provide police officers or fire fighters for special duty assignments in public or quasi-public places within the city subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  All such police officers or fire fighters shall be volunteers whose presence is not required for other police department duties, such determination to be made by the chief of police or chief of the fire department in his sole discretion. 
(b)  The chief of police or chief of the fire department, in his sole discretion, shall approve the specific location and type of duty assignment for such police officers or fire fighters. 
(c)  All such police officers or fire fighters so assigned shall be considered to be on duty for all purposes, including without limiting the generality of the foregoing, being listed on duty rosters, being subject to the supervision and direction of all their superior officers, including reassignment and relocation. 
(d)  All such police officers or fire fighters so assigned shall be paid by the city at time and one-half the regular pay rate for their individual grade and shall receive no payment from nor shall they be subject to any direction or supervision from the requesting citizen or organization. Each police officer or fire fighter so assigned shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours' pay, regardless of the time actually worked. 
(e)  The commissioner of public safety shall cause to be kept an accurate record of the time devoted to such special duty assignments by the police officers or fire fighters and shall promptly report the same to the commissioner of finance. The commissioner of finance shall, as soon as practicable, render a bill in the name of the city to the individual citizen or organization which requested such special duty assignment, in accordance with the fee schedule set forth herein. All fees set forth in such bills shall be promptly paid to the city. 
(f)  The fee schedule for such special duty assignments shall be established by the commissioner of public safety at the beginning of each fiscal year. In any event, the minimum fee payable hereunder shall be for four (4) hours. 
(Ord. of 10-21-74, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-86, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-10. - [Platoon system for fire department established; duty and off-duty hours—Designated.] 
The members of the paid fire department in the city of White Plains shall be under a two (2) platoon system. The chief of the fire department, with the approval of the commissioner of public safety, shall assign said firemen into such platoons. The day tour shall be for ten (10) hours, from eight ante meridian to six post meridian (8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.) being ten (10) hours per day and sixty (60) hours per week when on day duty, and the night tour shall be for fourteen (14) hours, from six post meridian to eight ante meridian (6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.), being fourteen (14) hours per night and eighty-four (84) hours per week when on night duty. There shall be granted to each officer and member of the fire department one twenty-four (24) hour day off duty each week of seven (7) days, which shall be in addition to his platoon hours off duty. Each officer and member of the fire department shall receive an additional period of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours off duty following each period of fourteen (14) days. The tours of captains, lieutenants and firemen shall be changed once in each week of seven (7) days. Officers above the rank of captain, telegraph dispatchers, electricians and firemen on special service shall not be included as working under the platoon system. 
(L.L. No. 4-1974, § 1; L.L. No. 1-1943, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-11. - [Same—Suspension of schedule during time of emergency.] 
In the event of riots, serious or multiple fires or other department emergency, the above schedule may be temporarily suspended by the officer in command of the department and the hours of duty of all members shall be as directed by the officer in command of the department. 
(L.L. No. 4-1941, § 2; Ord. of 1-1943, § 2)  
Sec. 2-5-12. - [Attendance at conferences, conventions, schools, etc.] 
The power to authorize attendance of officers or employees of the city of White Plains at official or unofficial conventions or conferences of municipal officers or employees, or to attend schools conducted for the betterment of municipal government if believed to be of benefit to the city of White Plains, is hereby delegated to the mayor, as chief executive officer of the city. 
(L.L. No. 1-1955, § 1) 
State Law reference— Expenses of public officers attending conferences, schools, etc., General Municipal Law, § 77-b.  
Sec. 2-5-13. - [Overtime pay for police—Authorized.] 
The commissioner of public safety is hereby authorized to certify overtime compensation for police patrolmen, exclusive of detectives, who volunteer to work extra hours, during times when the police force is not up to full strength, and are then required to work in excess of their regularly established hours of employment, provided that such police patrolmen are not assigned to such duty. Said overtime compensation shall be at the regular basic pay rate for each such police patrolman. 
(L.L. No. 5-1961, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-14. - [Same—Provisions inconsistent superseded.] 
The provisions of section one of chapter three hundred sixty of the laws of nineteen hundred eleven, entitled "An act to promote the health and efficiency of policemen in cities of the first and second class," as last amended by chapter nine hundred sixty-four of the laws of nineteen hundred fifty-seven insofar as they restrict or are inconsistent with the provisions of this local law, are hereby to such extent superseded. 
(L.L. No. 5-161, § 2) 
Editor's note— The above cited law is embodied in sec. 971 of the Unconsolidated Laws (McKinney).  
Sec. 2-5-15. - Judicial review committee. 
(a)  At least one month prior to the appointment of city judge, acting city judge or associate judges a judicial review committee shall be appointed by the mayor to interview candidates and review and report on their qualifications. 
(b)  Said committee shall be bi-partisan, and shall be comprised of attorneys either resident in or practicing in the city. 
(c)  The appointment of the members of the committee shall be announced to the common council. 
(d)  The committee shall receive from any source the names of candidates and shall interview qualified and eligible candidates requesting consideration. The committee shall transmit its full and complete written report on all candidates considered to the mayor who shall distribute it to the common council at least five (5) days before the appointments appear on the council agenda. 
(e)  The written report of the review committee shall be held in absolute confidence; any breach of this confidence shall nullify this section. 
(f)  The committee may adopt such procedures and policies as it may deem appropriate to its functions, including standards for evaluating the best qualified candidates for appointment. 
(Res. of 4-7-80, §§ 1—6)  
Sec. 2-5-16. - [Retirement incentive program, 1991.] 
1.  The City of White Plains hereby elects to provide all its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 178, Laws of 1991. 
2.  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 1, 1991. 
3.  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
4.  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of this local law [section] shall be funded over a five-year period. The amount of the annual payment in each of the five (5) years shall be determined by the Actuary of the New York State and Local Employees Retirement System, and it shall be paid by The City of White Plains for each employee who receives the retirement benefits payable under this local law [section]. 
(L. L. No. 3-1991, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— The editor has included §§ 1—4 of L. L. No. 3-1991 as § 2-5-16.  
Sec. 2-5-16.1. - [Retirement incentive program, 1999.] 
1.  The City of White Plains hereby elects to provide all of its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 70, Laws of 1999. 
2.  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 3, 1999. 
3.  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit, shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
4.  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of the local law shall be paid as one (1) lump sum, or in five (5) annual installments. The amount of the annual payment shall be determined by the retirement actuary of the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System, and it shall be paid by the City of White Plains for each employee who received the benefits payable under this local law [section]. 
(L. L. No. 1-1999, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— L. L. No. 1-1999, §§ 1—4, has been included as § 2-5-16.1 by the editor.  
Sec. 2-5-16.2. - [Retirement incentive program, 2000.] 
1.  The City of White Plains hereby elects to provide all of its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 86, Laws of 2000. 
2.  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 1, 2000. 
3.  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit, shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
4.  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of the local law shall be paid as one (1) lump sum, or in five (5) annual installments. The amount of the annual payment shall be determined by the retirement actuary of the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System, and it shall be paid by the City of White Plains for each employee who received the benefits payable under this local law [section]. 
(L.L. No. 2-2000, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— L. L. No. 2-2000, §§ 1—4, has been included as § 2-5-16.2 by the editor.  
Secs. 2-5-17—2-5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXPENSES OF APPLICANTS FOR CITY POSITIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Traveling expenses for city job applicants, General Municipal Law, § 77-c. 
 
Sec. 2-5-21. - [Certification; payment by city.] 
The commissioner of finance is hereby authorized, after certification by the personnel director, to pay the expenses of job applicants who have been granted a position interview with the personnel director for municipal positions. 
(L.L. No. 2-1966, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-22. - [Enumeration of expenses; maximum amount payable by city generally.] 
Authorized payment by the commissioner of finance, after certification by the personnel director, shall be for mileage, if private conveyance is used, at the rate of eight cents ($.08) a mile, provided the mileage traveled by the job applicant is in excess of thirty-five (35) miles, or the actual fare paid to a public conveyance, provided the distance is greater than thirty-five (35) miles, the reasonable cost of lodging, if necessary, and for meals while the job applicant is in the City of White Plains or en route to and from the City of White Plains. No payment of expenses to a job applicant for mileage, lodging and meals shall exceed the total sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(L.L. No. 2-1966, § 2)  
Sec. 2-5-23. - [Payment of expenses in excess of fifty dollars.] 
The commissioner of finance is authorized to pay, after certification by the personnel director, to a job applicant, for expenses, a sum greater than fifty dollars ($50.00) provided the specific job applicant's expenses are approved by the mayor. 
(L.L. No. 2-1966, § 3)  
Secs. 2-5-24—2-5-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IIA. - EXPENSES OF CITY APPOINTED OFFICERS INCURRED IN MOVING TO CITY 
 
Sec. 2-5-27. - [Reimbursement authorized.] 
The common council shall have the power at the time of appointment to authorize reimbursement of appointed officers of the city for moving expenses incurred in transporting such officers, their families and household effects to a place of abode within the city, subject to agreement by any such officer to return to the city monies received for such expenses in the event of resignation or voluntary separation from the position to which such officer is appointed within one year after such appointment. 
(L.L. No. 5-1979, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-28. - [Same—Rules and regulations.] 
The commissioner of finance shall prescribe and amend such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this local law [sections 2-5-27 and 2-5-28], including but not limited to establishing standards, criteria and procedures for determining eligibility for such reimbursement, fixing the maximum dollar limitation on such reimbursement, establishing a minimum distance for eligibility for such reimbursement, and defining the types of expenses which may qualify for such reimbursement. 
(L.L. No. 5-1979, § 2)  
Secs. 2-5-29, 2-5-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMPENSATION AND LEAVE PLAN[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Power of governing body to provide for vacations, sick leaves and leaves of absence for officers and employees, General Municipal Law, § 92. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-5-31. - Office and business hours. 
Municipal office buildings shall be open for the transaction of business from Monday to Friday, both inclusive, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except such portions of said buildings as are required for city court, police, fire fighting, caretakers and similar services or for emergency services. The mayor may, by proclamation, designate a day, or a portion of a day, immediately preceding or succeeding a holiday, when such municipal office buildings shall be closed. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83 § 1(Art. III, § 1); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-32. - Common council work day. 
The standard work day for the position of common council member shall consist of six (6) hours. 
(Ord. of 3-4-91; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Secs. 2-5-33—2-5-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMPENSATION, ETC. 
 
Sec. 2-5-41. - Applicability. 
This division shall apply to all officers and employees of the city designated as appointed officials, managerial/confidential employees, persons serving in positions funded by grants or contracts, members of boards and commissions, employees designated as hourly workers, student workers and seasonal/part-time workers, who are not covered by the terms of a collective bargaining agreement with any one of the city's labor organizations and whose salary is not otherwise provided for by the City Charter. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. I, § 1); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-42. - Determination of salaries. 
The annual salaries for all officers and employees designated in section 2-5-41 of this Code shall be limited to the salary range for each position title within its respective salary group as hereinafter set forth in the Appendices: 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Such salaries shall be adjusted only at the beginning of the fiscal year, except in the case of promotions. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. I, § 2); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-43. - Appointments. 
Appointments and other personnel changes made to the positions in the city service shall be made in accordance with the Civil Service Law and the personnel procedures as promulgated by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. of 3-7-88, § 1(Art. I, § 3); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-44. - Managerial/confidential employees. 
The following conditions apply only to employees designated as managerial/confidential: 
(1)  New appointees. A new employee appointed to a position in a salary group shall be paid the minimum rate of pay for such salary group, except as follows: 
a.  A new employee upon original appointment who has had previous experience in the duties of his position exceeding the experience required for appointment at the minimum salary may be appointed at a salary equal to the minimum rate plus one (1) or more increments of a sum not to exceed seven (7) percent for each of previous experience as determined by the personnel officer. 
b.  In the event that the personnel officer determines that there is an acute shortage of qualified candidates for a position title, the personnel officer may certify the existence of such acute shortage in writing, which certification shall be effective for a period not to exceed the current fiscal year in which it is made. When such a certification has been made, an appointment to that position title may be made at a salary step above the minimum to be determined by the personnel officer, which salary shall not exceed that paid to any present employee in that position title. 
(2)  Promotions. When an employee's position is reallocated to a higher salary group, an employee shall receive a salary increase to the step in the new salary group which is closest but not less than the employee's salary in the lower salary group, unless specifically authorized at a higher step by the Personnel Officer. In no event shall the employee be paid in excess of the maximum of the higher group. 
(3)  Transfers. There shall be no immediate change in the salary of an employee who retains the same position title but is transferred from one department or bureau to another. There shall be no immediate change in the salary of an employee who is transferred from one position title to another position title in the same numerical salary group. 
(4)  Demotions. When an employee is demoted for cause to a position title in a lower salary group, he shall be paid a salary to be determined by the personnel officer upon the recommendation of the department head at a step which is within the range for the lower position title. 
(5)  Reallocation upward. When an employee's position is reallocated to a higher salary group, the employee shall receive a salary increase of seven (7) percent above his regular rate of pay, and then be placed on the salary scale of his new group level at the next highest scheduled step or minimum, which step or minimum shall be no less than the employee's prior salary plus seven (7) percent. In no event shall the employee be paid in excess of the maximum of the higher group. 
Reallocation downward. When an employee's position is reallocated to a position title in a lower salary group, the employee shall be permitted to continue at this present rate of pay during the period of incumbency (except in event of general service-wide reductions), but shall not be entitled to a salary increase in the fiscal year of reallocation or until the salary for said group shall equal or exceed the salary for the reallocated position. 
(6)  Part-time employment. All rates prescribed in the salary range schedule are the standard rates of pay authorized for full-time employment. When employment is on a part-time basis, only the proportionate part of the rate for the time actually employed shall be paid. The rate of compensation for part-time employees shall be computed on the basis of the minimum annual salary for the position as provided in this division, divided by the annual hours normally worked for full-time employees in such position. However, employees with a minimum of thirty-six (36) continuous months of service shall be proportionately entitled to all benefits accruing to full-time employees, including proportionately such salary adjustments as are set forth in this division. 
(7)  Additional compensation. Employees shall receive overtime pay or additional compensation as follows: 
a.  The employer shall pay time and one-half the employee's rate of pay (except as hereinafter referred to) for all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours per week, and for all hours worked on the employee's sixth day of work in a work week as may be authorized by the mayor; however: 
1.  Employees who normally work less than forty (40) hours per week shall be paid straight time or given compensatory time off, at the employer's option, for all hours worked in excess of their normal week up to forty (40) hours. 
2.  Upon mutual agreement between the department head and the employees, compensatory time off may be allowed instead of payment of time and one-half for all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours. 
3.  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions to the contrary, any employee who is promoted to an appointed official position shall be paid for or use all compensatory time balances prior to the effective date of such promotion. 
b.  Time and one-half the employee's rate of pay shall be paid for work performed on a holiday (except as provided in paragraph c below). In such cases, if requested by the employee, the employer will make a reasonable effort to schedule the employee for another day off with pay and, if none is scheduled, then the employee will get paid for one (1) additional day not worked. 
c.  The employer shall pay double time the employee's rate of pay for: 
1.  All hours worked in excess of sixteen (16) consecutive hours irrespective of the forty-hour provision. 
2.  Work performed on Christmas, Thanksgiving Day and New Year's Day. In such cases, if requested by the employee, the employer will make a reasonable effort to schedule the employee for another day off with pay; and if none is scheduled, then the employee will get paid for one (1) additional day not worked. 
d.  Call-back pay. Employees recalled to work after leaving the job at the end of their regular hours shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours' pay at the applicable overtime rates unless they work into their regular starting time, in which case they shall be paid at the applicable overtime rate for all hours worked prior to their regular starting time. 
e.  Longevity. Employees shall receive the following longevity pay: 
1.  After (12) years of continuous service with the city or its agencies, paid at the annual rate of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), effective July 1, 2002; seven hundred seventy-five dollars ($775.00), effective July 1, 2003; eight hundred dollars ($800.00), effective July 1, 2005, and nine hundred dollars ($900.00), effective July 1, 2006. 
2.  After fifteen (15) years of continuous service with the city or its agencies, paid at the annual rate of nine hundred dollars ($900.00), effective July 1, 2005; and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), effective July 1, 2006. 
3.  After twenty (20) years of continuous service with the city or its agencies, paid at the annual rate of nine hundred fifty dollars ($950.00) effective July 1, 2002; nine hundred seventy-five ($975.00) effective July 1, 2003; one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) effective July 1, 2005; and one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00) effective July 1, 2006. 
4.  Employees completing the required amount of continuous service in the fiscal year are eligible for the longevity payments commencing the first pay period of the fiscal year. These payments will be included in the employee's biweekly or weekly paychecks as the case may be. 
f.  Merit increases. Employees who are below maximum of their salary group may, at the discretion of the department head, receive a merit increase annually, not to exceed that which would equal a scheduled "increment" as those are reflected on the salary schedule, or so much of such an increment as would bring them up to maximum. Employees appointed or reinstated less than four (4) months prior to the beginning of the fiscal year will not be eligible for such a merit increase. 
(8)  Out-of-title work. When an employee is assigned to work in a higher classification for more than fifteen (15) work days out of forty-five (45) work days, then such employee shall receive the minimum rate for such higher classification work retroactive to the first day of such work but not less than seven (7) percent above his regular rate. When employees are temporarily assigned to perform the duties of a lower classification at a lower rate of pay, they shall be guaranteed their regular rate of pay. 
(9)  Reinstatement. An employee may be reinstated within one (1) year of the employee's termination of service with the city and shall be paid a salary step to be fixed by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. I, § 4); Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-96, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-00, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-27-04, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-04, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 2-5-45. - Tuition assistance. 
The city shall assist full-time employees in the pursuit of such formal educational programs as will mutually benefit the employee and the efficiency of the city operations in which the employee is engaged. This policy shall operate within the limitations of the budget and the guidelines of the personnel officer for such payment. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. I, § 5); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-46. - Mileage allowance. 
All officers and employees will be reimbursed for mileage, as set forth in Appendix 7, where a private car is authorized for use for the city's business, and when the employee has been certified eligible for reimbursement by the personnel officer. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. I, § 6); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-47. - Position titles and salary groups. 
(a)  Position titles and the allocation of such titles to salary groups shall be as set forth in Appendices 2-b, 3, 5 and 6. 
(b)  Position titles with fixed salaries shall be as set forth in Appendices 1 and 4. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. I, § 7); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-48. - Disbursement of funds. 
The mayor hereby authorizes and directs the commissioner of finance to disburse funds to pay the annual salaries and hourly wages in accordance with the provisions of this division and its appendices and upon receipt of documentation as prescribed by the commissioner of finance and the personnel officer. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. I, § 8); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-49. - Deferred compensation plan. 
The New York State Deferred Compensation Plan, presently administered by Copeland Associates, adopted February 2, 1987, is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-50. - Dental plan. 
The Mayor is hereby authorized to direct the Commissioner of Finance to disburse funds for individual and family dental insurance for elected, appointed and managerial/confidential employees and other eligible employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement as follows: 
Annual Employer Contribution per Person 	Effective Date 
$1,396.50 	July 1, 2018 
$1,436.50 	July 1, 2019 
$1,476.50 	July 1, 2020 
 
(Ord. of 4-5-88; Ord. of 3-5-91, § 2; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-96, § 2; Ord. of 12-4-00, § 3; Ord. of 9-27-04, § 2; Ord. of 10-4-04, § 2; Ord. of 6-2-08, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-11, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 1, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. of 5-19-14(3); § 1; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 2-5-51. - Optical plan. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to direct the commissioner of finance to disburse funds for individual and family optical insurance for elected, appointed and managerial/confidential employees, and other eligible employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement as follows: 
Maximum Annual Employer Contribution Per Eligible Person 	Effective Date 
$349.00 	July 1, 2015 
 
(Ord. of 3-5-91, § 3; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1, Ord. of 11-7-94, § 2; Ord. of 7-1-96, § 3; Ord. of 12-4-00, § 4; Ord. of 9-27-04, § 3; Ord. of 10-4-04, § 3; Ord. of 6-2-08, § 2; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 1; Ord. of 10-3-11, § 1; Ord. of 5-21-12, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 1; Ord. of 5-19-14(3); § 1; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 2-5-52. - Employee assistance plan. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to direct the commissioner of finance to disburse funds for the payment of the per-person cost, as contracted by the city with Westchester County, for the provision of the employee assistance program on behalf of elected, appointed, managerial/confidential, and other eligible employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement. 
(Ord. of 3-5-91, § 4; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 9-8-09, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-53. - Health insurance buyout. 
(a)  The health insurance buyout program shall be offered to elected and appointed officials and other eligible employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement as follows: 
(1)  Elected and appointed officials and other eligible employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement may opt out of the city's health insurance program in whole or in part by waiving coverage for themselves and their eligible dependents or for their eligible dependants only for periods of a full calendar year by completing and submitting the appropriate waiver agreement form furnished by the city to the commissioner of finance. In order to be eligible for this option, the official or employee must certify that he or she has health insurance through a source other than the city. 
(2)  Newly elected or appointed officials and newly hired employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement upon commencing service may elect to waive the city's health insurance coverage, with the provisions of this section taking effect on the normal effective date for their health benefits. Payments under the buyout schedule shall be made to the official or employee on a pro rata basis for the remaining months available in the waived calendar year. All other provisions of this section shall remain in effect. 
(b)  Waivers for the health insurance buyout program must be submitted in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Officials and employees electing to waive coverage must do so by filing their forms no later than the close of the annual open enrollment period prior to the beginning of the waived calendar year. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, officials and employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement who obtain health insurance through a source other than the city, within the calendar year may elect to waive the city's health insurance coverage, with the provisions of this section taking effect on or after the effective date the official or employee obtained health insurance through a source other than the city. Payments under the buyout schedule shall be made to the employee on a pro-rata basis for the remaining months available in the waived calendar year. All other provisions of this section shall remain in effect. 
(c)  Officials and employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement who participate in the health insurance buyout program will be paid the following dollar amounts, provided he or she maintains his or her waiver (remains opted out) for a full calendar year: 
Waiver of individual coverage: 	$1,500.00 
Waiver of dependent coverage: 	$1,650.00 
Waiver of family coverage: 	$3,200.00 
 
Payments shall be subject to all usual payroll deductions and shall be made on the first Friday in December of the waived calendar year, which is not a payday for city employees. 
(d)  Once an official or employee has waived coverage for a particular calendar year, he or she may not reinstate coverage for that calendar year, unless the official or employee experiences a "qualifying event" as defined by Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code. Reinstatement of coverage for the succeeding calendar year may be made by notifying the city in writing no later than the close of the annual open enrollment period to be effective the succeeding calendar year. This deadline will not apply to reinstatement due to a qualifying event. If reinstatement occurs during a waived calendar year due to a qualifying event, the official or employee will be paid on a pro rata basis for the actual months waived in that calendar year. All other provisions of this section shall remain in effect. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing to the contrary, the right of any city official or employee to participate in the health insurance buyout program or to reinstate city health insurance coverage, is and will be subject to the conditions imposed by the city's carrier(s) at that time. 
(Ord. of 3-5-91, § 5; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-94; Ord. of 7-1-96, § 4; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-13, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-53.5. - Health insurance. 
(a)  For elected and appointed officials, managerial/confidential and other eligible employees who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement, the city shall contribute eighty-five (85) percent of the premium charged by the New York State Empire Health Insurance Program toward the cost of providing individual or family coverage under any of the health insurance programs the city makes available to its employees. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby authorized to direct the commissioner of finance to deduct from the salaries of those officials or employees enrolled in any of the health insurance programs offered by the city, an amount equal to the difference between the city's contribution and the actual premium charged by the health insurance program in which the individual is enrolled. 
(Ord. of 2-1-10, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 2)  
Sec. 2-5-54. - Retirees health insurance. 
(a)  Employees hired before July 1, 1995, who are otherwise eligible to receive health insurance benefits in retirement from the city, shall continue to be entitled to maintain the level of health insurance benefits (individual or family) provided by the city to current employees and to have the city contribute eighty-five (85) percent of the premium charged by the New York State Empire Health Insurance Program toward the cost of providing individual or family coverage under any of the health insurance programs the city makes available to its employees. The provisions of this section shall not apply to retired employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement at the time of their retirement, during the term said collective bargaining agreement is in effect. 
(b)  Employees hired on or after July 1, 1995, who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement and who are otherwise eligible to receive health insurance benefits in retirement from the city, shall be entitled to maintain the level of health insurance benefits (individual or family) provided by the city to current employees and to have the city contribute the percent of the premium charged by the New York State Empire Health Insurance Program toward the cost of providing individual or family coverage under any of the health insurance programs the city makes available to its employees pursuant to the following schedule: 
Completed Years 
of City Service 	City 
Contribution 
20 or more 	85% 
15-19 	65% 
10-15 	50% (individual) 
35% (family) 
fewer than 10 	0% 
 
The city shall waive the twenty-year service requirement in the case of an employee who is eligible for, retires, and receives benefits pursuant to, Retirement and Social Security Law Section 63 (accidental). 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions (a) and (b) hereinabove, employees whose employment with the city commenced prior to July 1, 2010, who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement, and who have been continuously employed full time by the city from that time until at least July 1, 2017, and who are otherwise eligible to receive health insurance benefits in retirement from the city, shall be entitled to maintain the level of health insurance benefits (individual or family) provided by the city to current employees and to have the city contribute the percent of the premium charged by the New York State Empire Health Insurance Program toward the cost of providing individual or family coverage under any of the health insurance programs the city makes available to its employees pursuant to the following schedule: 
Completed Years 
of City Service 	City 
Contribution 
20 or more 	100% 
15-19 	80% 
10-15 	50% (individual) 
35% (family) 
fewer than 10 	0% 
 
The city shall waive the twenty-year service requirement in the case of an employee who is eligible for, retires, and receives benefits pursuant to, Retirement and Social Security Law Section 63 (accidental). 
(d)  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions to the contrary, the above schedules shall not apply to employees whose positions are designated in Appendix 1, Appointed Officials and Appendix 1c, Elected Officials. Such employees who are otherwise eligible to receive health insurance benefits in retirement from the city, shall continue to be entitled to maintain the level of health insurance benefits (individual or family) provided by the city to current employees and have the city contribute eighty-five (85) percent of the premium charged by the New York State Empire Health Insurance Program toward the cost of providing individual or family coverage under any of the health insurance programs the city makes available to its employees. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, employees whose positions are designated in Appendix 1, Appointed Officials, and whose employment with the city commenced prior to July 1, 2010 and who have been continuously employed full time by the city from that time until at least July 1, 2017, and who are otherwise eligible to receive health insurance benefits in retirement from the city, shall continue to be entitled to maintain the level of health insurance benefits (individual or family) provided by the city to current employees and have the city contribute one hundred (100) percent of the premium charged by the New York State Empire Health Insurance Program toward the cost of providing individual or family coverage under any of the health insurance programs the city makes available to its employees. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96, § 5; Ord. of 4-5-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 3; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 3 )  
Sec. 2-5-55. - Flexible spending plan. 
(a)  Name; purpose. This plan shall be known as the "City of White Plains Flexible Spending Plan." This plan is intended to be a "cafeteria plan" within the meaning of section 125(d) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Definitions. [For the purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Administrator means the commissioner of finance or person(s), or corporation appointed by the commissioner of finance to carry out the administrative duties of all or part of the plan. 
Benefits means the benefits available under the plan that are described in subsection (d)(1). 
Code means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time. 
Compensation means the total cash remuneration received by an eligible employee from the employer during a plan year prior to any reductions pursuant to a salary redirection agreement under the terms of this plan. It shall include overtime, differentials, bonuses and any form of remuneration to the eligible employee for services rendered to the employer as an employee. 
Dependent means an individual who qualifies as a dependent of an eligible employee within the meaning of section 152 of the code. In the case of health benefits provided under an insurance policy, the "dependent" must also be defined as dependent(s) under the policy. 
Election period means the period beginning sixty (60) days and ending thirty (30) days immediately before the beginning of each plan year for the election of benefits and salary redirection. 
Eligible employee means any current employee of the employer who is eligible to participate in the plan under subsection (c)(1). 
Employer means the City of White Plains. 
Insurer means an insurance company or health maintenance organization organized or incorporated in any one of the states of the United States which is licensed or authorized by the State of New York to provide a health insurance policy or city self insured programs. 
Insurance policies means the city's self insured programs or the agreements between the employer and the various insurers under which the insurer(s) provide health coverage to support in whole or in part the medical benefits agreed to by the employer to eligible employees and/or their dependents. 
Participant means an eligible employee who voluntarily agrees to participate in the plan. 
Plan contribution means the amounts paid by plan participants or on their behalf during the plan year either by foregoing cash options or by reducing salary to pay for health benefits or dependent care benefits. 
Such plan contributions may be made on a pretax basis in which case the plan contributions are not included in the participants taxable income for the plan year or on an after-tax basis in which case the plan contributions are included in the participant's taxable income for the plan year. 
Plan year means the twelve-month period starting on January 1 and ending December 31. The plan year shall be the coverage period for the benefits provided for under this plan. 
If an eligible employee begins participation under the plan after the first date of the plan year, the first period of coverage shall begin with the date of participation and shall end on the last date of the plan year. 
Premiums means the participant's cost for insurance policy benefits. 
Premium reimbursement account means an account to which plan contributions are allocated for each participant and from which the premiums of the participant may be paid or reimbursed. 
Salary redirection means plan contributions made by the employer for a participant. These are allocated to the premium reimbursement account as authorized by a participant's election of benefits under the plan. 
Salary redirection agreement is an agreement between the participant and the employer in which the participant agrees to reduce his compensation which has not yet been earned by a certain amount and the employer agrees to contribute that amount to the plan on behalf of the participant. 
(c)  Eligibility and participation. 
(1)  Existing plan participants and eligibility. All employees on the effective date of this plan and any future employees who are employed by the employer during a plan year who are eligible to participate in the city's health insurance program and in the employer's group medical plan, (the terms of which are incorporated herein by reference) and the applicable collective bargaining agreement between the employer and a union representing a unit of employees including the subject employees or, in the case of a nonunion employee, common council ordinance. In order to be eligible to receive the declination bonus, the employee must certify that he or she has health insurance through another source other than the city. 
(2)  Participation. Each employee who is eligible to participate in the plan and who does not become ineligible to participate in the plan for any reason shall become a plan participant in this plan on the effective date of his or her employment. 
(3)  Terms of participation. Before the plan is utilized by a particular eligible employee, he or she shall first agree to indemnify and save the city harmless against any and all claims and/or liabilities including attorney's fees, that may arise out of or by reason of action taken or not taken by the city for the purposes of complying with Internal Revenue Code section 125 and other relevant law. Participation in the plan ends if a Participant becomes ineligible, terminates or is discharged from employment, dies or if the plan is terminated. All benefits under the plan will cease at that time except that any rights which the participant may have under Title X of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 as amended ("COBRA") and any other state or federal law shall survive to the extent provided by these laws. 
(d)  Benefits under the plan. 
(1)  Benefit options. 
a.  Declination bonus. Each eligible employee may select one of the two (2) options in this subsection (a): 
1.  Declination in lieu of a specific level of health insurance coverage with payment of declination cash as set forth in the applicable collective bargaining agreement; or 
2.  No declination of health insurance coverage. 
b.  Health care reimbursement account. 
1.  Generally. Each participant will be entitled to receive for each plan year reimbursement of qualifying health care expenses incurred during the plan year, which are not reimbursed by other medical plans, and which are not taken as a deduction on the participant's income tax return, up to the dollar amount of coverage elected by the participant for that plan year. This election may be any whole dollar amount of coverage from one hundred dollars ($100.00) to thirty-five hundred dollars ($3,500.00). 
2.  Benefits limited to expenses incurred in plan year. The coverage elected is available only to reimburse expenses which are incurred during the plan year consistent with IRS regulations. Except that participants are permitted to use excess contributions from one plan year in the first two and one-half (2½) months of the following plan year, consistent with the grace period as authorized by IRS Notice 2005-42. 
3.  Qualifying health care expenses. Qualifying health care expenses shall include only amounts which are for "medical care" within the meaning of code section 213(d), of the participant or dependents. 
Expenses allowed under the code and IRS regulations must be substantiated consistent with the requirements of the IRS regulations and plan administrator. 
c.  Dependent care reimbursement account. 
1.  Generally. Each participant will be entitled to receive for each plan year reimbursement of qualifying dependent care expenses which are incurred during the plan year for which a dependent care tax credit is not taken on the participant's income tax return, up to the dollar amount of coverage elected by the participant for that plan year. In no event shall the sum of the reimbursements made to the participant under this plan and the amount of dependent care tax credit taken by the participant exceed the maximum amount set in accordance with IRS regulations. 
2.  Benefits limited to expenses incurred during plan year. The coverage elected for a plan is only available to reimburse expenses which are incurred during the plan year. Except that participants are permitted to use excess contributions from one plan year in the first two and one-half (2½) months of the following plan year, consistent with the grace period as authorized by IRS Notice 2005-42. Expenses shall only be reimbursed in accordance with IRS regulations and the plan administrator. 
3.  Qualifying dependent care expenses. Qualifying dependent care expenses shall include only amounts paid which constitute "employment related expenses" within the meaning of code section 21. Specifically, qualifying dependent care expenses must be incurred for the care of a qualifying individual and for household services incurred to enable the participant to be gainfully employed or attend school as authorized by and in accordance with IRS regulations. 
Expenses allowed under the code and IRS regulations must be substantiated consistent with the requirements of the IRS regulations and plan administrator. 
d.  Salary redirection. 
1.  Right of election. An eligible employee may elect to receive full salary in cash or to participate in a salary redirection agreement. Unless the eligible employee affirmatively states that he wishes to participate in salary redirection, the employee will receive full salary in cash. 
2.  Salary redirection agreement. Under the terms of a salary redirection agreement a participant agrees to have deducted from his salary an amount which is equal to the participant's premium costs for health insurance under insurance policies agreed to by the employer. The employer agrees to contribute to the plan as a plan contribution allocated for that participant an amount equal to the amount deducted from the participant's salary for that purpose. Premiums will be paid on behalf of the participant from the amount of plan contributions allocated to the participant. If more than one (1) insurance benefit is selected, sub-accounts for each of the participants's elections will be made. 
3.  Term of election. A participant shall determine changes in salary redirection prior to the beginning of the plan year during the election period. 
The first term of the salary redirection agreement for new employees who were not on the payroll of the employer during the election period shall be from the first day of the pay period following the date of participation until the end of the plan year. 
4.  Rules and regulations. The plan administrator may establish reasonable rules and regulations for the determination of amounts of salary redirection for each payroll period and for the implementation of this benefit. 
5.  Application of premium. As soon as practicable after each payroll period, the employer shall apply the salary redirection to provide the participant's premium expense. 
6.  Changes in premium rates. The amount of salary redirection shall be determined by premium costs which may increase or decrease during a plan year and the rate of contribution to be made by a plan participant under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement or by virtue of the rate of contribution required of nonunion employees. If insurance costs charged by the insurer increase or decrease during the plan year, the amount of salary redirection shall be adjusted accordingly. 
7.  Medical benefits. The medical coverage provided, the types and amounts of benefits, the eligibility for participation and all rights and obligations concerning the terms and conditions of medical coverage and benefits shall be determined by the medical plan that is in effect from time to time. Neither the employer or the plan make any representations or assume any responsibility for the determination of medical coverage, benefit, eligibility for participation or any other terms and/or conditions of the medical coverage. Total premium costs shall be determined by the insurer providing the medical coverage. 
(2)  Benefit process. For any plan year, a participant who is an eligible employee may elect to receive a benefit listed in a, b, c, and d in subsection (1) above by completing and signing an election form during the election period. The plan administrator shall provide the forms. After the form has been properly submitted and received and accepted by the employer the initial election shall become effective on the first day of the first pay period beginning after the election form is received. 
Once effective, an election under this section shall remain in effect throughout the plan year in which it was made and, with regard to salary redirection, throughout all subsequent plan years unless a change is made pursuant to subsection (3) below. 
An eligible employee will be deemed to have elected compensation in the form of direct salary if the employee does not submit a written election form on a timely basis. 
(3)  Change in benefit elections. Each eligible employee will have the opportunity to change his or her benefit election effective on the first date of the subsequent plan year. The election shall be made on an election form provided by the plan administrator and must be made during the election period before the start of the plan year. 
An eligible employee will not be permitted to change any benefit election for a plan year, except as provided (1) under section 125 of the code and the rules and regulations issued thereunder and (2) the insurance policy. 
(4)  Change in participation. All benefit election changes under the plan must be submitted to the plan administrator in writing. 
(5)  Forfeiture of unused benefits. A participant shall receive no reimbursement for benefits elected but unused during a plan year for any reason. Forfeitures may be used to pay plan administration expenses or costs. 
(e)  Declination of health insurance benefits. 
(1)  Right of election. An eligible employee may elect to receive health insurance coverage at a specific level, i.e., individual or family, or elect to receive health insurance declination cash ("declination") instead of health insurance coverage, provided the employee meets the terms of the collective bargaining agreement which offers the health insurance or the declination cash or for nonunion employees the terms established by the common council for the declination cash. 
(2)  Declination cash. A participant who elects declination cash instead of health insurance coverage under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement or by virtue of this being a benefit offered to a nonunion employee shall have an amount equal to the amount of the declination cash contributed to the plan by the employer. The plan shall pay said cash to the participant provided the participant meets all of the requirements for said declination cash under the terms of the collective bargaining agreement or for nonunion employees as established by the employer. 
(3)  An eligible employee who does not elect declination cash shall be deemed to have retained the current level of health insurance coverage. 
(f)  Plan contributions. Plan contributions made on a pretax basis shall be deemed employer contributions. Plan contributions made on an after-tax basis shall be deemed employee contributions. 
(g)  Benefit claims procedure. 
(1)  Insurance claims. Claims for benefits which are provided by an insurance contract shall be made to the insurer. If the claim is denied the participant shall follow the insurer's claim procedure. Under no circumstances shall the plan, the plan administrator or the employer be liable for any insurance claim benefit which is denied. 
(2)  Noninsurance claims review. A review of a denial in whole or in part of a noninsurance claim for benefits under this plan shall be made to the plan administrator. Such claims shall be made within sixty-five (65) days after denial unless special circumstances require an extension of time. The plan administrator shall determine the validity of the claim within sixty (60) days after its receipt. If the plan administrator does not make a determination within sixty (60) days, the claim shall be deemed denied. 
(3)  Plan administrator authority. The plan administrator shall have full authority to resolve any and all disputes under this plan. The plan administrator shall have full authority to interpret plan language and to resolve any ambiguities and to determine the application of this plan. 
(4)  Notice of claim denial. In the event the plan administrator denies a claim in whole or in part, the plan administrator shall furnish the claimant with a written notice giving the claimant the following information: 
a.  The specific reason for the denial; 
b.  Reference to the specific plan provisions upon which the denial is based; 
c.  Information or material which the claimant must submit to perfect his claim and why such information or material is necessary; 
d.  An explanation of the plan appeal procedures as set forth in subsection (5) below. 
(5)  Appeal procedure. Within sixty (60) days of denial of a claim, the claimant may submit in writing to the plan administrator a request for a review of the denial by the plan administrator. The claimant shall have the right to examine all pertinent documents, submit issues and comments in writing, have counsel of his or her own choice, and to submit any relevant evidence. 
No later than sixty (60) days after receipt of a request for a review, the plan administrator shall render a decision in writing. It shall state the reasons for the decision and shall refer to relevant plan provisions or code sections upon which it is based. The decision of the plan administrator is final and binding. 
(h)  Plan administrator. 
(1)  Appointment. The commissioner of finance may appoint a third party to be the plan administrator to administer all or a portion of the plan. 
(2)  Authority and responsibility of the plan administrator. The plan administrator shall have authority and responsibility to take any reasonable actions necessary to control and manage the operation and administration of this plan. The plan administrator shall have authority to establish rules and regulations which shall be applied on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis to all participants to fulfill the purposes of this plan. 
The plan administrator shall have authority to resolve all disputes under this plan and to resolve all claims disputes. 
The plan administrator shall have authority to interpret the language of this plan and to resolve any and all ambiguities. These determinations shall be final. 
The plan administrator shall have authority to take any action or not take any action to effectuate the purposes of this plan. Any rules, regulations or procedures which may be necessary for the proper administration or functioning of this plan that are not covered by the plan shall be the responsibility of the plan administrator. 
(3)  Removal of plan administrator. The commissioner of finance may remove any third party appointed as the plan administrator for all or part of the plan at any time for any reason. 
(i)  Amendment or termination. 
(1)  Amendment. The employer reserves the right to amend this plan at any time or from time to time in any manner the common council deems appropriate or advisable subject to subsection (3) herein. 
(2)  Termination. The employer established this plan with the bona fide intention that it remain in effect indefinitely. Nevertheless, the employer has no obligation to continue the plan for any given length of time and it may terminate the plan without any liability at any time subject to subsection (3) herein and except for liability which may accrue independent of this plan under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement. 
(3)  Participants rights. No plan amendment or termination may affect the right of any participant to collect a benefit for that portion of the plan year or coverage period prior to amendment or termination to the extent such amounts are payable under the terms of the plan as in effect before the calendar month in which the plan is amended or terminated. 
(4)  Effective date of plan amendment or termination. Any amendment or termination shall take effect only at the end of a pay period. 
(j)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Personal liability. Nothing in this plan shall impose or create any personal liability for any common council member or the chief city executive or their agents acting within the scope of their authority. 
(2)  Gender and number. Reference to any gender shall include the masculine, feminine and gender neutral. The plural shall include the singular and the singular the plural where appropriate. 
(3)  Construction. The terms of this plan shall be construed in accordance with the laws of the State of New York except to the extent that such laws are preempted by ERISA or any other federal statute or by the laws of any other state. 
(4)  Rights. Participants shall be allowed to examine plan documents at the employer's office without charge upon written request. The participant may have a copy of plan documents and the employer may make a reasonable charge for making copies. 
The plan shall be operated prudently on a nondiscrimination basis and solely in the interest of participants and beneficiaries under the plan. 
Participants may not be discriminated against in any manner to prevent them from obtaining a benefit rightly due to the participant under the plan or from exercising rights if any, available to the participant under ERISA. 
(5)  No employment contract rights. Neither the establishment of the plan or any amendment thereto shall create any right for any employee to continued employment nor shall this be construed as a contract of employment between the employer and the employee. 
(k)  Entire plan agreement. 
(1)  This document sets forth the entire plan and except as provided in this plan no other employee benefit plan which is now in existence or may be created shall be part of this plan. 
(Ord. of 7-1-96, § 6; Ord. of 7-7-97, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-05, § 1) 
Editor's note— At the instruction of the city the flexible spending plan has been set forth herein, designated by the editor as § 2-5-55.  
Sec. 2-5-56. - Disability insurance. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized to direct the commissioner of finance to make the necessary arrangements to enable the city to participate in the New York State Disability Insurance Plan. 
(b)  The mayor is hereby further authorized to direct the commissioner of finance to disburse funds for the New York State Disability Insurance Plan for eligible employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement. 
(c)  The mayor is still further authorized to direct the commissioner of finance to deduct from the salary of individuals enrolled in the program an amount not to equal the maximum employee contribution permitted by law (see Workers Compensation Law §209). 
(Ord. of 12-4-00, § 5)  
Sec. 2-5-57. - Attendance bonus. 
(a)  Effective December 1, 2001 all managerial/confidential employees and other eligible employees not covered by a collective bargaining agreement shall receive a bonus for excellent attendance for the prior year payable at the following rate: 
Number of Days Absent from Work 
December 1—November 30 	Bonus 
0 	$500.00, effective July 1, 2003; 
	600.00, effective July 1, 2006; 
1 	400.00, effective July 1, 2005; 
	500.00, effective July 1, 2006; 
2 	300.00, effective July 1, 2005; 
	400.00, effective July 1, 2006. 
 
Absences are defined to include any absences from work other than employer approved FMLA, vacation, personal and compensatory leave time, jury leave, that part of military leave that must be compensated by the employer pursuant to the New York Military Law, and up to two instances of bereavement leave. Bonuses shall be paid in a lump sum by separate check during January. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00, § 6; Ord. of 9-27-04, § 4; Ord. of 10-4-04, § 4)  
Sec. 2-5-58. - Retired city employees health insurance buyout program. 
(1)  Retired elected and appointed officials and city employees participating in the health insurance program by receiving health insurance for which the city contributes at least eighty-five (85) percent of the premium charged by the New York State Empire Health Insurance Program toward the cost of providing individual or family coverage under any of the health insurance programs the city makes available to its employees, may opt out of the health insurance program provided by the city in whole or in part by waiving coverage for themselves and their eligible dependents or for their eligible dependents only for periods of a full calendar year by completing and submitting the appropriate waiver agreement form furnished by the city to the finance commissioner on or before the 30 th day of November prior to the beginning of the calendar year the employee will waive coverage. In order to be eligible for this option a retired city employee must certify that he or she has health insurance through a source other than the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to retired employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement at the time of their retirement, during the term said collective bargaining agreement is in effect. 
(2)  Effective January 1, 2011, a retired city employee or official opting out of the health insurance program provided by the city in whole or in part by waiving coverage for themselves and their eligible dependents or their eligible dependents only shall be paid the following, provided he or she maintains his or her waiver (remains opted out) for a full calendar year: 
Waiver of individual coverage: 	$1,500.00 
Waiver of dependent coverage: 	$1,650 
Waiver of family coverage: 	$3,200.00 
 
[(a)]  Payments under the buyout schedule shall be made to such participating retired city officials and employees in the December following the effective date specified in the waiver agreement between the city and participating retired city employee. The December payment will be made on the first Friday of the month that is not a payday for city employees. 
(b)  Newly eligible retired city officials and employees electing to waive coverage may do so upon the date of their eligibility, with the provisions of this section taking effect on the effective date specified in the waiver agreement between the city and participating retired city employee. 
(c)  Retired city employees who obtain health insurance through a source other than the city, within the calendar year may elect to waive coverage, with the provisions of this section taking effect on or after the effective date the employee obtained health insurance through a source other than the city. Payments under the buyout schedule shall be made to the retired employee on a pro-rata basis for the remaining months available in the current calendar year. 
(3)  It is understood that once a retired city official or employee has waived coverage for a particular year, he or she may not reinstate coverage for that year except in the event of an emergency causing the loss of insurance through another source. Emergency shall not include the change of any such alternative insurance from a non-contributory to a contributory plan, or the voluntary declination of such alternative insurance by the spouse of insurance offered by the spouse's employer. If reinstatement occurs during a waiver year due to emergency, the retired city employee will repay, pro-rata, any amount already forwarded to him or her in return for the waiver prior to reinstatement. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any of the forgoing to the contrary, the right of any retired city official or employee to reinstate the health insurance coverage provided by the city is, and will be, subject to the conditions imposed by the city's carrier(s) at that time. 
(Ord. of 11-7-94, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 4)  
Secs. 2-5-59—2-5-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LEAVES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Power of governing board of city to provide for vacation, sick leaves and leaves of absence of officers and employees, General Municipal Law, § 92. 
 
Sec. 2-5-61. - Generally. 
The following provisions shall apply to leaves for personal illness or injury, childbearing and child rearing, serious illness or death in family, absences covered by workers' compensation, absences for jury and court attendance, and military and personal leave, for appointed officials and employees designated in Appendices 1, 2b, 2c, 2d and 3a as follows: 
(1)  No employee shall be absent from duty on any working day except for one of the reasons outlined above, unless permission shall have been obtained in advance from the department head. 
(2)  All earned but unused leave credits shall be transferred with the employee from one city department or agency to another. For purposes of this division, "department or agency" includes the White Plains Cable Television Access Commission, White Plains Parking Authority, and the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency. Leave credits shall not be transferred from any other jurisdictions. 
(3)  Days' allowance for absences mentioned in these rules shall be considered as meaning working days. 
(4)  As payrolls are made up from five (5) to six (6) days preceding the issuance of checks, absences occurring during that period will be deducted from the payroll issued approximately two (2) weeks later where applicable. 
(5)  At the time of employment, an employee, except those employed on a per diem basis, may be required to furnish a certificate from a physician as to the physical condition of the employee. 
(6)  In any case where a physical examination or a certificate is required from a physician or surgeon, as to an employee's physical condition, the city reserves the right to require the employee to submit to a physical examination by a physician or surgeon selected by the department head or the personnel officer. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 3(A); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-62. - Computation of service. 
For the purpose of this division, service shall be computed from the first day of employment. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 1); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-63. - Vacations. 
(a)  The following provisions shall apply to appointed officials as designated in Appendix 1: 
(1)  Effective January 1, 1994, all appointed officials designated in Appendix 1, at the time of appointment or on their anniversary date, shall be granted twenty (20) days vacation with full pay annually. 
(2)  All appointed officials appointed after July 5, 1994, shall be granted ten (10) days' vacation with full pay for their first twelve (12) months of service. Any unused portion of this ten (10) days' vacation shall not be carried forward beyond the first twelve (12) months of service and shall be forfeited. Thereafter they shall be granted twenty (20) days vacation with full pay annually. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the above provisions (1) and (2), all appointed officials as designated in Appendix 1, hired on or after January 1, 2010, shall be granted twenty (20) days vacation with full pay annually, at the time of appointment and on each successive anniversary date thereof. 
(b)  The following vacation schedule shall apply to all employees as designated in Appendices 2b and 3a, provided that at the time of hire, the personnel officer may give credit for previous experience in setting the period of continuous service for employees designated in Appendix 2b. 
(1)  All employees with six (6) months of continuous service on the payroll of the city shall be granted a vacation with full pay in accordance with the schedule set forth below: 
a.  Effective upon completing six (6) months of continuous full-time service all officers and employees shall be eligible for five (5) working days of vacation. 
b.  One (1) year's continuous service, but less than five (5) years' continuous service, all officers and employees shall be eligible for ten (10) working days of vacation. 
c.  Five (5) years' continuous service, but less than twelve (12) years' continuous service, all officers and employees shall be eligible for fifteen (15) working days of vacation provided that no more than ten (10) working days shall be taken consecutively, except upon approval of the department head. 
d.  Twelve (12) or more years' continuous service, all officers and employees shall be eligible for twenty (20) working days of vacation provided that no more than ten (10) working days of vacation shall be taken consecutively, except upon approval of the department head. 
(2)  Public library. Full-time public library employees in the professional job classification who, on June 30 of any calendar year shall have no less than six (6) calendar months of continuous service on the payroll of the city shall be granted a vacation with full pay in accordance with the schedule set forth below: 
a.  Six (6) months' continuous service on June 30, but less than one (1) year's continuous service, one (1) working day of vacation for each calendar month of service. 
b.  After one (1) year's continuous service, four (4) calendar weeks of vacation. 
(c)  The following vacation procedures shall apply to all appointed officers and employees as designated in Appendices 1, 2b, and 3a: 
(1)  If a legal holiday is observed by the city on any day except Saturday or Sunday, and such holiday occurs during an officer's or employee's vacation period, such officer or employee shall be entitled to an additional day of vacation. 
(2)  An officer or employee who has taken sick leave, a childbearing leave or child rearing leave in excess of sixty (60) working days in any anniversary year shall only be entitled to a vacation accrual of one (1) working day per calendar month of active service on the job in the anniversary year in which the leave was taken (if employed one (1) year or more) or one and one-half (1½) working days per month (if employed five (5) years or more), or two (2) working days per month (if employed twelve (12) years or more). 
(3)  The choice of vacation periods shall be given employees with the longest periods of continuous service, provided that such choice shall not, in the opinion of the department head, adversely affect the operation of the department. Vacation preference schedule shall be prepared and approved by the department head in order of employees' starting dates of last continuous employment. 
(4)  If an officer or employee intends to terminate employment with the city for reasons other than a dismissal from service, he shall be granted his earned vacation, with full pay, provided sufficient advance notice of such termination is submitted to the department head or in the case of a department head to the mayor to enable such vacation, with full pay to be scheduled prior to the effective date of termination, and provided that at least two (2) weeks' notice is given to the department head or mayor prior to commencing such vacation. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions to the contrary, when an officer or employee intends to terminate employment with the city, for reasons other than a dismissal from service, prior to June 30 of any fiscal year in which he has earned a vacation, and said officer or employee has had continuous service for six (6) months or more during such fiscal year, he shall be granted vacation, with full pay, based on his length of continuous service prior to such fiscal year, pro-rated on the number of months of such continuous service, during such fiscal year, provided at least two (2) weeks' notice of such termination of service is given to the department head or to the mayor in the case of a department head prior to commencing such vacation. 
(6)  After one (1) year of continuous service, an officer or employee who intends to terminate his employment with the city for reasons other than dismissal from service, provided such employee has given sufficient advance notice to his department or to the mayor in the case of a department head of such termination of service, may elect to receive compensation for his currently earned and unused vacation in lieu of taking such vacation as provided above. Upon certification thereof by the department head or mayor, the commissioner of finance is authorized to pay such compensation to such officer or employee. If at the time of the death of any officer or employee, there is currently earned and unused vacation standing to his credit, the monetary value of the same shall be paid to his beneficiaries by the commissioner of finance upon certification thereof by this department head or mayor and with the approval of the corporation counsel. 
(7)  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions to the contrary, vacation leave is to be used during the twelve-month period immediately following the end of the qualifying service period, at times approved by the department head, or the mayor in the case of department heads, and shall not be accumulated except pursuant to the specific approval of the department head. In any event, carry over of unused vacation leave credits earned after July 5, 1994 shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) days. Unused vacation leave credits in excess of ten (10) days, earned after July 5, 1994 shall not be carried forward beyond the twelve (12) month period immediately following the end of the qualifying service period, and shall be forfeited. 
(8)  All officers and employees must reduce unused accrued vacation balances in excess of ten (10) days, existing as of July 5, 1994, and must reduce such accrued vacation balances to zero at a rate of at least five (5) days per year. If an officer or employee fails to reduce his or her unused accrued vacation balance by the required five (5) days per year, that portion of the required five-day reduction shall be deducted from the officer's or employee's unused accrued vacation balance and forfeited. The above time periods shall run from July 5, 1994. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 1); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-97, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-00, § 7; Ord. of 1-4-10, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 2-5-64. - Holidays. 
The following holiday schedule shall apply to all appointed officers and employees as designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a. 
An employee shall be entitled to thirteen (13) paid holidays as follows: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, Lincoln's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans' Day, Election Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day and Good Friday. These shall be guaranteed regardless of the day on which they fall. Holidays falling on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding Friday. Holidays falling on Sunday will be observed the following Monday. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 2); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-00, § 8)  
Sec. 2-5-65. - Personal illness or injury. 
The following provisions shall apply to leaves for personal illness or injury for appointed officers and employees as designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a as follows: 
(1)  Officers and employees shall be allowed twelve (12) days' absence at full pay during any calendar year credited at one (1) day a month because of personal illness or injury. Those employed for less shall be given a proportionate allowance. 
a.  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions to the contrary, an appointed official, not promoted or transferred from another position in The City of White Plains Cable Television Access Commission, White Plains Parking Authority, or the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency, will be allowed twelve (12) days of personal illness or injury leave for their first twelve (12) months to be credited upon the effective date of their appointment. 
b.  Beginning with their thirteenth month of service appointed officials referred to in (a) above will be credited with personal illness or injury leave as provided in (1) above. 
(2)  Additional allowance for absence with full pay due to personal illness or injury shall be given after the first year of employment, depending upon the number of days of sick leave allowance which may be accumulated in accordance with the following plan: At the end of each year the unused portion of the twelve (12) days' allowance for that year shall be accumulated as an allowance for additional days of absence at full pay. Accumulation of sick leave shall be unlimited. 
(3)  In cases of extreme hardship, provided such officer or employee has been in the employ of the city for more than one (1) year, in the discretion of the department head, with the approval of the personnel officer, an additional thirty (30) days may be allowed irrespective of accumulations provided that the employee has exhausted all personal illness, vacation and any other accumulated leaves first. 
(4)  At the discretion of the department head and with the approval of the personnel officer, leave of absence at half pay for a period not to exceed three (3) calendar months may be granted because of serious illness or injury to an officer or employee whose sick leave credits have been exhausted provided that the employee has exhausted all personal illness, vacation and any other accumulated leaves first. 
(5)  In order that absence because of personal illness may be charged to accumulated sick leave, it must be reported by the officer or employee on the first working day of such absence within such time limit as the department head may fix. Absence for illness on Saturday shall not be charged unless Saturday is a designated working day for the employee. If an employee is designated to work a half-day, then only a half-day shall be charged for absence on such day. 
(6)  The minimum unit for computation of personal illness or injury leave shall be one (1) hour, unless the department head determines that it is preferable to use a half day as the minimum unit for computation of personal illness or injury leave. Credits cannot be earned for the period an employee is on leave of absence without pay. For the calculation of sick leave credits, the time recorded on the payroll at the full rate of pay shall be considered as time "served" by the employee. 
(7)  An officer or employee who has exhausted his sick leave allowance and who is absent at the end of the calendar year shall not receive any sick leave allowance for the new year until he returns to duty. On the first payroll following his return he may receive compensation for his absence to the extent of his sick leave allowance for that year, upon application made to his department head. 
(8)  The department head may require an officer or employee absent on account of claimed illness or injury to submit to a physical examination by a physician selected by the department head, or the personnel officer. 
(9)  An officer or employee who is absent from duty after his sick leave allowance has been exhausted will be considered as absent without leave unless he applies for and is granted a leave of absence by his department head. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 3(A); Ord. of 3-5-91, § 6; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-94, § 3; Ord. of 3-7-02, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-66. - Childbearing and childrearing leaves. 
The following provisions shall apply to leaves for childbearing and childrearing for appointed officers and employees as designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a as follows: 
(1)  Childbearing leave. A pregnant employee shall be allowed to perform the duties of her job as long as she is medically able. A pregnant employee, upon filing appropriate medical evidence, that she is unable to perform the duties of her position due to this pregnancy, shall be permitted to use any accumulated vacation leave, personal illness or injury, excused leave, and accumulated overtime for the period of her incapacity. 
(2)  Childrearing leave. The employee may use any paid leave he/she has accumulated (except personal illness or injury leave) for childrearing leave. The employee shall be granted, upon request, a leave of absence without pay for childrearing for a maximum period of six (6) months exclusive of the period above. This leave may be extended by mutual agreement with the approval of the personnel officer. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 3(B); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-96, § 7; Ord. of 12-4-00, § 9)  
Sec. 2-5-67. - Serious illness or death in family. 
The following provisions shall apply to leaves for serious illness or death in family for appointed officers and employees as designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a as follows: 
(1)  Officers and employees who have served four (4) months in a department shall have the right to take not more than four (4) working days, with pay, in any calendar year, on account of death or serious illness in the officer's or employee's immediate family upon satisfactory evidence of such. Such absence may be extended to a maximum of ten (10) days, and the excess above four (4) days shall be charged to sick leave, vacation or overtime credits. The immediate family of an employee shall include grandparents, brother, sister, spouse, child, father or mother or foster parent of the employee or his spouse. 
(2)  Absence for serious illness or death outside of the immediate family may be deducted from sick leave credits. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 3(C); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-68. - Absences covered by workers' compensation. 
The following provisions shall apply to leaves for absences covered by workers' compensation for appointed officers and employees as designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a as follows: 
(1)  An officer or employee who is necessarily absent from duty because of occupational injury or disease, as defined by the Workers' Compensation Law, may, pending adjudication of his case, be granted leave with full pay for the period not to exceed six (6) months (exclusive of accumulated sick leave credits), on approval of the department head, after full consideration of all the facts involved and the length of service of the employee. Should this disability persist beyond this period, plus accumulated sick leave credits, such employee may be placed on leave without pay for a further period not to exceed eleven (11) months. 
(2)  The employee shall, on return to active duty, be recredited with the number of days of earned sick leave consumed during his period of absence upon approval of his department head. 
(3)  Sick leave credits shall not be earned under these circumstances for the period that an employee is on such leave without pay. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 3(D); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-69. - Absence for jury and court attendance. 
On proof of the necessity of jury service or attending court for other than personal matters, leave of absence shall be granted with pay to all appointed officers and employees designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a, upon condition that they surrender to the city the amount received for jury or witness fees. Employees shall request that they be placed on "on-call" jury status, where available. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § (E); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-96, § 8)  
Sec. 2-5-70. - Military leave. 
An appointed officer or employee as designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a who is required to render ordered military duty shall be granted a leave of absence as authorized by law. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 3(G); Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-5-71. - Personal leave. 
The following provisions as to personal leave shall apply to appointed officers and employees designated in Appendices 1, 2b and 3a: 
(1)  Appointed officers and employees may receive up to four (4) days personal leave during the fiscal year. Any personal leave not taken in the fiscal year shall be credited towards the officers' or employees' sick leave. 
(2)  Upon approval of the department head, his designee, or personnel officer, personal leave shall be granted. The minimum unit of such leave shall be one (1) hour, unless the department head determines that it is preferable to use a half day as the minimum unit of leave. The minimum unit of personal leave may differ among employees in a bureau or department, but shall be uniform with respect to similarly situated employees within a bureau or department. 
(3)  Personal leave days shall not be accumulated. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1(Art. II, § 3(G); Ord. of 3-5-91, § 7; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 9-27-04, § 5; Ord. of 10-4-04, § 5)  
Secs. 2-5-72—2-5-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - APPENDICES 
 
Sec. 2-5-76. - Appendix 1, elected and appointed officials. 
The following shall be Appendix 1 and may be cited as such: 
1. Appointed Officials. 
Department 	Position Title 	Salaries 
Assessor 	Assessor 	$147,416 
Budget 	Budget Director 	164,000 
	Chief Deputy Budget Director 	0 
Building 	Commissioner of Building 	164,144 
	Deputy Commissioner of Building 	147,186 
City Clerk 	City Clerk 	117,201 
	Deputy City Clerk 	0 
Finance 	Commissioner 	167,280 
	Deputy Commissioner 	150,238 
Information Technology 	Chief Information Officer 	150,866 
Law 	Corporation Counsel 	215,000 
	Chief Deputy Corporation Counsel 	0 
	Deputy Corporation Counsel 	177,735 
Mayor 	Chief of Staff 	0 
Personnel 	Personnel Officer 	172,821 
	Deputy Personnel Officer 	106,014 
Planning 	Commissioner 	159,400 
	Deputy Commissioner 	141,143 
Public Library 	Director 	163,621 
Public Safety 	Commissioner 	203,000 
	Deputy Commissioner 	192,500 
Purchase 	Commissioner 	135,392 
Public Works 	Commissioner 	188,504 
	Deputy Commissioner 	154,000 
Parking 	Commissioner 	170,626 
	Deputy Commissioner of Parking I 	139,992 
	Deputy Commissioner of Parking II 	149,716 
Recreation & Parks 	Commissioner 	159,439 
	Deputy Commissioner 	140,000 
Youth Bureau 	Director 	142,711 
 
These salaries shall take effect as of July 1, 2019. 
1a. Appointed Officials Authorized by State Statute. 
The following shall be Appendix 1a and may be cited as such: 
Department 	Position 	Stipend 
City Clerk 	Registrar of Vital Statistics 	$1,500 
	Deputy Registrar of Vital Statistics 	1,500 
	Custodian Voting Machines 	3,000 
Board of Assessment Review 	Members (3) 	3,000 
Zoning Board of Appeals 	Chairman 	500 
	Members (4) 	400 
	Secretary (1) 	2,200 
White Plains Housing Authority 	Chairman 	2,000 
	Assistant Director of Administration 	$104,030 
	Business Assistant 	82,420 
	Deputy Director 	$137,284 
	Member (6) 	1,500 
 
These salaries shall take effect as of April 1, 2019. 
1b. Other Appointed Officials. 
The following shall be Appendix 1b and may be cited as such: 
Department 	Position 	Salary 
Public Safety 	Physician 	$57,398 
 
This salary shall take effect as of July 1, 2019. 
1c. Elected Officials. 
The following shall be Appendix 1c and may be cited as such: 
Position Title 		Salary 
Mayor 		$159,000 
Common Council Member 		36,471 
 
The common council president shall receive an additional two thousand five hundred ($2,500) annual stipend. 
These salaries shall take effect as of July 1, 2019. 
1d. Additional Compensation. 
Position Title 		Salary 
Chief Fiscal Officer 		$20,000 
 
This compensation shall take effect as of July 1, 2018. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, § 1, App. 1; Ord. of 6-20-83, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-84, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-87, § 1, Ord. of 3-7-88, § 1; Ords. (2) of 12-18-89, § 1; Ord. of 4-2-90, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-94, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-94; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-96, § 1; Ord. of 5-20-96, § 1; Ord. of 5-20-96, § 1(a); Ord. of 5-29-97, § 1; Ord. of 1-5-98, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-98, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-98, § 1; Ord. of 5-21-98, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-99, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-99, § 1, Ord. of 4-5-99, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-99, § 1; Ord. of 8-2-99, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-27-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-17-00, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. 5-29-01, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-02; Ords. (2) of 5-23-02, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-02, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-03, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-03, § 1; Ord. of 5-28-03, § 1; Ord. of 5-28-04, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-04, § 1; Ord. of 8-2-04, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-05, § 1; Ord. No. 7-5-05, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-06, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-06, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-06, § 1; Ord. of 1-2-07, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-07, § 1; Ord. of 5-22-08, § 1; Ord. of 5-28-09, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-10, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-10, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-10, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 2; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-11, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-11, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-12, § 1; Ord. of 5-21-12, § 2; Ord. of 10-1-12, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-12, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 2; Ord. of 5-19-14(3), § 2; Ord. of 7-7-14(1), § 1; Res. of 4-6-15, eff. 4-1-15; Ord. of 6-1-15, § 2, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. of 12-7-15 , § 1, eff. 12-31-15; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 1, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 2, eff. 7-1-16; Ord. of 4-3-17 ; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 4, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. of 12-4-17, § 1, eff. 12-4-17 ; Ord. of 1-2-18, § 1 , eff. 1-16-18; Ord. of 5-30-18, § 2 , eff. 7-1-18; Ord. of 1-7-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 2(A—C), eff. 7-1-19 ; Res. of 10-7-19, eff. 4-1-19 )  
Sec. 2-5-77. - Appendix 2, managerial/confidential. 
The following shall be Appendix 2 and may be cited as such: 
2a. Managerial/Confidential Salary Ranges—Effective July 1, 2019. 
For All Employees Hired before July 1, 2017 
Grade 	01 	02 	03 	04 	05 	06 
01 	NOT IN USE 					
02 	NOT IN USE 					
03 	NOT IN USE 					
04 	NOT IN USE 					
05 	NOT IN USE 					
06 	NOT IN USE 					
07 	NOT IN USE 					
08 	56,316 	60,057 	63,792 	67,545 	71,289 	75,031 
09 	59,817 	63,895 	67,977 	72,066 	76,147 	80,227 
10 	64,538 	68,898 	73,258 	77,605 	81,963 	86,322 
11 	68,733 	73,362 	77,994 	82,632 	87,265 	91,905 
12 	73,941 	79,040 	84,124 	89,220 	94,310 	99,396 
13 	79,171 	84,734 	90,301 	95,856 	101,422 	106,990 
14 	84,473 	90,428 	96,389 	102,347 	108,302 	114,262 
15 	89,800 	96,141 	102,511 	108,860 	115,210 	121,576 
16 	95,084 	101,885 	108,683 	115,489 	122,288 	129,085 
17 	104,013 	111,307 	118,606 	125,901 	133,196 	140,487 
18 	113,273 	120,974 	128,679 	136,378 	144,084 	151,787 
19 	122,424 	130,649 	138,858 	147,071 	155,291 	163,509 
20 	131,646 	140,594 	149,525 	158,446 	167,414 	176,354 
 
Effective July 1, 2019 
For All Employees Hired On or After July 1, 2017 
Grade 	01 	02 	03 	04 	05 	06 	07 
01 	NOT IN USE 						
02 	NOT IN USE 						
03 	NOT IN USE 						
04 	NOT IN USE 						
05 	NOT IN USE 						
06 	45,573 	46,939 	48,347 	49,798 	51,292 	54,369 	59,262 
07 	47,727 	49,159 	50,634 	52,153 	53,717 	56,941 	62,065 
08 	50,302 	51,811 	53,366 	54,966 	56,616 	60,013 	65,413 
09 	53,824 	55,438 	57,101 	58,815 	60,579 	64,213 	69,992 
10 	57,592 	59,319 	61,098 	62,931 	64,819 	68,708 	74,893 
11 	61,622 	63,471 	65,376 	67,336 	69,357 	73,517 	80,135 
12 	65,935 	67,913 	69,951 	72,049 	74,212 	78,665 	85,743 
13 	70,552 	72,667 	74,849 	77,093 	79,406 	84,170 	91,746 
14 	75,490 	77,754 	80,087 	82,490 	84,964 	90,063 	98,168 
15 	80,774 	83,198 	85,693 	88,264 	90,912 	96,366 	105,039 
16 	86,428 	89,021 	91,691 	94,444 	97,276 	103,113 	112,392 
17 	92,479 	95,252 	98,111 	101,054 	104,085 	110,331 	120,260 
18 	100,802 	103,825 	106,940 	110,149 	113,452 	120,260 	131,084 
19 	109,874 	113,170 	116,565 	120,062 	123,664 	131,084 	142,881 
20 	128,744 	132,607 	136,585 	140,682 	144,903 	153,597 	167,421 
 
2b. Managerial/Confidential. 
Department 	Position Title 	Salary Group 
Budget 	Assistant Budget Director 	15 
	Budget Analyst 	12 
	Budget Assistant 	10 
	Internal Auditor 	(As determined by Mayor & 
Common Council) 
	Secretary 	7 
Building 	Secretary to Commissioner of Building 	8 
Finance 	Assistant to the Commissioner of Finance 	12 
	Chief Accountant 	17 
	Insurance/Risk Manager 	17 
	Departmental Secretary I 	8 
	Secretary I 	10 
	Secretary to the Commissioner of Finance 	8 
Information Services 	Information Technology Manager 	16 
Management Information 
Services 	Systems Analyst 	17 
Law 	Assistant Corporation Counsel 	17 
	Assistant Corporation Counsel I 	12 
	Assistant Corporation Counsel II 	16 
	Secretary to the Corporation Counsel 	10 
	Law Assistant 	10 
	Legal Secretary 	8 
	Legal Secretary 	8 
	Senior Assistant Corporation Counsel 	20 
Mayor's Office 	Administrative Aid (Mayor's Office) 	14 
	Executive Secretary to Mayor 	10 
	Coordinator of Economic Development & Public Information 	17 
	Secretary (Mayor's Office) 	8 
	Grants Director 	(As determined by Mayor & 
Common Council) 
	Graphics Technician 	8 
Parking 	Secretary to the Commissioner of Parking 	8 
Personnel 	Civil Service Assistant 	10 
	2 Personnel Assistants 	14 
	Personnel Assistant 	11 
	Office Assistant I 	3 
	Office Assistant II 	6 
	Office Assistant II—Spanish speaking 	6 
	Personnel Associate 	13 
	Secretary to the Personnel Officer 	7 
	Senior Personnel Assistant 	16 
Planning 	Staff Assistant 	10 
Public Library 	Assistant Library Director 	17 
	Business Manager 	11 
	Business Assistant 	8 
Public Safety 	Secretary to the Commissioner of Public Safety 	8 
	Police Captain 	P3 
Public Works 	Administrative Officer 	14 
	Assistant Superintendent of Water and Wastewater 	14 
	Secretary to the Commissioner of Public Works 	10 
	Garage and Shop Superintendent 	15 
	General Operations Supervisor 	14 
	Principal Clerk 	8 
	Sanitation Superintendent 	15 
	Superintendent of Highways and Grounds 	18 
	Superintendent of Water and Wastewater 	18 
Recreation & Parks 	Assistant to the Commissioner-Recreation & Parks 	12 
	Parks Superintendent 	16 
	Secretary 	7 
	Secretary to the Commissioner of Recreation & Parks 	7 
Youth Bureau 	Assistant to the Youth Bureau Director—Administration 	11 
	Youth Specialist I 	12 
 
2c. Managerial/Confidential-Fire. 
Position Title 		Salary 
Fire Chief 	Effective July 1, 2019 	$186,726 
 
2d. Managerial/Confidential—Police. 
Position Title 		Salary 
Police Chief 	Effective July 1, 2019 	$186,726 
Assistant Police Chief 	Effective July 1, 2019 	$170,939 
 
2e. Managerial Confidential Annual Stipends. 
Department 	Position Title 	Annual Stipend 
	Acting Superintendent 	$15,000 
Law 	Special Counsel 	$16,854 
 
This section shall take effect July 1, 2018. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, App. 2; Ord. of 12-19-83, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-84, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-84, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-85, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-85, §§ 1, 2; Ords. (2) of 1-6-86, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-86, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-86, § 1; Ords. (2) of 7-7-86, § 1; Ord. of 9-2-86, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-86, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-87, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-87, § 1; Ord. of 9-8-87, § 1; Ord. of 12-8-87, § 1; Ords. (3) of 3-7-88, § 1, Ord. of 7-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-89, § 1; Ords. (2) of 6-5-89, § 1; Ords. (2) of 12-18-89, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-90, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-90, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-2-90, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-91, § 8; Ord. of 5-6-91, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-91, § 1; Ord. of 12-2-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-6-92, § 1; Ord. of 12-9-92, § 1; Ord. of 4-8-93, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-94, § 2; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 5-20-96, § 1(b); Ord. of 6-3-96, § 1a; Ord. of 9-9-96, § 1a; Ord. of 11-14-96, § 1a; Ord. of 1-6-97, § 1a; Ord. of 3-3-97, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-97, § 1a; Ord. of 5-29-97, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-97, § 1; Ord. of 9-8-97, § 1; Ord. of 5-21-98, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-98, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-99, § 2; Ord. of 2-1-99, § 2; Ord. of 5-20-99, § 2; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-99, § 3; Ord. of 9-7-99, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-00, § 1; Ord. of 5-17-00, § 2; Ord. of 9-7-00, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-00, § 1; Ord. of 1-2-01, § 1; Ord. of 5-29-01, § 2; Ord. of 7-2-01, § 1; Ord. of 11-5-01, § 1; Ord. of 12-27-01, § 1; Ord. of 1-9-02, § 1; Ord. of 5-23-02, § 2; Ord. of 9-3-02, § 2; Ord. of 3-3-03, § 2; Ord. of 4-7-03, § 2; Ord. of 5-28-03, § 2; Ord. of 2-2-04, § 1; Ord. of 6-7-04, § 2; Ord. of 12-6-04, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-05, § 2; Ord. of 8-1-05, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-5-05, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-06, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-05, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-06, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-06; Ord. of 5-25-06, § 2; Ord. of 6-5-06, § 2; Ord. of 7-6-06, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-07, § 2; Ord. of 3-2-09, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-10, 1; Ord. of 2-1-10, § 2; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 5; Ord. of 12-6-10, § 1; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 2; Ord. of 5-21-12, §§ 1, 3; Ord. of 11-5-12, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-13, §§ 1, 5; Ord. of 5-19-14(3), § 5; Ord. of 4-6-15; Ord. of 6-1-15, § 5, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. of 9-8-15, § 1, eff. 9-14-15; Ord of  3- 7-16 , § 1; Ord. of  5-17-16 , §§ 1, 2; Ord. of  5-17-16 , § 5; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 5 ; Ords. of 5-30-18(2), § 1, § 3 ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1 ; Ord. of 1-7-19, § 1 ; Ords. of 5-30-19, §§ 1, 3(A—D), eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 2-5-78. - Appendix 3, grants or contracts. 
The following shall be Appendix 3 and may be cited as such: 
3a. Various Grants Programs. 
Title     Salary Grade 
Assistant Youth Services Aide       As per Grant 
Grant Specialist (P/T)       As per Grant 
Planner I       As per Grant 
Planner II       As per Grant 
Project Evaluator       As per Grant 
Youth Services Aide       As per Grant 
Youth Worker       As per Grant 
Housing Policy Analyst       As Per Grant 
Housing Code Enforcement Officer       As Per Grant 
Site Coordinator-WPETC       As Per Grant 
Employment Counselor       As Per Grant 
Deputy Youth Services Director       $122,488 
3b. Youth Bureau OASAS Grant. 
Title     Salary Grade 
Youth Specialist I       12 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, App. 3; Ord. of 1-3-84, § 1; Ord. of 6-18-84, § 1, Ord. of 11-5-84; Ord. of 3-4-85, § 1, Ord. of 11-4-85, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-86, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-87, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-87, § 1; Ord. of 7-13-89, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-90, § 2; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-94, § 1; Ord. of 9-8-97, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-98, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-99, § 2; Ord. of 7-10-00, § 1; Ord. of 1-2-01, § 2; Ord. of 5-29-01, § 3; Ord. of 4-1-02, § 2; Ord. of 12-1-03, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-04, § 2; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-15, § 1; Ord. of 5-27-15, § 1, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. of 6-1-15, § 1; Ord. of  5-17-16 , § 3; Ord. of 11-7-16 , § 1; Ord. of 12-5-16 , § 1; Ord. of 7-5-17, § 1, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. of 5-30-18, § 2 ; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 4, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 2-5-79. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 7, 1999, § 2, provided that § 2-5-79, Appendix 4, boards and commissions, be reserved. Formerly, such section derived from ordinances adopted Mar. 7, 1983; Jan. 3, 1984; Mar. 3, 1986; June 3, 1991; July 5, 1994; and Jan. 2, 1996.  
Sec. 2-5-80. - Appendix 5, hourly. 
The following shall be Appendix 5 and may be cited as such: 
Appendix 5a. Hourly Pay Range Allocation: 
Position 	Range 
Aging Service Aide 	A 
Aging Service Aide 	B 
Aging Services Aide 	B, C, D & E 
Assistant Pool Director 	E 
Camp Counselor 	A 
Camp Counselor 	B 
Camp Counselor 	C 
Civil Service Monitor 	E & F 
Cleaner 	A 
Clerk/Typist P/T 	A 
Clerk P/T 	A 
Coordinator of Volunteers P/T 	C 
Coordinator of Volunteers P/T 	E 
Custodial Worker 	A 
Custodial-Driver 	A 
Day Camp Director 	F 
Day Camp Specialist 	A 
Day Camp Specialist 	B 
Day Camp Specialist 	C 
Field Marshall 	C 
Food Service Helper 	A 
Food Service Helper 	B 
Gate Attendant 	A 
Guard P/T 	A 
Guard P/T 	B 
Guard P/T 	C 
Guards P/T 	A, B, & C 
Grounds Worker 	A 
Grounds Worker 	B 
Grounds Worker 	C 
Head Camp Counselor 	B 
Head Camp Counselor 	C 
Head Lifeguard 	E 
Ice Rink Engineer/Zamboni Operator 	D 
Instructor 	D 
Instructor 	E 
Instructor 	F 
Job Development Specialist PT 	F 
Junior Librarian P/T 	E 
Junior Librarian P/T 	F 
Laborer 	A 
Library Page 	A 
Library Assistant P/T 	A 
Library Assistant P/T 	C 
Library Assistant P/T 	B & D 
Lifeguard 	A 
Lifeguard 	B 
Lifeguard 	C 
Lifeguard 	D 
Maintenance Laborer 	C 
Maintenance Mechanic 	D 
Management Associate 	D 
Management Associate 	E 
Management Associate 	F 
Media Aide 	C & D 
Messenger 	A 
Monitor 	C 
Motor Equipment Operator 	B, C, D & E 
Painter 	A 
Park Attendant 	A 
Park Attendant 	B 
Park Attendant 	C 
Personnel Management Associate P/T 	E & F 
Planner I 	F 
Playground Assistant 	A 
Pool Director 	F 
Program Assistant 	D 
Program Specialist 	E 
Program Coordinator 	F 
Recreation Leader P/T 	C 
Recreation Leader P/T 	D 
Recreation Leader P/T 	E 
Sanitation Worker 	(as per stipulation with Local 456) 
Scorer/Timer 	A 
Semi-Skilled Laborer 	A 
Semi-Skilled Laborer 	B 
Senior Clerk P/T 	B 
Senior Clerk P/T 	C 
Senior Clerk P/T 	B, C & D 
Senior Librarian I P/T 	F 
Senior Recreation Leader P/T 	E & F 
Senior Typist P/T 	B 
Senior Typist P/T 	C 
Senior Typist P/T 	B, C & D 
Senior Library Clerk P/T 	B 
Senior Library Clerk P/T 	B & C 
Skating Guard 	A 
Skating Guard 	B 
Skilled Laborer 	C 
Skilled Laborer 	D 
Social Worker (MSW) 	F 
Social Worker (BA) 	E 
Special Needs Assistant 	A 
Special Needs Assistant 	B 
Special Needs Attendant 	C 
Special Needs Attendant 	D 
Student Worker 	A 
Student Worker 	B 
Student Worker 	C 
Student Worker 	D 
Swimming Instructor 	D 
Swimming Leader 	C 
Swimming Pool Attendant 	A 
Teacher Aide 	D 
Teacher Aide 	E 
Teacher Helper 	A, B, C & D 
Technical Worker 	D 
Technical Worker 	E 
Technical Worker 	F 
Tennis Aide 	A 
Tennis Aide 	B 
Tennis Attendant 	A 
Tennis Attendant 	B 
Tennis Instructor 	C 
Tennis Leader 	C 
Youth Services Aide 	C 
Youth Services Aide 	D 
Youth Services Aide 	E 
Youth Services Aide 	F 
Youth Worker 	A 
Youth Worker 	B 
Youth Worker 	C 
 
PER SESSION/GAME 
Position 	Range 	Rate 
Recreation Activity Specialist 	K 	$10.00 
Recreation Sports Official 	K 	 10.00 
Senior Recreation Activity Specialist 	N 	 15.00 
Senior Recreation Sports Official 	N 	 20.05 
 
OTHER 
Position Title 	Rate 
Chief Deputy Budget Director (per hour) 	$100.00 
 
Appendix 5b. Hourly Pay Scale: 
	01 	02 	03 	04 	05 	06 	07 
A 	$7.25 	$9.00 	$9.00 	$9.00 	$9.00 	$9.30 	$10.55 
A1 						10.00 	
B 	9.00 	9.15 	9.85 	10.55 	11.35 	11.80 	12.70 
B1 			10.25 				
C 	9.50 	10.00 	10.75 	11.00 	11.55 	12.45 	13.35 
D 	12.00 	12.80 	13.75 	14.65 	15.60 	16.75 	18.00 
E 	15.00 	16.15 	17.35 	18.65 	20.05 	22.50 	25.00 
F 	22.50 	25.00 	27.50 	30.00 	32.50 	35.00 	37.50 
F1 				40.00 	45.00 	50.00 	60.00 
F2 				62.50 	65.00 	67.50 	70.00 
							
Sanitation Worker 		(as per stipulation with Local 456) 
 
1.  Hourly employees are to be paid within the limits of appropriated hourly funds in the Department's budget or grant funds. 
2.  Hourly employees are not entitled to fringe benefits. 
3.  Adjustments are not automatic and may be awarded annually for satisfactory performance or increased skills/experience. 
Appendix 5c. Per Diem Employees: 
Position Title 	Per Diem 
Civil Service Monitor 	$20.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$30.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$50.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$60.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$70.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$80.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$100.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$110.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$120.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$130.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$150.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$180.00 
Civil Service Monitor 	$200.00 
 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, App. 5; Ord. of 3-3-86, § 1; Ord. of 6-2-86, § 1; Ord. of 1-5-87, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-90, § 1; Ord. of 10-1-90; Ord. of 7-2-91, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 10-7-96, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-97, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-99; Ord. of 5-29-01, § 4; Ord. of 7-1-02, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-03, § 3; Ord. of 1-3-05, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-05, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-05, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-06, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-09, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-10, § 1; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 3; Ord. of 9-6-11, § 2; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 2, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. of 12-2-13, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-19-14(3), § 6; Ord. of 12-1-14, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-6-15; Ord. of 6-1-15, § 6, eff. 7-1-15; Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-15 , § 2; Ord of 3-7-16 , § 2; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 1; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 6; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 6, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. of 5-30-18, § 4 , eff. 7-1-18; Ord. of 9-4-18, § 1 ; Ords. of 5-30-19, §§ 2, 5, eff. 7-1-19 ; Ord. of 10-7-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 2-5-81. - Appendix 6. 
The following shall be Appendix 6 and may be cited as such: 
Appendix 6a: 
Position Title 	Salary Group 
Account Clerk 	4 
Accountant 	12 
Accounts Payable Supervisor 	15 
Accounts Receivable Supervisor 	15 
Aging Services Aide 	4 
Assessment Clerk 	3 
Assessor's Aide 	11 
Assessor's Aide (Field) 	13 
Assistant Accountant 	11 
Assistant Buyer 	10 
Assistant Chief Construction Coordinator 	15 
Assistant Construction Coordinator 	11 
Assistant to the Director (Youth Bureau) 	13 
Assistant Director—Cable TV Access 	12 
Assistant Director—Senior Center 	12 
Assistant Employee Benefits Clerk 	6 
Assistant Engineer (B.S.) 	14 
Assistant Engineer (B.S.) P.T 	14 
Assistant Engineer—Code Enforcement 	14 
Assistant Engineer (Part-Time) 	11 
Assistant Mechanical Engineer (B.S.) 	14 
Assistant Planner/Urban Design Specialist 	15 
Assistant Police Chief 	125,642 
Assistant Sanitation Superintendent 	14 
Assistant Superintendent of Highways and Grounds 	14 
Assistant Superintendent of Maintenance, City-Owned Buildings 	12 
Assistant Superintendent of Public Facilities 	14 
Assistant Traffic Systems Technician 	9 
Assistant Youth Services Aide 	6 
Associate Architect—Code Enforcement 	17 
Associate Mechanical Engineer 	17 
Associate Planner 	19 
Automotive Mechanic I 	9 
Automotive Mechanic II 	10 
Automotive Stock Clerk 	8 
Bookkeeper 	8 
Bookkeeper—Youth Bureau 	10 
Building Service Manager 	11 
Assistant Building Service Manager 	10 
Lead Building Service Worker 	5 
Building Service Worker 	3 
Business Assistant 	8 
Buyer 	13 
Carpenter 	10 
Cashier 	4 
Chief Construction Coordinator 	16 
Chief Library Clerk 	9 
Clerk 	2 
Code Enforcement Officer[—Building] 	12 
Code Enforcement Officer I—Public Works 	9 
Code Enforcement Officer II—Public Works 	11 
Code Enforcement Trainee 	10 
Collection Clerk 	9 
Commissioner of Parking 	140,608 
Community Service Aide I 	8 
Community Service Aide II 	9 
Computer Operator 	9 
Construction Coordinator 	14 
Contracts Clerk 	8 
Coordinator of Computer Systems—Library 	15 
Coordinator of Computer Systems—Public Works 	15 
Crew Leader 	9 
Data Entry Operator/Verifier 	4 
Department Secretary 	8 
Deputy Commissioner of Parking I 	105,142 
Deputy Commissioner of Parking II 	95,000 
Detention Aide—Women's Jail 	1 
Digital Media Specialist-Library 	9 
Director of Weights and Measures 	10 
Drafter I 	7 
Drafter II 	10 
Drafter III 	13 
Driver/Custodian 	5 
Electrician 	10 
Electronic Services Specialist 	14 
Electronics Field Technician 	12 
Elevator Code Enforcement Officer 	12 
Employee Benefits Clerk 	9 
Engineering Intern 	11 
Engineering Technician 	9 
Environmental Coordinator 	13 
Fire Code Enforcement Officer 	7 
Grants Accountant 	13 
Graphics Technician 	8 
Help Desk Coordinator 	10 
Highway Superintendent 	17 
Housing Authority Business Assistant 	77,667 
Housing Code Enforcement 	12 
Information System Specialist 	9 
Junior Administrative Assistant 	10 
Junior Engineer (B.S.) 	11 
Junior Planning Aide 	4 
Junior Programmer 	10 
Laborer 	3 
Lead Automotive Mechanic 	11 
Lead Tree Trimmer 	10 
Lead Water Maintenance Worker 	9 
Lead Wastewater Maintenance Worker 	10 
Librarian I 	10 
Librarian II 	12 
Librarian III 	14 
Librarian IV 	16 
Library Assistant 	9 
Library Clerk 	3 
Library Clerk (Spanish Speaking) 	3 
Library Media Technician 	6 
Library Page 	1 
Maintenance Mechanic 	8 
Media Aide 	11 
Media Operator 	3 
Messenger 	3 
Motor Equipment Operator 	7a 
Office Assistant I 	3 
Office Assistant I (Spanish Speaking) 	4 
Office Assistant II 	6 
Office Assistant II (Spanish Speaking) 	6 
Office Automation Support Specialist 	12 
Operations Assistant 	8 
Operations Leader 	11 
Park Mechanic 	9 
Parking/Code Enforcement Officer 	7 
Parking/Code Enforcement Officer-Spanish Speaking 	7 
Parking Enforcement Assistant 	7 
Parking Enforcement Officer 	7 
Parking Enforcement Officer—Spanish Speaking 	7 
Parking Enforcement Supervisor 	15 
Parking Ramp Attendant Supervisor 	12 
Parking Violations Supervisor 	12 
Parks Maintenance Supervisor I 	11 
Parks Maintenance Supervisor II 	13 
Personal Computer Network Specialist 	14 
Personal Computer Network Technician 	12 
Planner I 	11 
Planner II 	13 
Planning Aide 	9 
Plumber 	11 
Plumbing Code Enforcement Officer 	12 
Principal Clerk 	8 
Principal Library Clerk 	7 
Principal Stenographer 	10 
Program Analyst 	14 
Program Specialist—Public Safety 	11 
Programmer 	13 
Project Coordinator & Transportation Center Design (Public Works) 	12 
Public Administration Intern at an annual salary of $15,000 	
Public Information Coordinator (Library) 	10 
Public Safety—Police Captain 	P3 
Public Safety—Secretary 	7 
Public Safety Aide I—Animal Enforcement 	7 
Public Safety Aide I—Maintenance 	7 
Public Safety Aide I—Code Enforcement 	7 
Public Safety Aide I—Traffic Enforcement 	7 
Public Safety Aide I—Groom 	7 
Public Safety Aide I—Dispatcher 	7 
Public Works—Dispatcher 	8 
Public Works—Garage and Shop Automotive Stock Clerk 	6 
Purchase Clerk 	8 
Recreation Administrator 	15 
Recreation Intern 	10 
Recreation Leader 	4 
Recreation Supervisor I 	13 
Recreation Supervisor II 	15 
Safety Coordinator 	10 
Special Patrol Officer 	7 
	
School Crossing Guard       Pursuant to collective bargaining agreement 
Secretary to the Corporation Counsel 	10 
Secretary to the Commissioner of Parking 	8 
Secretary to the Personnel Officer 	7 
Secretary to the Commissioner of Public Safety 	8 
Secretary to the Commissioner of Public Works 	10 
Secretary to the Commissioner of Recreation & Parks 	7 
Semi-Skilled Laborer 	4 
Senior Accountant 	14 
Senior Architect-Code Enforcement-Spanish Speaking 	16 
Senior Assessment Clerk 	8 
Senior Automotive Stock Clerk 	9 
Senior Building/Housing Code Enforcement Officer 	14 
Senior Center Director 	14 
Senior Clerk 	5 
Senior Code Enforcement Officer 	14 
Senior Data Entry Operator/Verifier 	5 
Senior Electrical Code Enforcement Officer 	14 
Senior Elevator Code Enforcement Officer 	14 
Senior Engineer-Code Enforcement 	16 
Senior Engineer (B.S.) 	16 
Senior Housing Code Enforcement Officer 	14 
Senior Library Clerk 	6 
Senior Mechanical Engineer, (B.S.) 	16 
Senior Parking/Code Enforcement Officer 	9 
Senior Parking/Code Enforcement Officer-Spanish Speaking 	9 
Senior Parking Enforcement Officer 	9 
Senior Parking Enforcement Officer-Spanish Speaking 	9 
Senior Parking Ramp Attendant 	10 
Senior Payroll Clerk 	10 
Senior Planner 	17 
Senior Plumbing Code Enforcement Officer 	14 
Senior Programmer 	16 
Senior Recreation Leader 	6 
Senior Traffic Planning Technician 	15 
Senior Traffic Sign Installer 	9 
Senior Water Plant Operator 	12 
Site Coordinator-WPETC 	10 
Skilled Laborer 	6P 
Staff Assistant 	10 
Stock Clerk I 	5 
Stock Clerk II 	8 
Street Light Installer 	11 
Structural Engineer 	18 
Superintendent of Public Facilities 	17 
Systems Analyst 	17 
Traffic Engineer 	17 
Traffic Planning Technician 	12 
Traffic Sign Installer 	8 
Traffic Signal Repair Technician 	13 
Traffic Signal Installer 	12 
Traffic Signal Installer II 	13 
Traffic Systems Engineer 	15 
Traffic Systems Technician 	11 
Transportation Engineer I 	14 
Transportation Engineer II 	15 
Tree Trimmer 	8 
Water Maintenance Mechanic 	9 
Water Maintenance Worker—Grade II 	7 
Water Maintenance Worker—Grade I 	8 
Water Plant Operator 	9 
Water Plant Operator Trainee 	7 
Welder 	10 
Youth Care Specialist 	11 
Youth Services Aide 	9 
Youth Specialist II 	14 
Youth Specialist I 	12 
Youth Worker 	1 
Appendix 6b: 
Uniformed Classifications
Police Department 
Police Captain 	
Police Lieutenant 	
Police Sergeant 	
Fire Department 
Deputy Chief 	
Fire Alarm Electrician 	
Fire Captain 	
Fire Lieutenant 	
Fire Fighter 	
Appendix 6c:
Sanitation Bureau 
Sanitation Driver 	37 
Sanitation Leader 	39 
Sanitation Worker 	35 
MEO 	37 
Working Foreman 	39 
 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, App. 6; Ord. of 6-20-83, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-84, § 1; Ord. of 1-17-84, § 1; Ord. of 6-18-84, § 1; Ord. of 11-5-84, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-85, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-3-85, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-5-85, § 1; Ord. of 10-11-85, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-86, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-86, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-86, § 1; Ord. of 7-7-86, § 1; Ord. of 9-2-86, § 1; Ord. of 10-6-86, § 2; Ord. of 11-3-86, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-5-87, § 2; Ord. of 2-2-87, § 2; Ord. of 5-4-88, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-87, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-3-87, § 1; Ord. of 8-4-87, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-8-87, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-19-87, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-2-87, §§ 1, 2; Ords. (2) of 12-8-87, § 1; Ord. of 3-7-88, § 2; Ord. of 4-5-88, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-2-88, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-88, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-6-88, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-5-88, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-5-88, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-6-89, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-89, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-89, § 2; Ord. of 8-7-89, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 12-18-89, § 2; Ord. of 2-5-90, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-2-90, § 2; Ord. of 5-7-90, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-90, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-2-90, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 2; Ord. of 9-4-90, § 1; Ord. of 10-1-90, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-91, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-91, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-91, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-91, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-91; § 2; Ord. of 7-2-91, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-2-91, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 2-3-92, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-5-92, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 7-6-92, § 2; Ord. of 8-4-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-92, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-9-92, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-3-93, § 1; Ord. of 4-4-94, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-94, § 2; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-95, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-95, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-95, § 1; Ord. of 3-4-96, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-96, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-96, § 1b; Ord. of 9-9-96, § 1b; Ord. of 11-14-96, § 1b; Ord. of 1-6-97, § 2b; Ord. of 4-7-97, § 1b; Ord. of 8-3-98, § 1; Ord. of 8-28-98, § 1; Ord. Of 9-24-98, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-98, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-98, § 2; Ord. of 1-4-99, § 3; Ord. of 3-1-99; Ord. of 4-5-99, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 5-3-99, § 1; Ord. of 5-20-99, § 3; Ord. of 7-6-99, § 2, 3; Ord. of 9-7-99, § 2; Ord. of 1-3-00, § 2; Ord. of 3-16-00, § 1; Ord of 5-17-00, § 3; Ord. of 8-7-00, § 1; Ord. of 9-7-00, § 2; Ord. of 2-5-01, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-01, § 1; Ord. of 7-2-01, § 2; Ord. of 12-3-01, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-02, § 3; Ord. of 10-7-02, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-03, § 2; Ord. of 2-2-04, § 2; Ord. of 6-7-04, § 3; Ord. of 12-6-04, § 3; Ord. of 1-3-05, § 2; Ord. of 3-7-05, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-05, § 2; Ord. of 10-5-05, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 1-3-06, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-05, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-06, § 1; Ord. of 5-25-06, § 2; Ord. of 6-5-06, §§ 3, 4; Ord. of 7-6-06, § 1; Ord. of 11-6-06, § 1; Ord. of 1-2-07, § 1; Ord. of 2-5-07, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 2; Ord. of 7-9-07, § 1; Ord. of 10-1-07, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-08, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-7-08, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-08, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-09, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-10, § 1; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 4; Ord. of 9-6-11, § 3; Ord. of 5-21-12, § 2; Res. of 7-2-12; Ord. of 8-6-12, § 1; Ord. of 11-5-12, § 2; Ord. of 12-3-12, § 2; Ord. of 5-30-2013; Ord. of 6-3-13, § 1, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. of 5-19-14(2), § 1; Ord. of 5-19-14(3), §§ 1, 2, 5, 6; Ord. of 9-8-15, § 1, 2, eff. 9-14-15; Ord of 3-7-16 , § 3; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 4; Ord. of 5-30-17, § 1 ; Ord. of 7-5-17, § 2, eff. 7-1-17 ; Ord. of 5-30-18, § 3 ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 2 ; Ord. of 1-7-19, § 3 ; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 3, eff. 7-1-19 ; Ord. of 10-7-19, § 2 ) 
_____ 
Sec. 2-5-82. - Appendix 7, mileage allowance. 
All officers and employees will be reimbursed for mileage at the standard mileage rate used by the Internal Revenue Service, where a private car is authorized for use for the city's business and when the employee has been certified eligible for reimbursement by the insurance risk manager. 
(Ord. of 3-7-83, App. 7; Ord. of 1-7-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-02, § 1)  
Secs. 2-5-83—2-5-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PENSIONS, RETIREMENT AND RELATED BENEFITS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Related laws references— Death benefits for beneficiaries or urban renewal agency officers and employees, Art. A, Div. 12; death benefits for beneficiaries of parking authority officers and employees, Art. A, Div. 13; death benefits for beneficiaries of housing authority officers and employees, Art. A, Div. 14. 
 
Sec. 2-5-86. - Social security for policemen and firemen. 
(a)  The city, pursuant to section 218 of the Federal Social Security Act and Article 3 of the Retirement and Social Security Law, provides old-age and survivors insurance coverage for eligible policemen and firemen effective on December 16, 1957. 
(b)  Such coverage be provided for positions of policemen and firemen covered by the New York State Employees' Retirement System. 
(Res. of 1-20-58) 
Editor's note— See the resolution of March 21, 1955 for general social security coverage.  
Sec. 2-5-87. - Participation is "section 70-a" plan. 
(a)  The city, a participating employer in the New York State Employees' Retirement System, does hereby elect to make contributions to the pension accumulation fund pursuant to section 70-a of the Retirement and Social Security Law, as last amended by Chapter 339 of the Laws of 1960, for the purpose of providing death benefits and pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay. 
(b)  The reductions or discontinuances of retirement system members' contributions, as provided in said section 70-a, shall be made effective for the payroll period commencing on June 24, 1960. 
(Res. of 6-6-60)  
Sec. 2-5-88. - "Section 75-e" benefits. 
(a)  The common council does hereby elect to provide the additional pension benefits of section 75-e, as presently or hereafter amended. 
(b)  This election shall become effective with the payroll period beginning on the second day of May, 1970. 
(Res. of 4-27-70)  
Sec. 2-5-89. - "375-g," "375-i" retirement benefits. 
The common council does hereby elect to provide the additional pension benefits under section 375-e; provide a career retirement plan under section 375-g and provide for an improved career retirement plan under section 375-i of the Retirement and Social Security Law as presently or hereafter amended; effective with the payroll period beginning on August 9, 1976. 
(Res. of 9-7-76)  
Sec. 2-5-90. - Special allowance for unused sick leave. 
(a)  The common council does hereby elect to provide the benefits of Section 41, subdivision-j of the Retirement and Social Security Law as presently or hereafter amended, granting allowance for unused sick leave for eligible employees in an amount not to exceed one hundred sixty-five (165) days. 
(b)  This election shall become effective with the payroll period beginning on the first day of July, 1971. 
(Res. of 8-2-71)  
Sec. 2-5-91. - Participation in Chapter 1006 of Laws of 1966. 
The common council, a participating employer in the New York State Employees' Retirement System, does hereby elect to come under the provisions of Chapter 1006 of the Laws of 1966, as amended effective January 20, 1967. 
(Res. of 1-16-67) 
Editor's note— Ch. 1006 of the Laws of 1966 is found in the Retirement and Social Security Law, §§ 70a, 75a—75c.  
Sec. 2-5-92. - Supplemental police and fire death benefits. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in addition to any benefits otherwise provided, the death benefits enumerated below may be payable upon the death of a regular paid member of the police department or fire department of the city if upon application therefor the mayor shall determine, on the basis of the evidence, that such member: 
(1)  Died within one year after, and as the natural and proximate result of injuries sustained at a definite time and place and incurred in the performance of duty as a member of such department, and 
(2)  Did not cause such accident by his own wilful negligence. 
(b)  The death benefit shall be paid by the city upon the allowance of the claim therefor and shall consist of: 
(1)  An amount equal to the salary received by such member either during the year immediately preceding his death, or during the year preceding such injuries, whichever is greater, and 
(2)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each child of such member under eighteen (18) on the date of the member's death. 
(c)  The death benefit shall be paid to: 
(1)  the member's widow, or if he shall leave no widow, or if his widow shall die before receiving the total of the amounts provided in section two hereof, then to 
(2)  his child or children under age eighteen (18) in equal amounts. 
(d)  An application for death benefit shall be made: 
(1)  by the member's widow; 
(2)  by any of his children; 
(3)  by any person in behalf of the widow or children; 
(4)  within thirty (30) days after the death of the member; provided, however, that failure to file the application within thirty (30) days may be excused on petition to and order of a justice of the supreme court having jurisdiction, upon a showing either: 
a.  that a sufficient reason exists why such notice was not given; 
b.  that a report or other notice was made or given to the police department or the fire department of which such person was a member of the injuries within the thirty (30) day period; 
c.  that the city has not been prejudiced by the delay in giving the notice. 
(e)  The application for death benefit shall be made: 
(1)  To the commissioner of finance on a form to be prescribed and supplied by him and requiring such information as he shall determine necessary. 
(f)  Such claims or death benefits may be paid out of the general revenues of the city or out of funds otherwise available, or the common council may, by ordinance or resolution, authorize the procuring of policies of insurance in order to provide for the payment of such benefits. The premiums for such policies of insurance shall be borne entirely by the city and shall be paid out of general revenues or out of funds otherwise available. 
(Ord. of 3-1-65, §§ 1—6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 208-b.  
Sec. 2-5-93. - Supplemental pensions for retired policemen and retired paid firemen and widows of certain firemen. 
(a)  Pursuant to chapter 119 of the laws of 1995, supplemental pension payments to retired policemen and retired paid firemen of the city hereby granted shall be computed by the addition to the regular pension payment to which he was entitled at the time of retirement to an individual pursuant to section 302 or 305 of the Charter, of the sum of the supplemental payments authorized by subsection (c) (previous supplements authorized or computed pursuant to section 207-i of the General Municipal Law) and of subsection (d) (schedule of increases authorized pursuant to section 78 of the Retirement and Social Security Law). 
(b)  The supplemental pension payments referred to in this section shall be payable to retirees who have heretofore been awarded an annual pension pursuant to either section 302 or section 305 of the Charter. 
(c)  The computation for supplemental pension benefits to retirees to whom this section is applicable shall be computed by using as the base the amount of pension that had been awarded to the retiree pursuant to either section 302 or section 305 of the Charter upon the retirement of the paid policemen or fireman, to which shall be added the sum of the supplemental retirement benefits, to be computed as of July 1, 1997, shown on schedule A (authorized pursuant to section 78 of the Retirement and Social Security Law), and of Schedule B (authorized pursuant to Section 207-i of the General Municipal Law,) both schedules being part of this section. 
(d)  The provision for supplemental pension payments provided in this section shall also be applicable to the widow of a member of the paid fire department who was killed in the actual performance of duty who died from the effects of any injury received while in the actual performance of duty, said widow having heretofore been awarded a pension pursuant to subdivision 1 of Section 305 of the Charter so that the supplemental pension payments provided for in this section will be added to the pension originally authorized for such widow. 
(e)  The following shall be Schedule A and may be cited as such: 
SCHEDULE A 
Schedule of Percentages 
Supplemental Retirement Allowance Under Section 78 
of the Retirement and Social Security Law 
Effective July 1, 1997 
Calendar Year of Retirement 	Percentage 
1989 	  0.8 
1988 	  1.4 
1987 	  2.0 
1986 	  2.7 
1985 	  3.2 
1984 	  4.0 
1983 	  5.0 
1982 	  5.9 
1981 	  7.5 
1980 	 10.1 
1979 	 14.0 
1978 	 18.0 
1977 	 21.2 
1976 	 24.4 
1975 	 27.6 
1974 	 32.6 
1973 	 39.3 
1972 	 44.0 
1971 	 47.2 
1970 	 50.2 
1969 	108.4 
1968 	131.1 
1967 	153.9 
1966 	160.2 
1965 	166.2 
1964 	169.7 
1963 	189.8 
1962 	210.5 
1961 	231.1 
1960 	252.1 
1959 	294.4 
1958 	334.1 
1957 	384.6 
1956 	400.7 
1955 	408.2 
1954 	406.3 
1953 	410.1 
1952 	413.9 
1951 	423.8 
1950 	465.1 
1949 	472.2 
1948 	465.1 
1947 	510.7 
1946 	598.4 
1945 	656.6 
1944 	673.8 
1943 	687.2 
1942 	735.5 
1941 	826.5 
1940 	872.8 
1939 	879.8 
1938 	865.9 
1937 	845.8 
1936 	879.8 
1935 	894.1 
1934 	916.4 
1933 	947.6 
1932 	894.1 
1931 	796.0 
1930 	715.5 
 
(f)  The following shall be Schedule B and may be cited as such: 
SCHEDULE B 
Schedule of Percentages 
Supplemental Retirement Allowance Under Section 207-i 
of the General Municipal Law 
Effective July 1, 1981 
Year or Date of 
Retirement 	Per centum 
1979 	three 
1978 	three 
1977 	three 
1976 	three 
1975 	four 
1974 	five 
1973 	six 
1972 	seven 
1971 	eight 
April 1, 1970 to and including 
December 31, 1970 	eight 
April 1, 1969 to and including 
March 31, 1970 	twenty-one 
January 1, 1968 to and including 
March 31, 1969 	twenty-two 
1967 	twenty-three 
1966 	twenty-four 
1965 	twenty-four 
1964 	twenty-five 
1963 	twenty-five 
1962 	twenty-six 
1961 	twenty-six 
1960 	twenty-seven 
1959 	twenty-seven 
1958 	twenty-seven 
1957 	twenty-seven 
1956 	twenty-eight 
1955 	twenty-eight 
1954 	twenty-eight 
1953 	twenty-eight 
1952 	twenty-eight 
1951 and earlier 	twenty-nine 
 
(Ord. of 5-7-62, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 7-10-78, §§ 1, 2, Schs., A, B; Ord. of 9-17-79, §§ 1—3, Schs., A, B; Ord. of 1-1-82, §§ 1—4, Schs., A, B; Ord. of 8-1-83, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-85, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 6-7-88, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-98, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 2-5-94. - Supplemental pension payments to widows and orphan minor children of retired policemen and retired paid firemen. 
(a)  Pursuant to chapter 119 of the Laws of 1995 relating to supplemental pension retirement benefits, as amended, supplemental pension payments to widows and orphan minor children of retired policemen and retired paid firemen of the city shall be as computed in this section. 
(b)  The supplemental pension payments referred to in this section shall be payable to widows who have heretofore been awarded an annual pension of three hundred dollars ($300.00) pursuant to either section 302 or 305 of the Charter. 
(c)  The computation for supplemental pension benefits to widows to whom this section is applicable shall be computed by using as the base the amount of pension that had been awarded to the retiree pursuant to either section 302 or section 305 of the Charter, upon the retirement of the paid policeman or fireman, to which shall be added the sum of the supplemental retirement benefits, to be computed as of July 1, 1997, of the additional supplemental payments shown on Schedule A (authorized pursuant to section 78 of the Retirement and Social Security Law) and Schedule B (authorized pursuant to section 207-i of the General Municipal Law) which became effective July 1, 1981, and which remains unchanged, both schedules being annexed to and made a part of this section. The amount to be paid to a widow shall be fifty (50) percent of such total to be paid monthly at one-twelfth of the annual rate for each month of entitlement. If the total of the basic pension and the supplements is less than eighteen hundred dollars ($1,800.00), then the sum of eighteen hundred dollars ($1,800.00) shall be paid to such widow per annum prorated monthly. 
(d)  The following are the previous supplements authorized or computed pursuant to section 207-i of the General Municipal Law: 
SCHEDULE A 
Schedule of Percentages 
Supplemental Retirement Allowance Under Section 78 
of the Retirement and Social Security Law 
Effective July 1, 1997 
Calendar Year of Retirement 	Percentage 
1989 	  0.8 
1988 	  1.4 
1987 	  2.0 
1986 	  2.7 
1985 	  3.2 
1984 	  4.0 
1983 	  5.0 
1982 	  5.9 
1981 	  7.5 
1980 	 10.1 
1979 	 14.0 
1978 	 18.0 
1977 	 21.2 
1976 	 24.4 
1975 	 27.6 
1974 	 32.6 
1973 	 39.3 
1972 	 44.0 
1971 	 47.2 
1970 	 50.2 
1969 	108.4 
1968 	131.1 
1967 	153.9 
1966 	160.2 
1965 	166.2 
1964 	169.7 
1963 	189.8 
1962 	210.5 
1961 	231.1 
1960 	252.1 
1959 	294.4 
1958 	334.1 
1957 	384.6 
1956 	400.7 
1955 	408.2 
1954 	406.3 
1953 	410.1 
1952 	413.9 
1951 	423.8 
1950 	465.1 
1949 	472.2 
1948 	465.1 
1947 	510.7 
1946 	598.4 
1945 	656.6 
1944 	673.8 
1943 	687.2 
1942 	735.5 
1941 	826.5 
1940 	872.8 
1939 	879.8 
1938 	865.9 
1937 	845.8 
1936 	879.8 
1935 	894.1 
1934 	916.4 
1933 	947.6 
1932 	894.1 
1931 	796.0 
1930 	715.5 
 
(e)  The following is the schedule of increases authorized pursuant to section 207(i) of the General Municipal Law: 
SCHEDULE B 
Schedule of Percentages 
Supplemental Retirement Allowance Under Section 207-i 
of the General Municipal Law 
Effective July 1, 1981 
Year or Date of 
Retirement 	Per centum 
1979 	three 
1978 	three 
1977 	three 
1976 	three 
1975 	four 
1974 	five 
1973 	six 
1972 	seven 
1971 	eight 
April 1, 1970 to and including 	
December 31, 1970 	eight 
April 1, 1969 to and including 	
March 31, 1970 	twenty-one 
January 1, 1968 to and including 	
March 31, 1969 	twenty-two 
1967 	twenty-three 
1966 	twenty-four 
1965 	twenty-four 
1964 	twenty-five 
1963 	twenty-five 
1962 	twenty-six 
1961 	twenty-six 
1960 	twenty-seven 
1959 	twenty-seven 
1958 	twenty-seven 
1957 	twenty-seven 
1956 	twenty-eight 
1955 	twenty-eight 
1954 	twenty-eight 
1953 	twenty-eight 
1952 	twenty-eight 
1951 and earlier 	twenty-nine 
 
(Ord. of 8-7-61; Ord. of 7-10-78, §§ 1—3, Schs., A, B; Ord. of 9-17-79, §§ 1—3, Schs., A, B; Ord. of 1-18-82, §§ 1—3, Schs., A, B; Ord. of 8-1-83; Ord. of 2-4-85, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 6-7-88, § 1; Ord. of 5-4-98, §§ 1—3)  
Sec. 2-5-95. - Supplemental death benefits for other officers and employees. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in addition to any benefits otherwise provided, the death benefits enumerated below may be payable upon the death of a paid officer or employee of the city if, upon application therefor, the mayor or president of the common council shall determine, on the basis of the evidence, that such officer or employee: 
(1)  Died within one year after, and as the natural and proximate result of injuries sustained at a definite time and place and incurred in the performance of duty as such paid officer or employee, and 
(2)  Did not cause accident by his own wilful negligence. 
(b)  The death benefit shall be paid by the city upon the allowance of the claim therefor, and shall consist of: 
(1)  An amount equal to the salary received by such paid officer or employee either during the year immediately preceding his death, or during the year preceding such injuries, whichever is greater, and 
(2)  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each child of such paid officer or employee under eighteen on the date of the paid officer's or employee's death. 
(c)  The death benefit shall be paid to: 
(1)  Such paid officer's or employee's widow, or widower, or if he or she shall leave no widow or widower, or if his widow or her widower shall die before receiving the total of the amounts provided in subsection (b) hereof, then to 
(2)  His or her child or children under age eighteen (18) in equal amounts. 
(d)  Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(1)  By the paid officer's or employee's widow or widower; 
(2)  By any of his children; 
(3)  By any person in behalf of the widow or widower or children. 
(e)  Application for death benefit shall be made: 
(1)  To the commissioner of finance on a form to be prescribed and supplied by him and requiring such information as he shall determine necessary; 
(2)  Within thirty (30) days after the death of such paid officer or employee; provided, however, that failure to file the application within thirty (30) days may be excused on petition to and order of a justice of the supreme court having jurisdiction, upon a showing either: 
a. 
That a sufficient reason exists why such notice was not given; 
b. 
That a report or other notice was made or given to the head of the department in which such paid officer or employee is employed, of the injuries within the thirty day period; 
c. 
That the city has not been prejudiced by the delay in giving the notice. 
(f)  Such claims or death benefits may be paid out of the general revenues of the city or out of the funds otherwise available, or the common council may, by ordinance or resolution, authorize the procuring of a policy or policies of insurance in order to provide for the payment of such benefits. The premiums for such policy or policies of insurance shall be borne entirely by the city and shall be paid out of general revenues or out of funds otherwise available. 
(g)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the regular paid members of the police and fire departments of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, §§ 1—7; Ord. of 9-7-65, § 1) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, Laws, 1965, § 1005.  
Sec. 2-5-96. - Retirement incentive program, 1992. 
(a)  The City of White Plains hereby elects to provide all its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 643, Laws of 1992. 
(b)  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 1, 1992. 
(c)  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
(d)  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be funded over a five-year period. The amount of the annual payment in each of the five-years shall be determined by the Actuary of the New York State and Local Employees Retirement System, and it shall be paid by The City of White Plains for each employee who receives the retirement benefits payable under this section. 
(L.L. No. 2-1992, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 2-1992 did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—4 as § 2-5-96 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-5-97. - Retirement incentive program, 1995. 
(a)  The City of White Plains hereby elects to provide all its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized to Chapter 12, Laws of 1995. 
(b)  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be June 1, 1995. 
(c)  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit, shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
(d)  The employer will fund the retirement incentive program provided by Chapter 12, Laws of 1995, by paying to the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System in one (1) annual payment, the amount of which shall be determined by the retirement system actuary, the first payment for which is due December 15, 1996. 
(L.L. No. 1-1995, §§ 1—4) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1-1995 did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—4 as § 2-5-97 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-5-98. - Retirement incentive program, 1996, for all eligible employees. 
(a)  The City of White Plains hereby elects to provide all of its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 30, Laws of 1996. 
(b)  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 3, 1996. 
(c)  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit, shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
(d)  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of the local law shall be paid as one (1) lump sum or in five (5) annual installments. The amount of the annual payment shall be determined by the retirement actuary of the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System, and it shall be paid by the city for each employee who received the benefits payable under this local law. 
(L.L. No. 3-1996, §§ 1—4; L.L. No. 5-1996, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 3-1996, §§ 1—4, passed Aug. 5, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 2-5-98 was at the editor's discretion. Subsequently, L.L. No. 5, of 1996, passed Sept. 9, 1996, purported to amend L.L. No. 2 of 1996, adopted Aug. 5, 1996, retirement incentive program. Inasmuch as the retirement incentive program adopted Aug. 5, 1996, was numbered L.L. No. 3, the provisions thereof have been deemed to be amended by L.L. No. 5.  
Sec. 2-5-99. - Retirement incentive program, 1996, for appointed officials and managerial/confidential positions. 
(a)  The common council of the City of White Plains hereby elects to establish a retirement incentive program for appointed officials and managerial/confidential positions targeted for program participation. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Eligible employee means a person who is an appointed official as set forth in appendix 1 of section 2-5-76 of the White Plains Municipal Code or a managerial/confidential employee as set forth in appendix 2b of section 2-5-77 of the White Plains Municipal Code, who is otherwise eligible for a service retirement as of the effective date of the employee's application for retirement, who has a minimum of ten (10) years of service with the city, whose retirement will result in no greater cost to the city than would result from the employee's retirement under the New York State Early Retirement Incentive Program authorized by Chapter 30, Laws of 1996, and whose position has been targeted for program participation. 
(2)  Targeted position means a position which the mayor has designated as suitable to participate in this retirement incentive program. In making his determination as to which positions are suitable to participate in this retirement incentive program, the mayor shall consider whether the participation of a specific position would: (a) Result in an unacceptable reduction of the level of service required or mandated to protect and care for the residents of the city or to assure public health and safety; (b) unacceptably endanger the health or safety of employees of the city; or (c) result in a loss of significant revenue to the city or result in substantially increased overtime or contractual costs. The mayor shall also determine that the city will attain a compensation savings for the two-year period subsequent to the termination of such eligible employees' employment with the City. 
(3)  Compensation savings means that the total base salary and benefits paid for all new hires, who would not have been hired but for vacancies resulting from the retirement incentive provided herein, shall be less than the total base salary and benefits that would have been paid for the two-year period January 1, 1997 through December 31, 1998 to the eligible employees who terminated their city employment and received the retirement incentive established by this local law. 
(c)  The mayor shall notify the commissioner of finance and the personnel officer of his designation of the targeted positions on or before September 30, 1996. The personnel officer shall notify all eligible employees of the mayor's designations. 
(d)  The first date that the retirement incentive established by this local law shall be made available is October 1, 1996. 
(e)  The period during which an eligible employee may elect to participate in the program and receive the retirement incentive established by this local law shall be the period from October 1, 1996 through October 31, 1996. An eligible employee who wishes to receive the retirement incentive established by this local law must file an application for service retirement with the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System with an effective retirement date no later than December 31, 1996. 
(f)  The benefit provided hereby as an incentive for the participation of an eligible employee shall consist of a payment to said employee based on the following schedule which approximates the pension benefit cost which the city would have been required to pay, calculated to be paid in a payment, to the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System if that employee's position were targeted for, and the employee participated in, the state retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 30, Laws of 1996: 
Eligible Employees Retirement Plan 	Rate 
75-g, 75-h; 75-i; 	0.15 
70, 71-a, 75-c, 75-e 	0.12 
Article 14, Article 15 	0.09 
 
This benefit shall be calculated by multiplying the appropriate rate for the retirement plan in which the eligible employee is enrolled by the eligible employee's annual salary and multiplying that result by five (5). Payment of this benefit shall be made to the eligible employee after the employee's termination of employment with the city but no later than January 3, 1997. 
(L.L. No. 4-1996, §§ 1—6) 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 4-1996, §§ 1—6, passed Sept. 9, 1996, did not specify manner of codification, but was designated as § 2-5-99 by the editor. See also § 2-5-16.  
Sec. 2-5-100. - Retirement incentive program, 1997, for all eligible employees. 
(a)  The city hereby elects to provide all of its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 41, Laws of 1997. 
(b)  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 3, 1997. 
(c)  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit, shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
(d)  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of the local law shall be paid as one (1) lump sum or in five (5) annual installments. The amount of the annual payment shall be determined by the retirement actuary of the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System, and it shall be paid by the City of White Plains for each employee who received the benefits payable under this local law. 
(L.L. No. 2-1997, §§ 1—4, 8-4-97) 
Editor's note— Local Law No. 2-1997, §§ 1—4, adopted Aug. 4, 1997, pertained to a retirement incentive program, but did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-5-100 was at the editor's discretion. See also § 2-5-16.  
Sec. 2-5-101. - Retirement incentive program, 1998, for all eligible employees. 
(a)  The city hereby elects to provide all of its eligible employees with a retirement incentive program authorized by Chapter 47, Laws of 1998. 
(b)  The commencement date of the retirement incentive program shall be October 3, 1998. 
(c)  The open period during which eligible employees may retire and receive the additional retirement benefit, shall be ninety (90) days in length. 
(d)  The actuarial present value of the additional retirement benefits payable pursuant to the provisions of the local law shall be paid as one (1) lump sum or in five (5) annual installments. The amount of the annual payment shall be determined by the retirement actuary of the New York State and Local Employees' Retirement System, and it shall be paid by the City of White Plains for each employee who received the benefits payable under this local law. 
(L.L. No. 2-1998, §§ 1—4, 8-3-98) 
Editor's note— Local Law No. 2-1998, §§ 1—4, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, Pertained to a retirement incentive program, but did not specify manner of codification; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-5-101 was at the discretion of the editor. See also § 2-5-16.  
Secs. 2-5-102—2-5-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Local Law No. 3-1999, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 1999, repealed Art. V, Code of ethics, §§ 2-5-106—2-5-113, and § 2 of that local law enacted a new Art. V, §§ 2-5-106—2-1-116, herein set out. Prior to repeal, former Art. V derived from ordinances adopted Sept. 21, 1970; July 29, 1974; Aug. 1, 1977; and Sept. 19, 1977. 
State Law reference— Power of council to adopt code of ethics, General Municipal Law, § 806. 
 
Sec. 2-5-106. - Purpose, intent, etc. 
The common council of the City of White Plains recognizes that there are rules of conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this article to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees of the city. This Article shall serve as a guide for official conduct of the officers and employees of the city. The rules of ethical conduct in this Article, as adopted, shall not conflict with, but shall be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest in contracts of municipal officers and employees. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 2-5-107. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(a)  Interest: A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer or employee, or a pecuniary or material benefit accruing to: 
(1)  The municipal officer's or employee's spouse, minor children and dependents; 
(2)  A firm, partnership or association of which such officer or employee is a member or employee; 
(3)  A corporation of which such officer or employee is an officer, director or employee; and 
(4)  A corporation any stock of which is accrued or controlled directly or indirectly by such officer or employee. 
(b)  Municipal officer or employee: An officer or employee of the city, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being a volunteer firefighter, civil defense volunteer, or auxiliary police. 
(c)  Social Hospitality: Nominal expenses and inexpensive tokens that are generally regarded by custom and sound ethical practice to constitute appropriate forms of expressing friendship or good will. 
(d)  Relative: A spouse, domestic partner, parent, step-parent, sibling, step-sibling, sibling's spouse, child, step-child, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, first cousin, or household member of a municipal officer or employee, and individuals having any of these relationships to the spouse of the municipal officer or employee. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99; L.L. No. 3-2011, § 1, 9-6-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 800.  
Sec. 2-5-108. - Distribution of article. 
The mayor shall cause a copy of the article to be distributed to every officer and employee of the City of White Plains and, thereafter, to each officer and employee, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his or her office or employment. Each recipient shall sign a certificate acknowledging their receipt which certificate will be filed with the city clerk. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99) 
State Law reference— Posting of state code of ethics, General Municipal Law, § 807.  
Sec. 2-5-109. - Standards of conduct. 
Every officer or employee of the City of White Plains shall be subject to and abide by the following standards of conduct: 
(a)  Gifts. 
(1)  No officer or employee of the City of White Plains shall directly or indirectly solicit any gift. 
(2)  No officer or employee of the City of White Plains shall accept or receive any gift or series of gifts, in any form whatsoever, from any person, firm, corporation or other entity which to his or her knowledge is doing business with the City of White Plains, and under circumstances in which it could be reasonably inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or her, or could reasonably be expected to influence him or her, in the performance of his or her official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his or her part. The foregoing limitation shall not apply to campaign contributions not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(3)  The term "gift" within the meaning of this local law does not include any of the following, which although they may benefit individual officers or employees, are deemed to be primarily public benefits rather than personal benefits: 
(i)  Admission to philanthropic events, provided directly from the event's beneficiary, regardless of value, to which officers or employees are invited in their official, representative capacity as public servants; 
(ii)  Awards publicly presented in recognition of public service, acts of heroism or for solving crimes; 
(iii)  Plaques or other commemorative tokens of recognition presented by representatives of governmental bodies or political subdivisions who are acting in their official capacities; 
(iv)  Anything of value, regardless of the value, when the thing is offered to the City of White Plains, is accepted on behalf of the City of White Plains, and is to remain the property of the City of White Plains; 
(v)  Meals received when an officer or employee serves as a participant or speaker in a job-related professional or educational program and meals are made available to all participants; 
(vi)  Modest items of food and refreshment, (such as soft drinks, coffee, tea and doughnuts), offered other than as part of a meal; 
(vii)  Unsolicited advertising or promotional material of little intrinsic value. 
(4)  The term "gift" within the meaning of this local law also does not include forms of "social hospitality", a term as defined in section 2-5-107(c) and should not be deemed to be a personal benefit. Such forms of "social hospitality" may include, but are not limited to the following terms: 
(i)  Social hospitality for a purpose unrelated to the official business of the City of White Plains; 
(ii)  Reasonable and customary social gatherings and presents having nominal value given for special occasions; and 
(iii)  Gifts given to an officer or employee based on a family or personal relationship with the officer or employee when circumstances make it clear that it is the familial or personal relationship rather than the recipient's office or position that is the primary motivating factor. 
(b)  Confidential information. An officer or employee shall not disclose confidential information acquired in the course of official duties or use such information to further his or her personal interest. 
(c)  Representation before one's own agency. An officer or employee shall not receive, or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of which such officer or employee is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency over which such officer or employee has jurisdiction or to which such officer or employee has the power to appoint any member, officer or employee. 
(d)  Representation before any other agency for a contingent fee. An officer or employee shall not receive, or enter into any agreement, express or implied for compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter before any other agency of the City of White Plains, whereby the compensation for an officer or employee is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by such other agency with respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the services rendered. 
(e)  Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that an officer or employee knows thereof, a member of the common council and any officer or employee of the City of White Plains, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the discussion or gives an official opinion to the common council on any legislation before the common council shall publicly disclose on the official record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other private interest such officer or employee has in such legislation. For the purposes of this subsection only, "interest" shall include the officer or employee's immediate' family, including parents, siblings and adult children. 
(f)  Investments in conflict with official duties. An officer or employee shall not invest or hold any investment directly or indirectly in any financial, business, commercial or other private transaction, which creates a conflict with his or her official duties. 
(g)  Private employment. An officer or employee shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or promise to accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or impairs the proper discharge of such officer's or employees official duties. 
(h)  Future employment. An officer or employee shall not, after the termination of employment or service with the City of White Plains, appear before any board or agency of the City of White Plains in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which such officer or employee personally participated during the period of his or her service or employment or which was under his or her active consideration. 
(i)  Political conflict of interest. He or she shall not as an elected or appointed and salaried officer of the City of White Plains, or a person appointed to fill out the unexpired term of an elected official, or a member of the planning board, board of appeals, board of assessment review, or board of ethics, other than as an election officer, and he or she shall not as an employee in the exempt position of the civil service, while so serving or employed, be an officer or member of a political committee, or be an officer of a political party (excluding a district leader), political club, or similar organization. 
(j)  Nepotism. Except as otherwise required by law (and whenever recusal is not an option): 
(1)  No officer or employee, either individually or as a member of a board, commission or agency may participate in any decision specifically to appoint, hire, promote, discipline or discharge a relative for any position at, for, or within the City of White Plains government or a City of White Plains board, commission or agency. 
(2)  No officer or employee may supervise a relative in the performance of the relative's official powers or duties unless such supervisory role has been disclosed to the personnel committee of the common council. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99; L.L. No. 3-2011, § 2, 9-6-11) 
Charter reference— City officers and employees not to be interested in contracts, § 29. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 805-a; conflicts of interest prohibited, General Municipal Law, § 801.  
Sec. 2-5-110. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  There is hereby appointed a board of ethics consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of the common council of the City of White Plains, all of whom shall reside in the City of White Plains. A majority of such members shall be persons other than officers or employees of the City of White Plains, but there shall be at least one (1) member who is an elected or appointed officer or employee of the City of White Plains. The city corporation counsel shall be a member ex-officio of such board or a city attorney designated by the corporation counsel shall be a member ex-officio of such board without the power to vote. The members of such board shall receive no salary or compensation for their services as members of such board and shall serve for terms of three (3) years each with the initial appointments being one (1) member for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members for terms of two (2) years, and two (2) members for terms of three (3) years. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made and shall be made for the balance of the unexpired term. Such board shall not be constituted so that more than two (2) members shall belong to the same political party. The board of ethics each year shall elect from its membership its chairperson and secretary and upon its formation shall promulgate its own rules and regulations as to its forms and procedures and maintain proper records of its opinions and proceedings, for which expenses it shall be reimbursed by the City of White Plains for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of its duties. Any member currently serving on the board of ethics prior to the effective date of this local law shall remain in his or her office until the expiration of his or her term of office. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and shall render advisory opinions to officers and employees of the City of White Plains with respect to Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and any code of ethics adopted pursuant to such article under such rules and regulations as the board of ethics may prescribe. The advisory opinions are to be on ethics-related matters involving prospective conduct and may be requested only by the individual officer or employee whose conduct may be called into question. In addition to the aforementioned, the board of ethics may make recommendations with respect to the drafting and adoption of a code of ethics or amendments thereto upon request of the common council. 
(c)  An officer or employee whose conduct or action is the subject of the advisory opinion shall not be subject to penalties or sanctions by virtue of acting or failing to act due to a reasonable reliance on the opinion, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for an opinion. The board of ethics may amend a previously issued opinion after giving reasonable notice to the officer or employee that it is reconsidering its opinion; provided that such amended advisory opinion shall apply only to future conduct or action of the officer or employee. 
(d)  All agencies of the City of White Plains and all officers, employees and agency members shall furnish to the board of ethics such data, information and statements as may in the opinion of the board be necessary for the necessary for the proper exercise of its functions, powers and duties as set forth in section 808 of the General Municipal Code. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99) 
State Law reference— Board of ethics authorized, General Municipal Law, § 808.  
Sec. 2-5-111. - Additional powers of the board of ethics of the City of White Plains. 
(a)  Receipt and investigation of complaints. 
(1)  In addition to the other powers and duties granted to the board of ethics, the board shall have the authority to receive from any person a written complaint questioning the compliance by any city officer or employee with the provisions of this article. The board of ethics may prescribe a form for such complaint. 
(2)  The written complaint must be signed, must include the individual complainant's address, and set forth in reasonable detail and documentation, if any, the facts alleged to constitute the violation(s). 
(3)  The written complaint shall be filed with the board of ethics. Upon receipt of said complaint, but in no event no later than five (5) business days after receipt, the board of ethics shall acknowledge receipt to the complainant and forward the complaint simultaneously to the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint and the corporation counsel. 
(4)  The board of ethics may on its own motion conduct an inquiry of an officer or employee's alleged non-compliance with provisions of this article upon receipt of substantial, reliable evidence, including, but not limited to, documents, written materials, or other forms of proof. In the event that the board of ethics should consider in its discretion to conduct such an inquiry, a two-thirds vote of the total voting membership of said board is required to initiate an inquiry. 
(5)  The board of ethics shall then conduct a preliminary written analysis of a complaint no later than thirty (30) days from the date the complaint is received. In the event that the board of ethics should find no probable cause for the complaint, the complaint shall be dismissed by the board of ethics sua sponte. Within three (3) business days thereof, the board of ethics shall then notify the complainant, the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint and the corporation counsel of the disposition of the complaint. 
(6)  In the event that the board of ethics should find probable cause for the complaint, the board of ethics shall forward to the corporation counsel a copy of its written preliminary analysis together with any information and documentation acquired by the board of ethics regarding the complaint. The officer or employee and complainant shall be notified by the board of ethics that the complaint has been forwarded to the corporation counsel for further action and investigation in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  The corporation counsel shall render a written analysis of the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt from the board of ethics. In the event that the subject of the complaint is the mayor, the corporation counsel shall request special counsel to be appointed by the common council. Reasonable attorney's fees, costs and disbursements necessary to undertake action on the complaint and assist the board of ethics in any hearing pertaining to the complaint shall be an expense to the city. In the event that the subject of the complaint is the office of the corporation counsel, the board of ethics shall request special counsel to be appointed by the common council. Reasonable attorney's fees, costs and disbursements necessary to undertake action on the complaint and assist the board of ethics in any hearing pertaining to the complaint shall be an expense to the city. 
(8)  Upon receipt of the corporation counsel's or special counsel's analysis, as the case may be, the board of ethics shall proceed to conduct a full investigation of the complaint, including' interviewing the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint, and any necessary witnesses and requesting documents and other pertinent materials. 
(9)  Upon the request of a majority vote of the total voting membership of the board of ethics, the corporation counsel may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of necessary witnesses and the production of documents and other materials pertinent to the investigation. The corporation counsel must state a specific and articulable reason(s) for denying any request by the board of ethics for the issuance of a subpoena(s). 
(10)  In the event that the corporation counsel should refuse to issue a subpoena(s), the board of ethics may override the corporation counsel's determination and the corporation counsel shall issue subpoena(s) upon a two-thirds vote of the total voting membership of the board of ethics. 
(11)  The officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint has the right to be represented by counsel at any required appearance before the board of ethics. 
(12)  A copy of the transcript of the testimony provided by the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint shall be provided at no cost to the officer or employee. 
(13)  The board of ethics may require a written response from the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint in lieu of an appearance before the board of ethics. 
(14)  After a complaint has been filed and prior to any investigation undertaken of a complaint before the board of ethics, no member of the board of ethics or any of the board's authorized agents may communicate directly or indirectly with any party or other person about any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except that: 
a.  The members of the board of ethics may obtain legal advice from the corporation counsel or special counsel as the case may be; and 
b.  The members of the board of ethics may discuss the complaint among themselves; 
c.  The complaint, records and other proceedings related thereto prior to the filing of charges or dismissal of the complaint are deemed confidential. 
If any person attempts to influence a board of ethics member regarding the pending complaint, the board member shall report the substance of the communication to the board of ethics at the next regular meeting of the board of ethics. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 2-5-112. - Board of ethics actions. 
(a)  Upon a full investigation, the board of ethics may take any action or combination of actions which it deems appropriate and which it is lawfully empowered to take, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Dismiss the complaint based on a variety of grounds, including but limited to: 
(i)  The complaint does not allege facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this article; 
(ii)  The board of ethics has no jurisdiction over the matter; 
(iii)  Failure of the complainant to cooperate in the board of ethics' review and consideration of the complaint; 
(iv)  The complaint is defective in a manner which results in the board of ethics being unable to make any sound determination; or 
(2)  Determine that no violation of this article has occurred; or 
(3)  Determine that the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this article and that the board of ethics will conduct a hearing, in which case, the board of ethics shall promptly send written notice of such determination to the accused and to the person who made the complaint; or 
(4)  Determine that further information must be obtained in order for the board of ethics to ascertain whether the complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of this article; or 
(5)  Refer the complaint to any appropriate authorities for criminal investigation or prosecution. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 2-5-113. - Hearing before the board of ethics. 
(1)  Upon a full investigation, if the board of ethics determines after a two-third's vote of the total voting membership of the Board that a hearing is warranted, the officer or employee who is the subject of the complaint shall be served with formal charges. 
(2)  The officer or employee may file an answer to the formal charges within twenty (20) days of service of said charges. The failure to respond and/or file an answer shall be deemed a denial of all material allegations alleged in the charges. 
(3)  If the answer disputes material factual allegations, the board of ethics shall direct that a hearing be held at a date certain, and if appropriate, a hearing officer be appointed by the board, at such compensation as may be agreed upon by the common council, to preside over the hearing and make findings of fact. If appropriate, special counsel may also be appointed on a case-by-case basis in accordance with section 244 of the Charter, subject to approval by the common council for compensation not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) unless a greater sum has been authorized or upon an additional request or requests by the corporation counsel, the common council may appropriate additional compensation. 
(4)  Thirty (30) days after charges have been served, the charges and the answer, if any, shall be made public, unless otherwise stipulated by the parties or extended by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5)  The officer or employee may be represented by counsel at all stages of the hearing process. 
(6)  At the earliest possible stage after the filing of charges, the parties are entitled to copies of all records that will be introduced at the hearing, written statements of any parties and/or witnesses to be called to testify by either party, and exculpatory evidence known to the board of ethics or its counsel. 
(7)  At the request of a majority vote of the total voting membership of the board of ethics, the corporation counsel shall issue subpoena(s) to necessary witnesses required to appear at the hearing and for the production of documents and other materials pertinent to the hearing. The corporation counsel must state a specific and articulable reason(s) for denying any request by the board of Ethics for the issuance of a subpoena(s). 
(8)  In the event that the corporation counsel should refuse to issue a subpoena(s), the board of ethics may override the corporation counsel's determination and compel the corporation counsel to issue subpoena(s) upon a two-thirds vote of the total voting membership of the board of ethics. 
(9)  A transcript shall be made of the hearing and a copy provided to the officer or employee at no cost. 
(10)  The standard of proof shall be clear and convincing evidence and the burden of proof upon the board of ethics. 
(11)  After the hearing, counsel may present proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(12)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such materials, the board shall render recommended findings and conclusions of law, transmit said report to the common council and file it with the city clerk for public review. 
(13)  In lieu of a hearing, the officer or employee or the counsel designated by the board of ethics to present evidence in support of the charges, may submit to the board of ethics, a written, signed stipulation of facts and whether the conduct of the officer or employee has violated the city's code of ethics. The board may either accept the stipulation of a waiver of a hearing and be bound by the stipulation or reject the stipulation and order a hearing. If the stipulation is rejected by the board of ethics, it may not be introduced or used at the hearing. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 2-5-114. - Financial disclosure statements. 
(a)  Applicability. The following classes of officers or employees of the City of White Plains shall be deemed "reporting officials" and shall be required to file financial disclosure statements as provided under this section: 
(1)  All elected officials; 
(2)  All commissioners and deputy commissioners; 
(3)  All department heads and assistant department heads; 
(4)  Members of the board of appeals, planning board, board of ethics and board of assessment review. 
(b)  General disclosure. The financial disclosure statement to be filed by all officers and employees to whom this section is applicable shall be in substantially the form: 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT FOR THE REPORTING YEAR — 
_____
Last Name 	First Name 	Initial 
_____
Title 	Department of Agency 
_____
Work Address 	Phone Number 
_____
Home Address 	Phone Number 
 
A.  Every question must be answered. 
If the question to any answer is "none", please so indicate. If the question is inapplicable, please so indicate (i.e. "n/a"). If the answer is left blank, it will be returned for an answer. 
B.  Use additional paper if necessary. 
If additional space is needed, complete the response on extra sheets of paper and clearly identify the number of the question. 
C.  Privacy request. 
If there are circumstances in which a reporting official believes that answers to any questions should not be made public, the reporting official may request, upon submission of this completed form, that certain information be kept confidential. 
D.  Advice in answering questions. 
A reporting official may request from the board of ethics advice as to the completion of this form or as to any question in this form. Question should be addressed to the board of ethics, in care of the corporation counsel. 
E.  Board members must complete items 1 through 8. Other reporting officials must complete all items. 
Information to be provided is for the reporting year. 
1.  Real Estate Ownership. List the address of each piece of property in the City of White Plains that you or your spouse owned or had a financial interest in, including your primary residence. 
As to investment property, provide the type and percentage of ownership by you or your spouse. 
Owner's Name 	Self or Spouse 	Address 	Investment or 
Primary Residence 
_____
_____
_____
 
2.  Ownership Interests. List any entity in which you or your spouse had an Ownership interest, except a corporation of which you owned less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock. Identify the name and type of business, and list the relationship to the business (i.e., owner, partner, officer, director, member, employee, or shareholder). 
Name of Business 	Type of Business 	Relationship 
to Business 	Self or Spouse 
_____
_____
_____
 
3.  Gifts. List all gifts that you or your spouse received last year from any entity or person, or agent or representative of such entity or person, who (i) within the past twenty-four (24) months has received or sought a financial benefit from the City of White Plains, has made an application to the City of White Plains, or has had business dealings with the City of White Plains or (ii) has a financial interest in any matter proposed or pending before the City of White Plains. 
Gifts include, but are not limited to, tangible items of value, cash in any form, entertainment, any interest, security or item for which the donee paid less than fair consideration or did not pay for, expenses for trip or accommodations, or travel or accommodations provided at a cost of less than full value or at no cost, loans for which interest payments are deferred, no interest is paid, or interest is paid at less than prevailing rates, or other economic benefits, excluding earned income from wages derived from the City of White Plains. 
Indicate whether the gift was received by you or your spouse. 
Gift (Describe) 	Approximate Value 	Name of Donor 	Self or Spouse 
_____
_____
_____
 
4.  Loans. List all loans in excess of $50.00, except those from commercial lending institutions, that you or your spouse has received from a subordinate of yours who is employed by the City of White Plains or from a source in any of the following categories: any person or entity, or agent or representative of person or entity, who (ii) within the past twenty-four (24) months has received or sought a financial benefit from the City of White Plains, has made an application to the City of White Plains, or has business dealings with the City of White Plains; or (ii) has a financial interest in any matter proposed or pending before the City of White Plains. 
Name of Creditor 	Description of 
Obligation 	Amount 	Self or Spouse 
_____
_____
 
5.  Political Positions Held. List any political office, political position(other than district leader) or membership on a political party committee that you held during the reporting year. 
Position 	Organization 
_____
_____
 
6.  Relatives Employed by the City of White Plains or by Businesses or Persons Doing Business with the City of White Plains. List any relatives in your immediate family (parents, children, spouse), whether they are living with you, employed by the City of White Plains or by persons or entities known by you to be doing business with the city. 
Name of Employer 	Name of Relative 	Relationship 	Position Held 
_____
_____
 
7.  Interest in City of White Plains Contracts. List any financial interest that you or your spouse had in any contract made or executed by the City of White Plains, excluding bonds and notes purchased on the open market. 
Description of Interest 	Self or Spouse 
_____
_____
 
8.  Client Disclosure. List the names of your or your firm's clients or customers known to you who had matters before your board or agency. 
Name 	Description of Matters 
_____
_____
 
Members of the Board of Appeals, Planning Board, board of ethics and Board of Assessment Review Need Not Complete Items 9 and 10. 
9.  Earned Income. List the source and nature of any income from any source in excess of $1000.00 that you earned in compensation for services rendered, or for goods sold or purchased, excluding a salary from the City of White Plains. 
Do not list such unearned sources of income as interest, dividends, distributions, or capital gains, and do not provide amounts on earned income listed. 
Source 	Nature of Income 
_____
_____
 
10.  Agreements for Future Employment. List any assurances or promises of future employment you received during the reporting year from any person or enterprise engaged in business with the City of White Plains. 
Future Prospective Employer 	When Applicable 
_____
_____
 
I attest under oath that all information given here is true and accurate to the best of my knowledge. 
_____
(Signature) 
Sworn to me this _____ day of ________, (year) 	Please Print: 
_____
Name 
_____
Notary Public 	_____
Address 
 
(c)  Doing business defined. For purposes of this section, the entity shall be deemed to be "doing business with the City of White Plains" only if it shall, during the twenty-four (24) month period preceding the date of such disclosure statement, either have transacted any business involving one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more with the City of White Plains, the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency, the White Plains Housing Authority, the White Plains Parking Authority, and any other agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing or have made any application, petition, request for a variance, amendment, change of zoning, approval of a plat, exemption from plat or official map, license or permit, pursuant to the provisions of, in or in connection with, any ordinance local law rule or regulation of the City of White Plains or any of its agencies or instrumentalities. 
(d)  Filing date. The financial disclosure statement shall be made annually on or before January 31, with respect to the preceding calendar year. Any person required to file such statement who becomes so required upon election, appointment, promotion or otherwise, of any year after January 1st, shall file such statement within thirty (30) days of receipt of such statement. The said statement shall be prepared under oath on a form to be approved by the common council and filed with the board of ethics which shall, subject to the provisions of subsection (g) transmit same to the city clerk within fourteen (14) days after its receipt thereof. Any changes involving any of the matters set forth in the financial disclosure statement shall be reported in the same manner within thirty (30) days of such change. 
(e)  Privacy claims. At the time of the filing of any disclosure statement, the officer or employee filing same may simultaneously file with the board of ethics, a written claim of privacy specifying with particularity those portions of the said statement which the officer or employee requests be deleted therefrom in the record thereof to be maintained by the city clerk. The board of ethics, prior to the transmission of such statement to the city clerk, shall delete any such item upon a finding that the same is of a highly personal nature, does not in any way relate to the duties of the position held by such person and does not create an actual or potential conflict of interest. The officer or employee shall have an opportunity to appear before the board of ethics in accordance with written procedures to be established by the board of ethics and filed with the common council and the city clerk. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 2-5-115. - Claims, lawsuits, etc. 
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a present or former officer or employee of any claim, account, demand or suit against the City of White Plains, or any agency thereof on behalf of him/herself or any member of his/her family arising out of any personal injury or property damage of for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Sec. 2-5-116. - Penalties. 
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any provision of this article may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment, as the case may be, in the manner provided by law. 
(L.L. No. 3-1999, § 2, 12-6-99)  
Secs. 2-5-117—2-5-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE GRIEVANCES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Employee grievance procedure, General Municipal Law, § 681 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-5-126—2-5-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CESA EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-5-136. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to cultivate and maintain a harmonious and cooperative relationship between city government and its employees; to provide orderly procedures for the submission, review and settlement of employee grievances in an atmosphere free from intimidation, coercion, interference or reprisal. The spirit and provisions of this division shall receive liberal construction to better effectuate its intended purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 681.  
Sec. 2-5-137. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, as used in this division the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Arbitration board: The three (3) member panel, one member designated by the mayor, one by the Civil Service Employees Association, and a third member chosen by the other two (2), or failing agreement, by the American Arbitration Association. 
(2)  Employee: Any person directly employed and compensated by the city except elected officials, city judges and persons in the unclassified and exempt classes of the civil service, employees of the police, fire, urban renewal, bureau of waste disposal and waste collection. The term "employee" shall include only those employees who are represented by the Civil Service Employees Association. 
(3)  Grievance: Any claimed violation, misinterpretation or inequitable application of existing laws, rules, procedures, regulations, administrative orders or work rules of the city or a department, committee, commission or board thereof, which relates to or involves employee health or safety, physical facilities, materials or equipment furnished to employees or supervision of employees; provided, however, that such term shall not include any matter involving an employee's rate of compensation, retirement benefits, disciplinary proceedings or any matter which is otherwise reviewable pursuant to law or any rule or regulation having the force and effect of law. 
(4)  Supervisor: Any person, other than a department head, regardless of title, who is authorized to exercise any level of supervisory responsibility over city employees. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 682.  
Sec. 2-5-138. - Basic standards and principles. 
(a)  Every city employee shall have the right to present his grievances, in accordance with the provisions of this division, free from interference, coercion, restraint, discrimination or reprisal and the grievance procedure established under this division shall provide the right to be represented at all stages thereof. 
(b)  It shall be the fundamental responsibility of supervisors at all levels, commensurate with the authority delegated to them by their superiors, promptly to consider and act upon grievances presented to them by employees under their supervision. To such extent as is practicable, appropriate authority shall be delegated to such supervisors to enable them to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 683.  
Sec. 2-5-139. - Grievance procedure—Generally. 
The grievance procedure shall consist of a first and second stage and an arbitration stage as outlined in this division. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 4)  
Sec. 2-5-140. - Same—Time limits generally. 
(a)  If a decision at one stage of the grievance procedure is not appealed to the next stage within the time limits specified, the grievance will be deemed discontinued at the prior stage. 
(b)  Failure at any stage by the city to communicate its decision within the specified time limit shall permit the grievant and/or the Civil Service Employees Association to appeal the matter to the next stage within the time limit as if the decision had been communicated on the final day. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 4(4.b., c.))  
Sec. 2-5-141. - Same—First stage. 
The first grievance procedural stage shall consist of the employee's presentation of his grievance to his immediate supervisor who shall, to such extent as he may deem appropriate, consult with his superiors. The discussion and resolution of grievances at the first stage shall be on an oral and informal basis. An oral decision or determination thereon shall be made by the supervisor within seventy-two (72) hours from the time of submission. If such grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at the first stage, such employee may proceed to the second stage. If any employee has no supervisor, he shall commence the grievance procedure at the second stage. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 4(1.))  
Sec. 2-5-142. - Same—Second stage. 
(a)  The second grievance procedural stage shall consist of a request by the aggrieved employee for a review and determination of his grievance by the head of the department concerned, or his designee. In such case, the aggrieved employee and his immediate supervisor shall each submit to the head of the department concerned, or his designee, a written statement setting forth the specific nature of the grievance and the facts relating thereto. Thereupon such head of the department concerned, or his designee, at the request of the employee, shall hold an informal hearing at which the employee, and, in accordance with the provisions of the grievance procedure, his representative, may appear and present oral and written statements or arguments. The final determination of the second stage of such grievance proceeding shall be made in writing by the head of the department concerned, or his designee, within seven (7) calendar days from the date of submission, and a copy thereof shall be promptly furnished to the aggrieved employee and the personnel director. 
(b)  No written grievance will be entertained, and shall be deemed waived unless it was submitted to Stage 2 within sixty (60) calendar days after the employee knew or should have known of the act or condition giving rise to the grievance. 
(c)  The personnel director shall be advised by all department heads of the details of all grievances that have reached the second stage. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 4(2., 3.d., 4.a.))  
Sec. 2-5-143. - Same—Arbitration. 
(a)  If a city employee is not satisfied with the decision of Stage 2 of the grievance procedure and the Civil Service Employees Association determines that the grievance is meritorious, it may submit the grievance to arbitration by written notice to the personnel director within fifteen (15) days of the decision at Stage 2. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the notice, the city and the Civil Service Employees Association shall each designate one member to serve on an arbitration board, such members shall promptly meet to choose a third, neutral member. In the event they cannot agree, they shall request the third member to be selected by the American Arbitration Association. The parties will follow the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association. The arbitration board shall hear the matter and issue its report no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the close of the hearing or last date for submission of proofs and briefs. 
(c)  The written report of the arbitration board shall contain a statement of the board's findings of fact, conclusions and advisory recommendations. The arbitration board shall send a copy of its written report to each employee involved, the Civil Service Employees Association, the head of the department involved, to the personnel director and to the mayor. 
(d)  The original report shall be filed in the office of the mayor and copies thereof shall be furnished to the aggrieved employee, to his Civil Service Employees Association representative, the department head and to the personnel director. All papers and documents pertaining to the grievance, including stenographic minutes, if any, shall be filed in the office of the mayor. 
(e)  The issuance of the report by the arbitration board shall constitute the final step in the grievance procedure contained in this division. 
(f)  The parties shall equally bear the costs, if any, of the neutral member of the arbitration board. 
(g)  Although the decisions of arbitration boards are advisory, a department head may, in his discretion, adopt all or a portion of the recommendations contained therein. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, §§ 4(3., 4d.—4f.), 5)  
Sec. 2-5-144. - Same—Confidential nature. 
All proceedings under this division shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public, except by written order of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 6) 
State Law reference— Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law, § 84.  
Secs. 2-5-145—2-5-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NON-CESA EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-5-151. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to cultivate and maintain a harmonious and cooperative relationship between the government of the city and its employees; to provide orderly procedures for the submission, review and settlement of employee grievances in an atmosphere free from intimidation, coercion, interference or reprisal. The spirit and provisions of this division shall receive liberal construction to better effectuate its intended purpose. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 681.  
Sec. 2-5-152. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this division, have the following meanings: 
(1)  Employee: Any person directly employed and compensated by the city, except elected officials, city judges and persons in the unclassified and exempt classes of the civil service. 
(2)  General grievance board: The grievance board, appointed by the mayor, having jurisdiction over all employees other than uniformed employees of the police and fire bureaus. 
(3)  Grievance: Any claimed violation, misinterpretation or inequitable application of existing laws, rules, procedures, regulations, administrative orders or work rules of the city, or a department, committee, commission or board thereof, which relates to or involves employee health or safety, physical facilities, materials or equipment furnished to employees or supervision of employees; provided, however, that such term shall not include any matter involving an employee's rate of compensation, retirement benefits, disciplinary proceedings or any matter which is otherwise reviewable pursuant to law or any rule or regulation having the force and effect of law. 
(4)  Investigator: A person designated by the appropriate grievance board to investigate the allegations contained in the written statement of the grievance and to submit a written report containing the results of his investigation to the person or persons conducting the hearing. The investigator may be a member of either grievance board or any other person not such a member but he shall not be a member of the department from which the grievance under investigation originates. 
(5)  Supervisor: Any person, other than a department head, regardless of title, who is authorized to exercise any level of supervisory responsibility over city employees. 
(6)  Police and fire grievance board: The grievance board, appointed by the mayor, having jurisdiction only over all uniformed employees of the police and fire bureaus. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 682.  
Sec. 2-5-153. - Basic standards and principles. 
(a)  Every city employee shall have the right to present his grievances, in accordance with the provisions of this division, free from interference, coercion, restraint, discrimination or reprisal and the grievance procedure established under this division shall provide the right to be represented at all stages thereof. 
(b)  It shall be the fundamental responsibility of supervisors at all levels, commensurate with the authority delegated to them by their superiors, promptly, to consider and act upon grievances presented to them by employees under their supervision. To such extent as is practicable, appropriate authority shall be delegated to such supervisors to enable them to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 683.  
Sec. 2-5-154. - Exemption. 
This division shall not apply to employees who are represented by the Civil Service Employees Association. 
(Ord. of 11-16-70, § 7)  
Sec. 2-5-155. - Grievance boards. 
The mayor shall appoint two (2) grievance boards composed of three (3) members each. The general grievance board shall have jurisdiction over all city employees, other than uniformed members of the police and fire departments. The police and fire grievance board shall have jurisdiction only over all uniformed members of the police and fire departments. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 4)  
Sec. 2-5-156. - Grievance procedure—Generally. 
The grievance procedure shall consist of a first and second stage and an arbitration stage as outlined in this division. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 5)  
Sec. 2-5-157. - Same—First stage. 
The first procedural stage of the grievance procedure shall consist of the employee's presentation of his grievance to his immediate supervisor who shall, to such extent as he may deem appropriate, consult with his superiors. The discussion and resolution of grievances at the first stage shall be on an oral and informal basis. An oral decision or determination thereon shall be made by the supervisor within seventy-two (72) hours from the time of submission. If such grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at the first stage, such employee may proceed to the second stage. If an employee has no supervisor, he shall commence the grievance procedure at the second stage. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 5(1.))  
Sec. 2-5-158. - Same—Second stage. 
The second procedural stage of the grievance procedure shall consist of a request by the aggrieved employee for a review and determination of his grievance by the head of the department concerned, or his designee. In such case the aggrieved employee and his immediate supervisor shall each submit to the head of the department concerned, or his designee, a written statement setting forth the specific nature of the grievance and the facts relating thereto. Thereupon such head of the department concerned, or his designee, shall, at the request of the employee, hold an informal hearing at which the employee, and, in accordance with the provisions of the grievance procedure, his representative, may appear and present oral and written statements or arguments. The final determination of the second stage of such grievance proceeding shall be made in writing by the head of the department concerned, or his designee, within seven (7) calendar days from the date of submission, and a copy thereof shall be promptly furnished to the aggrieved employee and the personnel director. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 5(2.))  
Sec. 2-5-159. - Same—Appeal stage. 
(a)  Any city employee may, within sixty (60) days, appeal to the appropriate grievance board from the written determination by the head of his department or his designee. Such employee shall be granted a hearing before the appropriate board on such appeal and such employee shall have the right to be represented in such appeal. 
(b)  Any such hearing may be conducted by any one or more members of the appropriate board, designated by that board to act on its behalf; provided, however, that if less than the full board presides at such a hearing the member or members thereof conducting such hearing shall render a written report thereon to the full board and the full board shall thereupon make its written report. 
(c)  The written report of the appropriate board shall contain a statement of the board's findings of fact, conclusions and advisory recommendations and shall be made within three (3) calendar weeks from the date of final submission to the appropriate board. The appropriate board shall send a copy of its written report to each employee involved, his representative, if any, the head of the department involved, to the personnel director and to the mayor. 
(d)  The personnel director shall be advised by all department heads of the details of all grievances that have reached the second procedural step and he may attend, as an observer, all meetings of the general grievance board or the police and fire grievance board. 
(e)  The appropriate grievance board shall promptly consider all grievances properly presented to it and take such necessary action as is required hereby. The merits of all grievances shall be considered objectively, with due consideration to the harmonious inter-relationship that is sought to be achieved among employees of the city and for the best interests of the public. 
(f)  An aggrieved employee desiring to appeal to the appropriate grievance board shall, within sixty (60) days, after the determination made by his department head, file a notice of appeal, in writing, in the office of his department head and in the office of the chairman of the appropriate grievance board, which notice of appeal shall set forth his name and address and the name and title of his department head. 
(g)  Such department head shall promptly, upon receipt of such notice of appeal, submit to the chairman of such grievance board the written statement furnished him by the aggrieved employee and a copy of the determination of the department head made pursuant to section 2-5-158 of this Code. 
(h)  At the hearing, which shall be informal, the aggrieved employee, the department head and the supervisor, if any, may submit such data or information as they may deem pertinent to the grievance, subject to the approval of the person conducting the hearing. 
(i)  The person conducting such hearing may appoint an investigator who shall make an investigation of the pertinent facts and such investigator shall make a written report thereon to the person or persons conducting such hearing and shall furnish copies thereof to the aggrieved employee and to the department head. 
(j)  The original report shall be filed in the office of the mayor and copies thereof shall be furnished to the aggrieved employee, to his representative, if any, to the department head and to the personnel director. All papers and documents pertaining to the grievance, including stenographic minutes, if any, shall be filed in the office of the mayor. 
(k)  The issuance of the report by the full board shall constitute the final step in the grievance procedure contained in this division. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 5(3, 4))  
Sec. 2-5-160. - Reports of grievance board may be adopted. 
Although the reports of the grievance boards are advisory, a department head may, in his discretion, adopt all or a portion of the recommendations contained therein. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 6)  
Sec. 2-5-161. - Confidential nature of proceedings. 
All proceedings under this division shall be confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public, except by written order of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 6-17-63, § 7) 
State Law reference— Freedom of Information Law, Public Officers Law, § 84.  
Secs. 2-5-162—2-5-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RULES FOR THE CLASSIFIED CIVIL SERVICE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Retention and disposition of civil service records, § 2-2-2. 
State Law reference— Administration of civil service, Civil Service Law, §§ 15—20. 
 
Sec. 2-5-171. - Purpose and effect. 
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to provide an orderly and uniform system for the administration of civil service in the city on a basis of merit and fitness as provided in the Civil Service Law of the state. These rules have the force and effect of law, and apply to all positions in the classified service of the city as well as the school district therein. These rules may be amended by the personnel officer after public hearing and subject to the approval of the common council and the state civil service commission. 
(Civ. Serv. Rules)  
Sec. 2-5-172. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context or subject matter requires a different meaning, the several terms hereinafter mentioned, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as follows: 
1.  Personnel officer means the personnel officer of the city, who shall be in responsible charge of the personnel department. 
2.  Employee means the incumbent of a position holding the position in accordance with these rules and the Civil Service Law. 
3.  Position means an office or employment involving an aggregation of duties to be performed and responsibilities to be exercised by one person. 
4.  Compensation means the remuneration of a position and shall include food, lodging, maintenance and commutation when the same is furnished by the employer. 
5.  Eligible list means an official record kept in the personnel department as a public record which contains the names of those persons who have successfully completed examinations, listed and ranked in order of their final ratings from the highest to the lowest rank. 
6.  Part-time employment means any employment or a combination of one or more employments in a civil division in which an individual works less than fifty (50) percent of the time prescribed as a normal work week by the appropriate governing body or other appropriate authority of the civil division or wherein the employee earns not more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) annually. 
7.  Transfer means the change, without further examination, of a permanent employee from a position under the jurisdiction of one appointing authority to a similar position under the jurisdiction of another appointing authority. 
8.  Reassignment means the change, without further examination, of a permanent employee from one position to another similar position under the jurisdiction of the same appointing authority. 
9.  Municipality means city or school district. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule I)  
Sec. 2-5-173. - Powers and duties of the personnel officer. 
The personnel officer may appoint such subordinates and employees within available appropriations as he or she may deem necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of this article. He shall fix the duties of these employees. The personnel officer shall keep true and accurate minutes of all civil service meetings and proceedings which shall be open to public inspection. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule II)  
Sec. 2-5-174. - Exempt class. 
1.  Positions in the exempt class are those for which competitive or noncompetitive examinations or other qualifications requirements are not practicable. (Civil Service Law, Section 41) 
2.  Positions in the exempt class shall be listed in section 2-5-199 of this Code. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule III)  
Sec. 2-5-175. - Noncompetitive class. 
1.  A position in the noncompetitive class may be filled by the appointment of a person who meets the minimum qualifications established for such position by the personnel officer. A nomination for such an appointment shall state the qualifications of the nominee and shall be filed by the appointing authority with the personnel officer. Such appointment shall become effective only after approval by the personnel officer. 
2.  Positions in the noncompetitive class shall be listed in section 2-5-200 of this Code and made a part hereof. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule IV)  
Sec. 2-5-176. - Labor class. 
1.  The labor class shall include unskilled laborers. 
2.  A position in the labor class may be filled by the appointment of any person selected by the appointing officer of the agency where a vacancy exists, and the personnel officer may require applicants for employment in the labor class to qualify in such tests of their fitness for employment as may be deemed practicable. 
3.  Positions in the labor class shall be listed in section 2-5-201 of this Code and made a part hereof. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule V)  
Sec. 2-5-177. - Unclassified service. 
Positions in the unclassified service shall be listed in section 2-5-202 of this Code and made a part hereof as though set forth in full herein. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule VI)  
Sec. 2-5-178. - Recruitment of personnel. 
1.  Residence requirements for municipal positions. 
(a)  An applicant must be at the time of examination and for at least one month prior thereto a resident of the municipality in which appointment is to be made or any reasonable combination of municipalities both in and outside of New York State contiguous to the municipality in which appointment is to be made or contiguous to the municipality in which such municipality is located as determined by the personnel officer. Residence requirements may be suspended or reduced by the personnel officer in cases where recruitment difficulty makes such requirements disadvantageous to the public interest. 
(b)  When preference in certification is given to residents of a municipality pursuant to subdivision 4-a of section 23, the Civil Service Law, an eligible must have been, at the time of examination and for at least one month prior thereto, a resident of such municipality in order to be included in a certification as a resident of such municipality. 
2.  Announcements of examinations. The public announcement of an examination shall specify the application fee, if any, the title, salary or salary range, the duties of the position, the minimum qualifications required, the final date for filing applications, the subjects or scope of the examination and the relative weights thereof, and the date and place of the examination. Public notice of open competitive examinations shall be made at least twenty-five (25) days before the date of the examination and must be conspicuously posted in a public place for fifteen (15) days. The last day for filing applications shall be at least ten (10) days before the date of the examination. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule VII)  
Sec. 2-5-179. - Applications. 
1.  Applications of candidates for positions in the competitive class and for positions in the noncompetitive class must be addressed to the personnel officer at the office of the personnel department. 
2.  The personnel officer shall notify each applicant of the disposition of his application. Approved applicants for competitive examination shall be given notice of their approval at least four (4) days before the examination, by mail to the address stated in the application, or one day's notice by telegram. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule VIII)  
Sec. 2-5-180. - Disqualification. 
1.  Good moral character and habits and a satisfactory reputation shall be requirements for appointment to any position subject to these rules. Any applicant who is found to lack such requirements shall be disqualified for examination or, after examination, for certification and appointment. 
2.  A record of disrespect for the requirements and processes of law, including repeated traffic offenses or disregard of summonses for traffic offenses, may be grounds for disqualification for examination or, after examination, for certification and appointment. 
3.  The burden of establishing his qualifications to the satisfaction of the personnel officer shall be upon the applicant. Any applicant who refuses to permit the personnel officer to investigate matters necessary for the verification of his qualifications or who otherwise hampers, impedes or fails to cooperate with the personnel officer in such investigation shall be disqualified for examination or, after examination, for certification and appointment. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule IX)  
Sec. 2-5-181. - Examinations. 
1.  The marking of each competitor's examination shall be made on the scale of one hundred (100), which maximum shall represent the best performance possible, expected or attained, and seventy (70) shall represent a performance meeting the minimum needs of the position to be filled. The personnel officer may, after the announcement of an examination is made, subdivide the written examination into parts and require a passing mark of seventy (70) in each of the parts in order that candidates be considered further for eligibility. Notice of such arrangement shall be given in the instructions on the written examination. Where the written test is prepared and rated by the state civil service commission in accordance with section 23, subdivision 2 of the Civil Service Law, the provisions of the rules and regulations of the state civil service commission and department dealing with the rating of examinations shall apply. 
2.  The personnel officer shall adopt a system to conceal the identity of the candidates' papers in a written examination until such written examination has been rated. 
3.  For examinations prepared and rated by the personnel officer, applications and examination records and papers of candidates shall be preserved until at least six (6) months after the expiration of the eligible list resulting from such examination, but in no event may records be destroyed except in accordance with the policies of the state commissioner of education and the state civil service commission. Whenever an oral test shall be prescribed as part of an examination, a stenographic or recording device record of all the questions and answers shall be made a part of the examination records. 
4.  Every candidate in an examination shall be notified of his final rating and, if successful, of his relative position on the eligible list established as a result of the examination. Any candidate receiving such notice, or his duly authorized representative, may inspect his examination papers in the office of the personnel department and in the presence of a designated representative of the personnel officer, provided he makes request for such inspection, in writing, within the period of ten (10) calendar days after the date of the postmark of such notice. The application and examination papers of a candidate shall be exhibited only to the candidate or his duly authorized representative, designated as such in writing. The application of an eligible who is being considered for appointment may be shown to the appointing officer. 
5.  (a) 
A candidate who wishes to appeal to the personnel officer from his rating in one, or more, or all of the subjects of an examination must submit such appeal in writing within twenty (20) calendar days after the earliest date on which his examination papers were made available for his inspection. Such appeal must show that a manifest error was made in the original rating. Such appeal shall be considered as opening all of the candidate's papers for review, whether resulting in a higher or lower average standing. No change in rating shall be made as a result of an appeal unless it shall affect the candidate's relative position on the eligible list. 
(b)  For examinations prepared and rated under subdivision 2 of section 23 of the Civil Service Law, the state civil service commission shall have sole and exclusive authority to correct any errors in rating upon appeal or otherwise. The review of papers by candidates and the filing of appeals in such examinations shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the state civil service commission and department. 
(c)  The personnel officer may at any time during the life of an eligible list, resulting from an examination prepared and rated by the personnel officer, correct any clerical or computational errors in the ratings of candidates who competed in the examination. 
(d)  Any change in an eligible list pursuant to this rule shall be made without prejudice to the status of any person previously appointed as a result of such examination. 
6.  Rating keys shall be prepared for each examination held. Such keys shall be a permanent part of the record of each examination. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule X)  
Sec. 2-5-182. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-5-183. - Eligible lists. 
1.  Every candidate who attains a passing mark in an examination as a whole and who meets the standards prescribed, if any, for separate subjects or parts of subjects of the examination shall be eligible for appointment to the position for which he was examined and his name shall be entered on the eligible list in the order of his final rating; but if two or more eligibles receive the same final rating in the examination, they shall be ranked in accordance with such uniform, impartial procedure as may be prescribed therefor by the personnel officer. 
2.  The date of the establishment of a list shall be the date fixed therefor by the resolution of the personnel officer, and shall be entered on such list. The duration of all eligible lists shall be fixed by the resolution of the personnel officer prior to the establishment of such lists, but shall not be less than one nor more than four (4) years. The date of establishment of a list and its duration shall be given to all successful candidates at the time when notice of standing on the eligible list is given to such candidates. Where the duration of an eligible list is fixed at less than four (4) years, the personnel officer may, by resolution, prior to the expiration date of such list, extend the duration of the list up to the maximum limitation of four (4) years, provided that eligibles on such list are notified in writing of the extension of the eligible list. 
3.  Eligible lists shall be open to public inspection at the office of the personnel officer. The names of persons who failed to receive a passing grade on the examination shall not be disclosed to the public. 
4.  The personnel officer shall have power in his discretion to correct any error and amend any eligible list where it appears that an error has been made. The personnel officer shall have power to revoke any eligible list where the provisions of these rules were not properly or sufficiently carried out; provided, however, that an eligible list shall not be revoked except after notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given to all persons whose names appear thereon. The reasons for such action shall be recorded in the minutes of the personnel officer and reported to the state civil service commission. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XI)  
Sec. 2-5-184. - Certification. 
1.  The personnel officer shall determine the eligible list most nearly appropriate for the position to be filled, and shall certify to the appointing authority a sufficient number of eligibles from which selection for appointment may be made. When the name of any eligible is included in a certification for appointment, the names of all other eligibles on the list having the same final rating as such eligible shall likewise be included in such certification. 
2.  A certification issued by the personnel officer to an appointing officer shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of its issuance. After the expiration of such thirty (30) calendar day period, no appointment shall be made except from a new certification. 
3.  When an eligible is canvassed for appointment or is offered appointment in writing, and fails to state his willingness to accept such appointment within four (4) business days after the mailing of such canvass or offer, or before the end of the next succeeding business day if such canvass or offer is sent to him by telegram, he may be considered ineligible for purposes of making selection for such particular appointment. 
4.  The name of the person declining appointment shall be eliminated from further certification from the eligible list unless declination is for one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  Insufficiency of compensation offered when below minimum of grade of the position for which the examination was held; 
(b)  Location of employment; 
(c)  Temporary inability, physical or otherwise, which must be satisfactorily explained by the eligible in writing. 
The personnel officer shall enter upon the eligible list the reasons for action in such cases. 
5.  Except as otherwise provided herein, appointment or promotion to a position in the competitive class shall be made by the selection of a person on the most nearly appropriate eligible list who is willing to accept such appointment and whose final rating in the examination is equal to or higher than the rating of the third highest ranking eligible on the list indicating willingness to accept such appointment. The term "ranking" as used herein refers to the order in which the names of eligibles appear on the eligible list as provided in section 2-5-183 of this Code. 
6.  Whenever a vacancy exists in a position in the competitive class and an open competitive examination duly advertised results in three (3) or fewer approved applicants for the examination, the appointing officer may nominate to the personnel officer one of the applicants who may be certified for appointment to fill the vacancy without further examination, provided that he has already qualified in an examination of equivalent character within the last four (4) years from the date of nomination. 
7.  Wherever one or more eligibles shall have declined any appointment offered and an eligible, whose relative standing is lower and who was reachable on the certification only because of the aforesaid declination, shall have been appointed to the position, the salary or compensation of such appointee shall not be increased, except by a service or a class-wide increase, within a period of six (6) months after his appointment beyond that offered to the persons so declining. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XII)  
Sec. 2-5-185. - Promotions. 
1.  Promotion examinations shall be open to employees having permanent status in a lower appropriate title, and whose qualifications meet the minimum requirements established for the title to which they seek promotion, but in no case shall any person be eligible to compete in a promotion examination without six (6) months of permanent competitive class service in the lower grade position. 
2.  Any person who is nominated for noncompetitive examination for promotion to a position and who fails to pass two (2) successive examinations for such promotion shall not thereafter be eligible for employment in such position, except by appointment or promotion from an eligible list established following competitive examination. 
3.  When an interdepartmental promotion eligible list exists, such list shall be certified before any appropriate open competitive eligible list. Preference in appointment from the interdepartmental promotion eligible list must be given to departmental employees. If such departmental employees constitute fewer than three (3) eligibles willing to accept appointment, appointment may be made from the entire interdepartmental promotion list. If the interdepartmental promotion eligible list contains the names of fewer than three (3) eligibles willing to accept appointment, appointment may be made from the most appropriate open competitive eligible list. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XIII)  
Sec. 2-5-186. - Probationary term. 
1.  Probationary term. 
(a)  Except as herein otherwise provided, every permanent appointment from an open competitive list and every original appointment to a position in the noncompetitive, exempt or labor class shall be for a probationary term of not less than eight (8) nor more than twenty-six (26) weeks, except that every original appointment or employment as police officer in the police department and firefighter in the fire department shall be for a probationary term of one year; provided, however, that if the conduct, capacity or fitness of a probationary police officer or probationary firefighter after three (3) months of service is not satisfactory, his service may be discontinued at any time during the remainder of the probationary term. In notifying the person certified to him for appointment, the appointing officer shall specify the appointment as a probationary appointment. 
(b)  The probationary term for training positions, in which an appointee is required to serve a specified training term, shall be not less than twelve (12) nor more than fifty-two (52) weeks. 
(c)  An appointment shall become permanent upon the completion of the minimum period of probation unless the probationer, prior to the completion of such service, is given written notice that the probationary term will be continued. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the personnel officer. If the probationary term is so continued, the appointment shall become permanent upon the retention of the probationer after his completion of the maximum period of service or upon earlier notice to the probationer at any time after the completion of the minimum period of service that his probationary term is successfully completed. If the conduct or performance of the probationer is not satisfactory, his employment may be terminated at any time after the completion of the minimum period of service and on or before the completion of the maximum period of service. 
2.  Interdepartmental promotions and transfers. An interdepartmental promotion or transfer means a promotion or transfer from a position in one department to a position in another department. Every interdepartmental promotion or transfer shall be for a probationary term of twelve (12) weeks. If the conduct or performance of the probationer is not satisfactory, his employment in such position shall be discontinued at the end of such term. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "promotion" shall include the appointment of an employee to a higher grade position in the noncompetitive or exempt class. 
3.  Restoration to permanent position. When a permanent employee is promoted or transferred to a position in which he is required to serve a probationary term, the position thus vacated by him shall not be filled, except on a temporary basis, during such probationary term. At any time during such probationary term the employee shall have the right to return to his previous position at his own election. If the conduct or performance of the probationer is not satisfactory, he shall be restored to his former permanent position at the end of his probationary term. 
4.  Absence during probationary term. Any periods of authorized or unauthorized absence aggregating up to ten (10) work days during the probationary term, may in the discretion of the appointing authority, be counted as time served in the probationary term. Any such periods of absence in excess of an aggregate of ten (10) work days shall not be counted as time served in the probationary term. The minimum and maximum periods of the probationary term of any employee shall be extended by the number of work days of his absence which, pursuant to this section, are not considered as time served in the probationary term. Nothing in this section shall be construed to except a probationer from the application of subsection 4 of section 2-5-192 of this Code. 
5.  Report on probationer's service. The probationer's supervisor shall carefully observe his conduct and performance and, at least two (2) weeks prior to the end of the probationary term shall report thereon in writing to the proper appointing authority. The supervisor shall also, from time to time during the probationary term, advise the probationer of his status and progress. A probationer whose services are to be terminated for unsatisfactory service shall receive written notice at least one week prior to such termination and, upon request, shall be granted an interview with the appointing authority or his representative. 
6.  Restoration to eligible list. A probationer whose employment is terminated or who resigns before the end of his probationary term may request that his name be restored to the eligible list from which he was appointed, provided such list is still in existence. His name may be restored to such list if the personnel officer in his discretion determines that the probationer should be given a second opportunity for appointment. 
7.  Temporary or provisional service in higher level position. When an employee who has not completed his probationary term is appointed on a temporary or provisional basis to a higher level position, the period of temporary or provisional service rendered by such employee in such higher level position, may in the discretion of the appointing authority, be considered as satisfactory probationary service in his lower position and may be counted as such in determining the satisfactory completion of such probationary term. At any time after the expiration of the minimum period of the probationary term, or the entire probationary term if it be one of fixed duration, the appointing authority shall, on request of such probationer, furnish his decision in writing as to whether or not service in such higher level position shall be considered as satisfactory probationary service. In the event of an adverse decision by the appointing authority, such probationer, at his request, shall be returned to his lower position for sufficient time to permit him to complete his probationary term. The employment of such a probationer in his lower position shall not be terminated at the end of his probationary term on account of unsatisfactory service unless he shall have actually served in such position, in the aggregate, at least the minimum period specified for such probationary term or the entire probationary term if it be one of fixed duration. 
8.  Removal during probationary term. Nothing contained in this rule shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the authority of an appointing authority pursuant to section 75 of the Civil Service Law, at any time during the probationary term, to remove a probationer for incompetency or misconduct. 
9.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of these rules, the appointment or promotion of a police officer shall not become permanent unless and until he has satisfied such requirements as may be applicable to him under section 209-q of the General Municipal Law. If a police officer is promoted to a higher rank for which he has met all requirements of eligibility for permanent promotion except training requirements applicable under section 209-q of the General Municipal Law, he shall be deemed to be on leave of absence from the lower rank position from which he was promoted pending completion of such training. During such period such lower rank position may not be filled except on a temporary basis. In the event of his failure to complete such training successfully within the time allowed therefor, he shall be restored to such lower rank position. 
10.  An employee who is reinstated to a position after a separation of more than one year, either in his former jurisdiction or in another jurisdiction shall serve a new probationary period in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as apply upon the original appointment to such position. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XIV)  
Sec. 2-5-187. - Seasonal and emergency defense and trainee appointments. 
1.  Appointment to seasonal positions in competitive class. 
(a)  Positions in the competitive class where the nature of service is such that it is not continuous throughout the year, but recurs in each successive year, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be designated as seasonal positions and shall be subject to the provisions of these rules applicable generally to positions in such class. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of the employment season, the names of all persons employed in such seasonal positions shall be entered upon a seasonal re-employment list in the order of their first appointment to the title vacated by them at the expiration of such employment season. Such seasonal re-employment list shall be certified to the appointing authority at the commencement of or during the next employment season, and the persons whose names appear thereon as still qualified shall be entitled to re-employment in such positions in the order in which their names appear on such list. Any such person may be re-examined by the personnel officer with respect to his physical fitness for the performance of the duties of the position, and may be disqualified for re-employment in the same manner, and for any of the reasons applicable to the disqualification of an eligible on an eligible list resulting from open competitive examination. 
(c)  The name of any person on such list who is not reached for re-employment shall remain on such list and shall be certified in the order of the date of his first appointment to such position during subsequent employment seasons; provided, however, that the eligibility for re-employment of any such person shall not continue for a period longer than three years from the date of his separation from such seasonal employment. A seasonal re-employment list shall not be deemed to be a preferred list as provided for in section 81 of the Civil Service Law. 
2.  Emergency defense appointments. 
(a)  Any position in a civil defense agency or any position created in a governmental agency to perform civil defense or other national emergency functions, which is unique and peculiar to civil defense or national emergency activities and which is not comparable to any regular, standard position in the classified civil service, may be designated, with the consent of the personnel officer and upon the approval of the state civil service commission, as an emergency defense position. No position involving conventional and stable duties of the nature of those performed in the regular and normal functions of the civil government, or having as a counterpart a position in any regular established department or agency of civil government, shall be designated as an emergency defense position. An emergency defense position may be filled on a temporary basis for a period not to extend beyond the duration of the New York State Emergency Defense Act. Appointments to such positions shall be designated as emergency defense appointments. All positions designated as emergency defense positions shall be listed in these rules and made a part hereof as though set forth in full herein. 
(b)  Any permanent employee who, with the consent of his appointing officer, accepts an emergency defense appointment under this subdivision shall be granted a leave of absence from his permanent position until the termination of such appointment. 
3.  Trainee appointments. The personnel officer may require that permanent appointments or promotions to designated positions shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory completion of a term of service as a trainee in such a position or in an appropriate, lower training title or the completion of specified training or academic courses, or both. The period of such term of training service shall be prescribed by the personnel officer. Upon the satisfactory completion of such training term, and of specified courses if required, an appointee shall be entitled to full permanent status in the position for which appointment was made. Any appointment hereunder shall be subject to such probationary period as is prescribed in these rules. Also, the employment of such person may be discontinued if his conduct, capacity or fitness is not satisfactory, or at any time if he fails to pursue or continue satisfactorily such training or academic courses as may be required. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XV)  
Sec. 2-5-188. - Effect of temporary or provisional appointment on status of appointee. 
1.  Effect of temporary appointment on eligibility for permanent appointment. The acceptance by an eligible of a temporary appointment shall not affect his standing on the eligible list for a permanent appointment, nor shall the period of temporary service be counted as part of the probationary service in the event of subsequent permanent appointment. 
2.  Provisional appointment of permanent employee. When a permanent competitive class employee is given a provisional appointment to another competitive class position in the same department or agency, the position thus vacated by him shall not be filled on other than a temporary basis pending his reinstatement thereto upon failure of his provisional appointment to mature into permanent appointment. 
When a temporary appointment to a permanently encumbered position is made from an eligible list and the temporary appointee is at the time of such appointment reachable on such eligible list he shall, at such time that the permanent incumbency is vacated, be eligible for permanent appointment to the same position or another position in the same class notwithstanding the fact that the eligible list on which his name originally appeared may have expired. 
3.  Successive provisional appointment. 
(a)  No provisional employee who has refused to take an examination held for permanent appointment shall be given another provisional appointment in the same class position. 
(b)  No provisional employee who has twice failed an examination for permanent appointment shall be given another provisional appointment in the same class position, provided, however, where an examination fails to produce any qualified eligibles, or where an eligible list is depleted of all eligibles immediately following its establishment, such employee at the discretion of the appointing authority may be given a third and final provisional appointment in the same position. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XVI)  
Sec. 2-5-189. - Transfers. 
1.  General conditions and limitations. In addition to the conditions and limitations prescribed by statute or in other provisions of these rules, transfers shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  A transfer may be allowed only if it is impracticable to fill the position to which transfer is sought by promotion from among persons holding lower grade positions in the department or agency in which such position exists. 
(b)  A transfer may not be made to a position for which a preferred list containing the name of an eligible willing to accept reinstatement to such position exists. 
(c)  A transfer may be made only if the position to which transfer is sought is at the same or substantially the same or a lower salary level than the position from which transfer is sought. 
(d)  Every transfer shall require the consent, in writing, of the transferee and of the respective appointing authorities having jurisdiction over the positions to which and from which transfer is sought, and the approval of the personnel officer. 
2.  Transfers between positions in different civil divisions under the jurisdiction of the personnel officer. A transfer may be allowed from a position in one civil division to a position in another civil division under the jurisdiction of the personnel officer, provided the prospective transferee meets applicable residence requirements, if any, for the position to which transfer is sought and provided such prospective transferee at any time would have been eligible and reachable for appointment to the position to which transfer is sought from an eligible list resulting from an examination having the same or less restrictive residence requirements than those applicable, at the time of transfer, to the position to which transfer is sought. A transfer may also be allowed from a position in one such civil division to a position in another such civil division whenever a competitive examination for the latter position in which the prospective transferee was eligible to compete has failed to produce sufficient eligibles to fill all vacancies in the position to which transfer is sought. 
3.  Transfers between state and local positions. 
(a)  A transfer may be made from a position in the state service to a position subject to these rules, provided the prospective transferee meets the residence requirements, if any, applicable to the position to which transfer is sought. 
(b)  A transfer may be made from a position subject to these rules to a position in the service of the state, provided the prospective transferee was, at or subsequent to the time of original appointment in an agency subject to these rules, eligible for certification and appointment to the position in the state service to which transfer is sought. 
(c)  A transfer pursuant to this section shall require the approval of the state civil service department and the personnel officer having jurisdiction over the local position to or from which transfer is made. 
4.  Transfers pursuant to reciprocal rules. 
(a)  This section shall apply to transfers between positions subject to these rules and positions in a civil division under the jurisdiction of the state civil service department or under the jurisdiction of a personnel officer which had adopted a reciprocal rule permitting transfers of employees to and from other governmental jurisdictions. 
(b)  A transfer may be made pursuant to this section, provided that: 
(1)  The prospective transferee holds a position to which he was appointed from an eligible list resulting from an examination prepared and rated by the state civil service department; 
(2)  Such examination is or would be appropriate for filling the position to which transfer is sought; 
(3)  Such person meets applicable residence requirements, if any, for the position to which transfer is sought; and 
(4)  Such person at any time would have been eligible and reachable for appointment to the position to which transfer is sought from an eligible list resulting from an examination having the same or less restrictive residence requirements than those applicable, at the time of transfer, to the position to which transfer is sought. 
(c)  Any person holding a permanent appointment in a competitive class position in the service of a civil division may be transferred to a similar position in another civil division having qualifications and examination requirements similar to or lower than the position then held by such person, as determined by the state civil service department, provided that a competitive examination for the latter position in which such person was eligible to compete has failed to produce sufficient eligibles to fill vacancies in the civil division to which transfer is sought. 
(d)  Any transfer pursuant to this reciprocal rule shall require the approval of the state civil service department and the respective personnel officers having jurisdiction over the positions from which and to which transfer is sought. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XVII)  
Sec. 2-5-190. - Reinstatement. 
1.  A permanent employee who has resigned from his position may be reinstated without examination within one year from the date of such resignation in the position from which he resigned, if then vacant, or in any vacant position to which he was eligible for transfer or reassignment. In computing the one year period within which a person may be reinstated after the resignation, the day the resignation takes effect, any time spent in active service in the military or naval forces of the United States or of the state, and any time served in another position in the civil service of the same municipality shall not be considered. 
In an exceptional case the personnel officer may, for good cause shown and where the interests of the government would be served, waive the provisions of this rule to permit the reinstatement of a person to his former position more than one year after resignation; provided, however, that such a waiver to permit reinstatement more than three (3) years after resignation shall be subject to approval of the state civil service commission. 
For the purpose of this rule, where an employee on leave of absence resigns, such resignation shall be deemed effective as of the date of the commencement of such leave. 
2.  Refusal or failure to accept reinstatement from preferred list. 
(a)  Relinquishment of eligibility for reinstatement. The failure or refusal of a person on a preferred list, after reasonable notice, to accept reinstatement therefrom to his former position or any similar position in the same salary grade for which such list is certified, shall be deemed to be a relinquishment of his eligibility for reinstatement, and his name shall thereupon be stricken from such preferred list. The name of such person may be restored to such preferred list, and certified to fill such appropriate vacancies as may thereafter occur, only upon the request of such person and his submission of reasons satisfactory to the personnel officer for his previous failure or refusal to accept reinstatement. 
(b)  Effect or refusal to accept reinstatement to lower grade position. A person on a preferred list shall not be deemed to relinquish his eligibility for reinstatement therefrom by reason of his failure or refusal to accept reinstatement to a position in a lower salary grade than the position from which he was suspended or demoted. The name of such person may be withheld from further certification for reinstatement to a position in the same or a lower salary grade than the position to which he failed or refused to accept reinstatement. 
(c)  Restoration to eligibility for reinstatement not to affect previous appointments. The restoration of the name of a person to a preferred list, or his restoration to eligibility for certification therefrom to positions in a lower salary grade than his former position, shall not invalidate or in any manner adversely affect any appointment, promotion, reinstatement or demotion previously made to any position to which such person would otherwise have been eligible for reinstatement from such preferred list. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XVIII)  
Sec. 2-5-191. - Leave of absence. 
1.  A leave of absence without pay, not to exceed one year, may be granted to an employee by an appointing officer. Notice of such leave of absence shall be given to the personnel officer. Where a leave of absence without pay has been granted for a period which aggregates one year, a further leave of absence without pay shall not be granted unless the employee returns to his position and serves continuously therein for three (3) months immediately preceding the subsequent leave of absence. Notice of such subsequent leave of absence shall also be given to the personnel officer. Absence on leave for more than one year shall be deemed the equivalent of a resignation from the service upon the date of commencement of such absence, except as provided in subdivision 2 of this section. 
2.  In an exceptional case, the personnel officer may for good cause shown waive the provisions of this rule to permit an extension of the leave of absence for an additional one year period. In no case may such leave of absence exceed in aggregate two (2) years from the date of commencement of the leave. 
3.  A leave of absence without pay, not to exceed four (4) years, shall be granted by an appointing officer to an employee who is a veteran of World War II or who participated in the Korean hostilities, providing the leave of absence is for the purpose of taking courses under the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944 or the Veterans' Assistance Act of 1952 or under a New York State Board of Regents War Service Scholarship. An employee taking such a leave shall be reinstated to his position, provided he makes application for such reinstatement within sixty (60) days after the termination of his course of study. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XIX)  
Sec. 2-5-192. - Resignation. 
1.  Resignation in writing. Except as otherwise provided herein, every resignation shall be in writing. 
2.  Effective date. If no effective date is specified in a resignation, it shall take effect upon delivery to or filing in the office of the appointing authority or in the office as designated in Public Officers Law, section 31. If an effective date is specified in a resignation, it shall take effect on such specified date. However, if a resignation is submitted while the employee is on leave of absence without pay, such resignation, for the purpose of determining eligibility for reinstatement, shall be deemed to be effective as of the date of the commencement of such absence. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, when charges of incompetency or misconduct have been or are about to be filed against an employee, the appointing authority may elect to disregard a resignation filed by such employee and to prosecute such charges; and, in the event that such employee is found guilty of such charges and dismissed from the service, his termination shall be recorded as a dismissal rather than as a resignation. 
3.  Withdrawal or amendment. A resignation may not be withdrawn, canceled or amended after it is delivered to the appointing authority, or as designated in Public Officers Law, section 31, without the consent of the appointing authority. 
4.  Unauthorized absence; when deemed a resignation. When an employee is absent without leave and without an explanation therefor for a period of ten (10) work days, such absence shall be deemed to constitute a resignation effective on the date of the commencement of such absence. The failure of an employee to return to his position within ten (10) work days following the expiration of a leave of absence, or extension thereof, without submitting an explanation therefor within such ten (10) day period shall constitute a resignation which, for purposes of determining eligibility for reinstatement, shall be deemed to be effective as of the date of the commencement of such leave of absence. Nothing herein shall be deemed to excuse the unauthorized absence of an employee or his failure to return to his position upon the expiration of an authorized leave of absence, and any such failure may be regarded as misconduct in an appropriate disciplinary proceeding. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XX) 
Annotation— The above rule (subdiv. 4) was held invalid for being in conflict with sec. 75 of the Civil Service Law in Johnson v. Director, Downstate Medical Center, State University of New York, 41 N.Y. 2d 1061, 396 N.Y.S. 2d 172, 364 N.E. 2d 837 (C. A. 1979).  
Sec. 2-5-193. - Reports of appointing officers. 
For the purpose of certification of payrolls and to enable the personnel officer to keep an official roster of the classified service as required by law, each appointing officer, from time to time, and upon the date of the official action in each case, shall report to the personnel officer as follows: 
(a)  Every appointment or employment whether probationary, temporary or otherwise, in the classified service, with the date of commencement of service and the title and compensation of the position. 
(b)  Every failure to accept an appointment under him by a person eligible therefor, with copies of the offer or notice of appointment and the reply thereto, if any. 
(c)  Every discharge during or at the end of probationary term with the date thereof. 
(d)  Every vacancy in a position, for whatever reason with the date thereof. 
(e)  Every position abolished, with the date of such abolition. 
(f)  Every change of compensation in a position, with the date thereof. 
(g)  Every promotion, giving positions from which and to which made, with the salaries and date thereof. 
(h)  Every transfer, giving the positions from which and to which made, with the date and salaries thereof. 
(i)  Every reinstatement in a position, with the date and salary thereof. 
(j)  Every leave of absence, with the date and duration thereof. 
(k)  Every new position, giving a complete description of the duties thereof. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XXI)  
Sec. 2-5-194. - Certification of payrolls. 
1.  Extended certifications. The personnel officer may certify the employment of a person for a limited or extended period. No further certification shall be necessary for the payment of salary or compensation to such person, so long as his title and salary grade remain unchanged and during such stated period, except as to the first payment for services in each fiscal year and, if required by the personnel officer, the first payment for services in the second half of each fiscal year. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent or preclude the personnel officer from terminating or rescinding a certification at any time by giving notice thereof to the appropriate fiscal or disbursing officer. 
2.  Temporary certifications. When the name of any person is first submitted for certification following his appointment, reinstatement, promotion, transfer or other change in status, and the personnel officer requires further information or time to enable him to make a final determination thereon, the personnel officer may certify such person temporarily pending such final determination. In such event the personnel officer shall immediately request the necessary additional information from the appointing authority, who shall furnish forthwith. If such information is not furnished promptly, or if the personnel officer finds, following receipt of such information, that the employment of such person is not in accordance with the law and rules, the personnel officer shall immediately terminate such certification by notice to the appropriate fiscal or disbursing officer. 
3.  Refusal or termination of certification. Upon satisfactory evidence of intention to evade the provisions of the law and of these rules in assigning any employee to perform duties other than those for which he was examined and certified or under any title not appropriate to the duties to be performed, the personnel officer shall refuse certification or terminate a certification previously made and then in force. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XXII)  
Sec. 2-5-195. - Classification plan. 
1.  Definitions. For the purpose of this rule the following definitions shall apply: 
"Class" means one or more positions sufficiently similar with respect to duties and responsibilities to be designated by a single descriptive title and treated as a unit for the purpose of recruiting, establishing salary ranges, and administering other personnel functions. 
"Class title" means the designation given under these rules to a class and to each position allocated to such class. 
"Class specification" means a formal written statement of the class which defines the general character and scope of the duties and responsibilities of positions in the class, lists typical or illustrative examples of work of positions in the class, enumerates the knowledges, skills, and abilities required for successful performance of the work and states required minimum experience and training for positions in the class. 
"Allocation" means the assignment of a position to an appropriate class as determined by the duties, responsibilities, and minimum qualification requirements of the position. 
"Reclassification" means the re-allocation of a position from one class to another because of a permanent and material change of the duties of that position. 
2.  The personnel officer shall prepare and maintain a list of class titles and class specifications for all positions in the classified service of the civil division and shall allocate all such positions to an appropriate class. 
3.  Classification of vacant positions. The appointing officer shall file a prescribed form with the personnel officer when a classified position which has or is about to become vacant is to be filled. Such form shall contain a detailed description of the duties and responsibilities of the position to be filled and a statement of suggested minimum entrance qualifications for the position. After an analysis of the position description, the personnel officer shall allocate the position to an appropriate class, or, if no appropriate class exists, shall create a new class and prepare a class specification for such position. 
4.  Classification of new positions. The appointing officer shall file a prescribed form with the personnel officer when a new position is to be created. Such form shall contain a detailed description of the duties and responsibilities of the position to be filled and a statement of suggested minimum entrance qualifications for the position. After an analysis of the position description, the personnel officer shall allocate the position to an appropriate class, or if no appropriate class exists, shall create a new class and prepare a class specification for such new class. 
5.  Reclassification. The appointing officer shall file a prescribed form with the personnel officer whenever a permanent and material change is made in the duties and responsibilities of any position. Such form shall clearly describe in detail the changes which have been made in the duties of the position. After an analysis of the changes in the duties and responsibilities of the position, the personnel officer shall allocate the position to an appropriate class, or if no appropriate class exists, shall create a new class and prepare a class specification for such position. 
6.  Notice and appeals. Any appointing officer may make application for the classification or reclassification of any position in his department, or any employee in the classified service may apply for a reclassification of his position. Such application must set forth reasons in support of the requested reclassification and must show changes in the duties and responsibilities of the position since the last determination with respect to its classification. The personnel officer shall give reasonable notice of any proposal or application for a change in classification to the appointing officer and to the employee or employees affected thereby. Any person desiring to submit facts orally or in writing in connection with the reclassification of any position shall be afforded reasonable opportunity to do so. The personnel officer shall then determine the proper allocation of the position. No employee, either by classification or reclassification, change of title or otherwise, shall be promoted, demoted, transferred, suspended or reinstated except in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Service Law and this article. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XXIII)  
Sec. 2-5-196. - Grading of positions. 
All positions shall be graded in accordance with the salary plans established by the city and the White Plains board of education. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XXIV)  
Sec. 2-5-197. - Prohibition against questions eliciting information concerning political affiliation. 
No question in any examination or application or other proceeding by the personnel officer or his examiners shall be so framed as to elicit information concerning, nor shall any other attempt be made to ascertain the political opinions or affiliations of any applicant, competitor or eligible, and all disclosures thereof shall be discountenanced by the personnel officer and his examiners. No discrimination shall be exercised, threatened or promised against or in favor of any applicant, competitor or eligible because of his political opinions or affiliation. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XXV)  
Sec. 2-5-198. - Layoff of competitive class employees. 
1.  For the purpose of this section the following terms shall mean: 
(a)  Direct line of promotion shall be strictly construed in that in order to be considered as direct line all titles must have the same generic root. 
(b)  Next lower occupied title shall mean the title in direct line of promotion immediately below the title from which the incumbent is suspended or demoted, unless no one is serving in that title in that layoff unit, in which case it shall be the closest lower title in direct line of promotion in that layoff unit in which one or more persons do serve. 
(c)  Layoff unit shall mean the White Plains Housing Authority, the White Plains Parking Authority, the White Plains School District and each department of the city. 
(d)  Satisfactory service shall mean service by an employee during which he did not receive an "Unsatisfactory" performance rating and was not found guilty of misconduct or incompetency pursuant to section 75 of the Civil Service Law which resulted in the imposition of any of the following penalties upon such employee: 
(1)  dismissal from the service, or 
(2)  suspension without pay for a period exceeding one month, or 
(3)  demotion in grade and title. 
(e)  (1) 
Permanent service shall start on that date of the incumbent's original appointment on a permanent basis in the classified service; however, in the case of disabled veterans, the date of original permanent appointment is considered to be sixty (60) months earlier than the actual date, while non-disabled veterans are considered to have been appointed thirty (30) months earlier than their actual date of appointment. For the purposes of this rule the definition of what constitutes a veteran or disabled veteran is contained in section 85 of the Civil Service Law. 
(2)  A resignation followed by a reinstatement or reappointment more than one year subsequent to the resignation constitutes a break in service. The original appointment date is to be determined from the date of reemployment; the prior service would not count. 
(3)  Temporary or provisional service preceding the original permanent appointment does not count. However, temporary or provisional employment immediately preceded and followed by permanent classified service employment does not interrupt continuous service. 
(4)  The permanent service of an employee who was transferred from another civil division shall start on the date of his original permanent appointment in the classified service in the other civil division. 
(5)  If an employee was covered-in to a classified position upon acquisition by a civil division of an agency in which he was employed, his seniority begins on the effective date of the cover-in. As between that employee and others covered-in on the same date, they shall have the seniority held by them as among themselves in the agency before the cover-in. 
2.  Suspension. 
(a)  When an occupied position in the competitive class is abolished, suspension is to be made from among those employees holding the same title in the same layoff unit as the abolished position. 
(b)  Among permanent employees, the order of suspension is the inverse of the order of their original permanent appointments in the classified service. See above definition of permanent service for veterans and disabled veterans. An exception to this rule is that the blind have absolute retention rights but only in their job status. 
(c)  A blind person may not back-date his permanent service if he also happens to be either a veteran or disabled veteran. 
(d)  A person is considered blind if he is so certified by the Commission for the Visually Handicapped of the New York State Social Services Department. 
(e)  When two or more permanent incumbents of positions in a specific title are suspended, demoted or displaced at the same time, the order in which they shall be entitled to displace shall be determined by their respective retention standing, with those having the greater retention standing entitled to displace first. 
(f)  When several employees were originally appointed on a permanent basis on the same day, their retention rights shall be determined by their rank on the eligible list from which they were appointed, that person having the highest rank having greater retention rights over those having lower ranks. 
(g)  All temporary, provisional and contingent permanent employees occupying these positions must be let go before any permanent employee is suspended from such positions. 
(h)  Probationary employees occupying such positions in the same title must also be suspended before any permanent employee in the layoff unit in that title who has completed his probationary period. Probationary employees do, however, have superior retention rights to those of contingent permanent, temporary and provisional employees. 
(i)  The order of suspension among probationary employees shall follow the same principles as that among permanent employees. 
3.  Vertical bumping. 
(a)  Vertical bumping occurs when an employee in a specific title to which there is a direct line of promotion, who is himself suspended or displaced, displaces an employee in the next lower occupied title in direct line of promotion in the same layoff unit having the least seniority if the employee who seeks to displace has greater retention standing. 
(b)  Where the layoff involves more than one position in a title, the order of displacement will be the inverse of the order of suspension. That is, the most senior of the suspended employees will be the first to displace. This shall apply to both vertical bumping and retreat. 
(c)  If an employee refuses to displace a junior incumbent, he must be laid off. This, however, does not protect the junior incumbent from being compared in retention standing with other incumbents if other positions at the higher level are being abolished. 
(d)  When a next lower title has been occupied by means of displacement regardless of when the displacement into the title has occurred, it is considered to be occupied for further displacement purposes; however, a next lower title which has all of its positions abolished at the same time as positions are abolished at the higher level cannot be considered as occupied. A title which is occupied by an incumbent, temporary, provisional, contingent permanent, probationary or permanent is considered occupied for the purposes of this section. 
4.  Retreat. 
(a)  Retreat occurs when and only when there is no lower occupied position in direct line of promotion at any level. 
(b)  An employee may retreat by displacing the incumbent with the least retention right who is serving in a position in the title in which the displacing incumbent last served on a permanent basis prior to service in the title from which he is currently suspended or displaced. Retreat may only occur where the position in the title formerly held by the displacing incumbent is occupied in the competitive class, in the same layoff unit, and at a lower salary grade; the service of the displacing incumbent while in the former title must have been satisfactory, and the junior incumbent must have less retention standing than the displacing incumbent. 
(c)  The service of the displacing incumbent in the title to which he is retreating need not have been in the same layoff unit as the one from which he is displaced. 
(d)  An employee may also displace by retreat to a position in a title he last served on a permanent basis although he had intervening service in other titles as long as his service in each of the intervening titles was on other than a permanent basis. He may also displace by retreat to a position which does not count in the computation of his continuous service. 
(e)  Where a title change has been effected to better describe the duties of a position but the duties have not substantially changed since the suspended employee last served in that title the new title will for retreat purposes be deemed to be the former title. 
5.  An employee who refuses to accept an appointment afforded by displacement for whatever reason waives all rights regarding the displacement; however, this employee's name will be entered on an appropriate preferred list. 
6.  Preferred list standing for competitive class employees on and after October 1, 1973 shall be as follows: 
(a)  On and after October 1, 1973 those employees whose positions were abolished prior to that date and who therefore had their standing on the preferred list determined by the date of their original appointment on a permanent basis in the competitive class shall retain among themselves such preferred list standing including the preferences to which they were entitled as blind, disabled veterans, and nondisabled veterans. 
(b)  Blind employees whose positions are abolished on or after October 1, 1973 shall have their preferred list standing determined by the date of their original appointment on a permanent basis in the classified service, whether or not they are also disabled veterans or non-disabled veterans; provided however, that the blind shall be granted absolute preference on the preferred list over all other employees except those disabled veterans and blind employees whose positions were abolished prior to October 1, 1973 with whose names theirs shall be interfiled. 
(c)  Disabled veterans whose positions are abolished on or after October 1, 1973 shall have their preferred list standing determined by the date of their original appointment on a permanent basis in the classified service; provided however, that the date of such original appointment shall be deemed to be sixty (60) months earlier than the actual date, determined in accordance with section 30 of the General Construction Law. 
(d)  Non-disabled veterans whose positions are abolished on or after October 1, 1973 shall have their preferred list standing determined by the date of their original appointment on a permanent basis in the classified service; provided however, that the date of such original appointment shall be deemed to be thirty (30) months earlier than the actual date, determined in accordance with section 30 of the General Construction Law. 
(e)  Non-veterans whose positions are abolished on or after October 1, 1973 shall have their preferred list standing determined by the date of their original appointment on a permanent basis in the classified service. 
(f)  The names of all persons encompassed by paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) above whose positions are abolished on or after October 1, 1973 shall be interfiled on the preferred list with the names of all non-veterans whose positions were abolished prior to October 1, 1973. 
7.  An appointing authority may take such steps as it may deem necessary in order to secure binding written commitments in advance of suspension, demotion or displacement from employees potentially affected by such suspension, demotion or displacement as to their willingness to accept reassignment or displacement. 
(Civ. Serv. Rule XXVI)  
Sec. 2-5-199. - Appendix A, exempt positions. 
City Court Marshals 
Deputy City Clerk 
Deputy Commissioner of Building 
Deputy Commissioner of Finance 
Deputy Commissioner of Public Safety 
Deputy Commissioner of Public Works (2) 
Deputy Commissioner of Recreation 
Deputy Corporation Counsel 
Deputy Director of the Parking Authority (2) 
Deputy Commissioner of Planning 
Deputy Commissioner of Recreation and Parks (O&M) 
Director of Civil Defense 
Director of Management Information Services 
Director of the White Plains Parking Authority 
Executive Assistant to the Mayor 
Executive Secretary to the Mayor 
Executive Secretary to the White Plains Housing Authority 
Internal Auditor 
Parking Guards (Part-time) 
School Auditor 
School District Clerk 
Secretary to the Library Board 
Secretary to the Real Estate Committee 
Secretary to the Zoning Board of Appeals 
Senior Work Managers 
Service Officer 
Student Workers (unlimited) 
Treasurer, Board of Education 
(Civ. Serv. Rules, App. A)  
Sec. 2-5-200. - Appendix B, noncompetitive positions. 
Account Clerks (Part-time) 
Assessor 
Assistant Automotive Mechanics 
Assistant Youth Services Aides 
Automotive Mechanics 
Automotive Mechanic Foremen 
Bakers 
Carpenters 
Carpenter Foremen 
Chauffeurs 
Cleaner-Foremen 
Clerks (Part-time) 
Clerk-Typists (Part-time) 
Cooks 
Cook-Managers 
Coordinator of Volunteers (Part-time) 
Duplicating Shop Operator (Handicapped) 
Engineering Aides (Summer) 
Engineering Assistants (Part-time) 
Food Service Helper-Cashiers 
Glaziers 
Grounds Foremen 
Groundsmen 
Junior Librarians (Part-time) 
Library Assistants (Part-time) 
Maintenance Laborers 
Maintenance Men 
Mason Foremen 
Masons 
Medical Examiner-Civil Service (Part-time) 
Messengers 
Motor Equipment Operators 
Painters 
Painter Foremen 
Personnel Officer 
Physician (Part-time) 
Police Matrons (Part-time) 
Recreation Leaders (Part-time) 
Registered Professional Nurses (School) 
Roofers 
School Crossing Guards (Part-time) 
School Physicians (Part-time) 
Sealer of Weights and Measures (Part-time) 
Semi-Skilled Laborers 
Senior Clerks (Part-time) 
Senior Clerk-Typists (Part-time) 
Senior Library Clerks (Part-time) 
Senior Librarians I (Part-time) 
Senior Parking Ramp Attendants 
Senior Typists (Part-time) 
Skilled Laborers 
Stenographers (Part-time) 
Stock Clerks (Part-time) 
Supervising Teacher Aides 
Switchboard Operators (Part-time) 
Teacher Aides 
Teacher Helpers 
Tree Trimmers 
Water Maintenance Foremen 
Water Maintenance Men No. 1 and No. 2 
Welders 
Working Foremen 
Youth Services Aides 
Youth Services Director 
(Civ. Serv. Rules, App. B)  
Sec. 2-5-201. - Appendix C, labor class. 
Aging Services Aides 
Assistant Duplicating Shop Operators 
Cleaners 
Custodial Workers 
Food Service Helpers 
Incinerator Attendants 
Laborers 
Library Pages 
Mason Helpers 
Parking Ramp Attendants 
Sanitation Men 
Sanitation Trainees 
Swimming Pool Attendants 
Youth Workers 
(Civ. Serv. Rules, App. C)  
Sec. 2-5-202. - Appendix D, unclassified service. 
All Election Officers 
All Persons employed and certified pursuant to section 35(g) of the Civil Service Law 
City Clerk 
Commissioner of Building 
Commissioner of Finance 
Commissioner of Planning 
Commissioner of Public Safety 
Commissioner of Public Works 
Commissioner of Purchase 
Commissioner of Recreation 
Corporation Counsel 
Director of the Parking Authority 
Director of Urban Renewal 
Mayor 
Members of the Common Council 
Members of the Board of Review 
Members of the Housing Authority 
Members of the Medical Board (3) 
Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals 
Examining Board of Plumbers 
(Civ. Serv. Rules, App. D)  
Chapter 2-6 - MISCELLANEOUS BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The White Plains Beautification Foundation, Inc., operates under a contract approved by the city on March 6, 1972 (1972 Minutes, p. 142). The mayor's youth commission is operating pursuant to §§ 410—426 of the Executive Law. See also ordinance adopted September 21, 1970, which established a youth services bureau. 
Charter reference— Civil art commission, § 238-c et seq.; traffic commission, § 238-j et seq.; capital projects board, § 238-q et seq.; board of library trustees, § 270; board of trustees of police pension fund, § 300; trustees of fire department pension fund, § 303. 
Cross reference— Public housing agency designated, § 2-1-4; personnel committee of common council, § 2-3-51; citizen voluntary budget advisory committee, § 2-4-26 et seq.; board of ethics, § 2-5-110; grievance board, § 2-5-155; recreation advisory committee, § 6-1-1; Jacob Purdy Park and House and White Plains Monument committee, § 6-1-2; highway safety committee, § 8-1-1; planning board, § 9-3-16 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 9-2-7; building plan review board, § 9-3-41 et seq.; board of survey, § 9-5-127.0; building code appeals committee, § 9-5-128.0; minimum housing standards ordinance appeals committee, § 9-5-130.0; Multiple Residences Law board of review, § 9-5-131.0; board of electrical control, § 9-5-1508.0; board of examiners of motion picture operators, § 9-6-5.04; examining board of stationary engineers, § 9-6-21.06; examining board of plumbers, § 9-7-108. 
Related laws reference— Housing authority, Art. A, Div. 5. 
State Law reference— White Plains Urban Renewal Agency, General Municipal Law, § 583. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-6-1. - Mayor's advisory committee for people with disabilities. 
The Common Council does hereby rename the Mayor's Advisory Committee for the Disabled to the Mayor's Advisory Committee for People with Disabilities, composed of not more than ten (10) persons and a Chairman selected by the Mayor for a three-year term. Said Committee shall have the following purposes among others: 
(1)  To increase public understanding relating to the needs of people with disabilities. 
(2)  To work for the elimination of attitudinal and architectural barriers. 
(3)  To establish a liaison between said Committee and other agencies and services acting as advocates for people with disabilities. 
(4)  To make studies of requirements of people with disabilities in the City, and make such recommendations to the Common Council as it may deem advisable. 
(5)  To take such steps and propose such programs as will enhance the lives of our citizens living with disabilities. 
(Res. of 10-2-79; Res. of 10-1-12)  
Secs. 2-6-2—2-6-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fair housing, Ch. 4-19. 
State Law reference— Commission on human rights generally, General Municipal Law, §§ 239-o—239-t. 
 
Sec. 2-6-16. - Established. 
A commission on human rights is hereby established by the city, in accordance with Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law, as enacted by chapter 376 of the Laws of 1963, as amended. 
(Res. of 7-6-65, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to create commission on human rights, General Municipal Law, § 239-o.  
Sec. 2-6-17. - Members. 
(a)  The commission on human rights shall consist of not less than nine nor more than fifteen members, to be appointed by the mayor, the mayor to designate one of such members to be chairman, who shall serve as chairman at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  Of the members first appointed, one-third shall be appointed for terms of office of one year each, one-third for terms of office of two (2) years each and one-third for terms of office of three (3) years each. Thereafter, all appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for terms of office of three (3) years each. Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of terms of office shall be filled for the unexpired terms of the offices so filled. 
(c)  Unless salaries are provided for the members of the commission, or for the chairman, they shall serve without salary but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses necessarily incurred in the discharge of official duties. 
(d)  In making appointments to the commission, the mayor shall take into consideration the various religious, racial, nationality and political groups in the community. 
(Res. of 7-6-65, §§ 2—5)  
Sec. 2-6-18. - Officers and employees. 
The commission on human rights hereby created shall have the power and authority, subject to applicable civil service requirements, to employ an executive director, a secretary and such attorneys, experts and other employees as may be necessary, within the amount made available by the common council. 
(Res. of 7-6-65)  
Sec. 2-6-19. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the commission on human rights as provided by Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law, to: 
(1)  Foster mutual respect and understanding among all racial, religious and nationality groups in the community. 
(2)  Make such studies in any field of human relationship in the community as in its judgment will aid in effectuating its general purposes. 
(3)  Inquire into incidents of tension and conflict among or between various racial, religious and nationality groups, and to take such action as may be designed to alleviate such tension and conflict. 
(4)  Conduct and recommend such educational programs as, in its judgment, will increase good will among inhabitants of the community and open new opportunities into all phases of community life for all inhabitants. 
(Res. of 7-6-65)  
Sec. 2-6-20. - Obligations. 
The commission on human rights shall discharge the following obligations as provided by Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law: 
(1)  Receive complaints of alleged discrimination because of race, creed, color or national origin, seek the active assistance of the state commission on human rights in the solution of complaints which fall within the jurisdiction of the state commission and prepare its own plans in the case of other complaints with a view to reducing and eliminating such alleged discrimination through the process of conference, conciliation and persuasion. 
(2)  Hold conferences and other public meetings in the interest of and the constructive resolution of racial, religious and nationality group tensions and the prejudice and discrimination occasioned thereby. 
(3)  Issue such publications and reports of investigation as, in its judgment, will tend to effectuate the purposes of Article 12-D of the General Municipal Law. 
(4)  Enlist the cooperation and participation of the various racial, religious and nationality groups, community organizations, industrial and labor organizations, media of mass communication, fraternal and benevolent associations, and other groups in an educational campaign devoted to fostering among the diverse groups of the community mutual esteem, justice and equity. 
(5)  Encourage and stimulate agencies under the jurisdiction of the common council, which created the commission, to take such action as will fulfill the purposes of said Article 12-D. 
(6)  Submit an annual report to the common council. 
(Res. of 7-6-65)  
Secs. 2-6-21—2-6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSERVATION BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-6-31. - Established. 
A conservation board is hereby established. 
(Res. of 5-17-71, § 1; Res. of 9-7-93) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 239-x, subdiv. 1.  
Sec. 2-6-32. - Members. 
The conservation board shall consist of not less than three (3) nor more than nine (9) members, two (2) of which may be between sixteen (16) and twenty-one (21) years of age, to be appointed by the common council for a term not exceeding two (2) years. The common council shall designate one of such members to be chairman, who shall serve as chairman at the pleasure of the common council. All such members shall serve without salary. 
(Res. of 5-17-71, § 2; Res. of 9-7-93) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, General Municipal Law, § 239-x, subdiv. 3.  
Sec. 2-6-33. - Functions. 
The conservation board shall have the duties and obligations as provided by article 12-F of the General Municipal Law to: 
(1)  Conduct researches into the land area in the city. 
(2)  Seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes and to cooperate with other official municipal bodies active in the area of community planning for the city. 
(3)  It may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and booklets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its work. 
(4)  It shall keep an index of all open areas within the city with the plan of obtaining information pertinent to proper utilization of such lands including lands owned by the state, or any other municipality within the state or by the city itself. 
(5)  It shall keep an index of all open marsh lands, swamps and all other wet lands in a like manner, and may recommend to the common council, a program for the better promotion, development or utilization of all such areas. 
(6)  It shall keep accurate records of its meetings and actions and shall file an annual report with the common council on or before the thirty-first day of December of each and every year. 
(7)  In addition to the foregoing, carry out any other duties, tasks, or responsibilities, consistent with the objectives of article 12-F of the General Municipal Law assigned to it by resolution of the common council. 
(Res. of 5-17-71; Res. of 9-7-93) 
State Law reference— Conservation advisory council authorized, General Municipal Law, § 239-x., subdiv. 1.  
TITLE III. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION[1] 
CHAPTER 
 3-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 3-2  RESERVED 
 3-3  AIR POLLUTION 
 3-4  NOISE POLLUTION 
 3-5  STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS TO PROTECT AND PRESERVE ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE SITES AND FEATURES 
 3-6  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 3-7  COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) PROGRAM 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Conservation commission, § 2-6-31 et seq.; solid waste disposal, Ch. 7-6; sewers and drains, Ch. 7-7. 
 
Chapter 3-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 3-1-1. - Prevention of watershed contamination. 
(a)  No person shall enter upon the area known as the White Plains Watershed, shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the City of White Plains as Ward 5, Block 66, Lot 9, without express written permission of the commissioner of public works. Orchard Street, Old Road to Kensico, Reservoir Road, Hall Avenue and Nethermont Avenue, being public streets, are not affected hereby. Lawful existing easements and rights-of-way are not affected hereby. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or drain into, throw, cast, deposit or lay, or direct, suffer or permit any servant, agent or employee to discharge or drain into, cast, deposit or lay any substances or materials of any kind whatsoever upon the said White Plains Watershed without the express written permission of the commissioner. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable on conviction for a first offense by a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both; and for a second or subsequent offense by a fine not exceeding seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.032; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 1, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 3-3 - AIR POLLUTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 7, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 3-3, §§ 3-3-1—3-3-9, 3-3-21—3-3-26, 3-3-34—3-3-39, 3-3-48—3-3-58, 3-3-66—3-3-84, 3-3-91—3-3-97, 3-3-106—3-3-110, 3-3-121—3-3-128, 3-3-136—3-3-146, and 3-3-161—3-3-165, and enacted a new Ch. 3-3 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3-3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted June 7, 1971. 
Charter reference— General powers of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Fires in parks, § 6-2-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-3-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "White Plains Air Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-2. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to safeguard the air resources of the City of White Plains (the "City") from pollution by: 
(a)  Controlling or abating existing air pollution; 
(b)  Preventing new air pollution, under a program that shall be consistent with the declaration of policy stated in this chapter and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
(c)  Regulating the burning of combustible fuels and certain solid combustible material. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-3. - Declaration of policy. 
It is declared to be the policy of the City to maintain a reasonable degree of purity of the air resources of the City, which shall be consistent with the public health and welfare and the public enjoyment thereof, the commercial and residential development of the City, the propagation and protection of flora and fauna, and the protection of physical property and other resources, and to that end to require the use of all available practical and useful methods to prevent and control air pollution in the City. 
Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any filing required by State, County or Federal agencies. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Air contaminant: Any particulate matter or any gas or any combination thereof, other than uncombined water vapor or natural air. 
(2)  AP-42: AP-42 means the United States Environmental Protection Agency publication AP-42. Compilation of Air Pollution Emissions factors. Volume I: Stationary Point and Area Sources (fifth edition 1995 or current active version thereof). 
(3)  Area Source Facility: A facility that emits less than 10 tons a year of any single air toxin and less than 25 tons per year of any combination of air toxins. Most Boilers covered by the Area Source Rule are located in commercial and institutional facilities. Commercial Boilers include those found in office buildings, stores and malls, laundries, apartment buildings and hotels. Institutional Boilers are found in locations such as medical centers (hospital, nursing homes, etc.) and educational facilities. 
(4)  Biodiesel: A fuel, designated B100, that is composed exclusively of mono-alkyl esters of long chain fatty acids derived from feedstock and that meets the specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials designation D 6751-09a or current active version thereof. 
(5)  Bioheating fuel: A fuel comprised of Biodiesel blended with petroleum heating oil that meets the specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials designation D 396-09a or other specifications as determined by the Commissioner. 
(6)  Boiler: A closed vessel in which steam or hot water is generated under pressure by the application of heat from combustible fuels. 
(7)  Burner: An apparatus for burning fuel that is used to heat a building, provide hot water to the occupants of a building, or for any other purpose. 
(8)  BTU input: The quantity of heat generated by a fuel fed into a furnace under conditions of complete combustion, measured in British Thermal Units. BTU input includes sensible heat, calculated above sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit available from materials introduced into the combustion zone. 
(9)  Capacity rating: The fuel burning equipment manufacturer's guaranteed maximum BTU input rating in millions of BTU's per hour, or the maximum four-hour actual rate, whichever is higher. 
(10)  Commissioner: The Commissioner of Building of the City of White Plains. 
(11)  Control apparatus: Any device which prevents or controls the emission of any air contaminant. 
(12)  Department: The Department of Building of the City of White Plains. 
(13)  Equipment used in a manufacturing process: Equipment in which the preponderance of the air contaminant emitted is caused by the manufacturing process. 
(14)  Excess air: The quantity of air which exceeds the theoretical quantity of air required for complete combustion. 
(15)  Fuel: A material, such as coal, oil, wood or gas, that is burned to produce heat or power. 
(16)  Fuel Oil #2: Fuel oil grade No. 2 as classified by American Society of Testing and Materials Standard D396-05 or current active version thereof and available for sale and purchase in the State of New York. 
(17)  Fuel Oil #4: Fuel oil grade No. 4 as classified by American Society of Testing and Materials Standard D396-05 or current active version thereof and available for sale and purchase in the State of New York. 
(18)  Fuel Oil #6: Fuel oil grade No. 6 as classified by American Society of Testing and Materials Standard D396-05 or current active version thereof and available for sale and purchase in the State of New York. 
(19)  Heating Oil: Oil refined for the purpose of use as fuel for combustion in a heating system and that meets the specification of the American Society of Testing and Materials designation D396-09a or other specifications as determined by the Commissioner. 
(20)  Major Source Facility: A facility that emits more than 10 tons a year of any single air toxin and 25 tons or more per year of any combination of air toxins. The majority of Major Source Boilers are located at industrial facilities such as refineries and manufacturing plants. 
(21)  NOx: The pollutant Oxides of Nitrogen (NO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and other oxides of nitrogen expressed as nitrogen dioxide. 
(22)  Open air: All space outside of buildings, stacks, or exterior ducts. 
(23)  Operating Certificate: A document issued by the Commissioner granting permission to operate equipment. Operating certificates shall be issued upon proof of inspection. 
(24)  Particulate: Any matter dispersed in the atmosphere, whether solid or liquid, in which the individual particles are larger than single molecules (about 0.0002 µ in diameter), but smaller than about 500 µ. Settleable particulates, or dustfall, is normally in the size range greater than 10 µ, and suspended particulates range below 10 µ in diameter. 
(25)  PM: The pollutant Particulate Matter that is the term for a mixture of solid particles and liquid droplets found in the air. 
(26)  Process weight: The total weight of the materials introduced into any specific process including solid fuels charged, but excluding liquid and gaseous fuels, and combustion air. 
(27)  Process weight per hour: The process weight divided by the number of hours from the beginning of any specific process to the completion of the process excluding any time during which the equipment used in the process is idle. 
(28)  Professional certification: Certification of information or test results made in accordance with Section 7202(2) of the Education Law by a licensed professional engineer. 
(29)  Residual fuel oil: The current definition of fuel oil grades No. 5 and 6 as classified by the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
(30)  Solid fossil fuels: Anthracite, bituminous, sub-bituminous coal and coke, as currently defined by the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
(31)  Standard smoke chart: The Ringelmann Chart, as published by the U. S. Bureau of Mines, photographically reduced in size for use in the field. 
(32)  Work Permit: An installation or alteration permit issued by the Commissioner in accordance with the City of White Plains Municipal Code and the White Plains Supplemental Building Code. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-5. - Construction. 
This chapter is intended to be consistent with applicable federal, state and City law and shall be construed, whenever necessary, to achieve such consistency. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSIONER OF BUILDING 
 
Sec. 3-3-6. - General powers. 
Subject to the provisions of applicable law, the Commissioner may take such action as may be necessary to control the emission of an air contaminant which causes or may cause, by itself or in combination with other air contaminants in the open air, detriment to the safety, health, welfare or comfort of the public or to a part thereof, or damage to property or business. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-7. - Applications for operating certificates and renewals of operating certificates. 
(a)  An application for an operating certificate or for the renewal of an operating certificate shall be made by the owner, the owner's agent, or lessee of the equipment or apparatus, on forms furnished by the Building Department. 
(b)  A separate application is required for each unit of equipment or apparatus, unless identical units of equipment or apparatus are to be installed, altered or operated in an identical manner in the same building. 
(c)  Each application shall be signed by the applicant, or certified by a licensed professional engineer, or a registered architect as to the accuracy of the technical information concerning the equipment or apparatus contained in the application, plans and other papers submitted. For the renewal of a certificate, the applicant's professional engineer or architect shall certify that the equipment satisfies the provisions of this chapter. The signature of the applicant shall constitute an agreement that the applicant will assume responsibility for the installation, alteration or use of the equipment or apparatus concerned in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  An application for the renewal of an operating certificate shall be postmarked or date stamped by the Department upon personal delivery, no later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the certificate. 
(e)  Per the City of White Plains Supplemental Building Code, the person who actually installs fuel burning equipment is required to obtain an installation permit, while under this chapter the owner or lessee of the equipment is also required to obtain an operating certificate. This is in addition to the installation permit required. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-8. - Inspection and samples. 
(a)  The Department may inspect at any reasonable time and in a reasonable manner any burner, equipment, apparatus, device, or fuel, which affects or may affect the emission of air contaminant, including but not limited to the premises where the burner, equipment, apparatus, or fuel is used, or where the fuel is stored, purchased, sold, or offered for sale for use in the City. 
(b)  The Department may inspect at any reasonable time in a reasonable manner any record relating to the use of any burner, equipment or apparatus which affects or may affect the emission of air contaminant, or relating to the use of fuel, or the distribution, storage or transportation of fuel for use in the City. Fuel information tickets may be inspected only during business hours. 
(c)  If an authorized employee of the Department obtains a sample of air contaminant, fuel, process material or other material which affects or may affect the emission of air contaminant during the course of an inspection, a receipt for the sample obtained shall be given to the owner, the owner's agent, or lessee of the equipment or fuel, prior to leaving the premises. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access into a public area, mechanical room, boiler room or utility space of a multiple dwelling or commercial facility nor shall any person refuse entry or access into any premises to an authorized employee of the Department who presents appropriate credentials when such entry or access is warranted for the purpose of inspecting any burner, equipment, apparatus, device, fuel, or record pursuant to subsection (a) or (b). In the event such request is refused the Commissioner shall have the power to apply to the courts to obtain an order, warrant, or other remedy to obtain such entry. 
(e)  No person shall interfere with or obstruct the Commissioner or any departmental employee in carrying out any duty for the Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-9. - Testing by order of the commissioner. 
(a)  If the Commissioner has reasonable cause to believe that any burner, equipment apparatus, device or fuel is in violation of this chapter, the Commissioner may order the owner, the owner's agent, or lessee, of the equipment or fuel to conduct such tests as are necessary in the opinion of the Commissioner to determine whether the equipment, its operation, or the fuel is in violation of this chapter, or whether material used in any manufacturing process is contributing to any violation of this chapter, and to submit the test results to the Department within ten (10) days after the tests are completed. 
(b)  Such test shall be conducted in a manner approved by the Commissioner. If any part of the test is conducted at a place other than the site where the burner, equipment, apparatus, device or fuel is located, that part of the test shall be performed by a certified testing laboratory. The entire test results shall be reviewed and certified by a New York State Professional Engineer. 
(c)  The owner, the owner's agent, or lessee, shall notify the Department of the time and place of a test at least seven (7) days before the commencement of a test. Reasonable facilities shall be made available for the Department to witness the test. 
(d)  If, in the opinion of the Commissioner, tests by the Department are necessary in addition to those conducted by the owner, the owner's agent, or lessee of the burner, equipment, apparatus, or device, the Commissioner may order the owner, the owner's agent, or lessee, to provide sampling holes at such points in the flue stack as the Commissioner may reasonably request, to provide a power source suitably close to the points of testing, and to make any other accommodations to facilitate the testing, exclusive of sampling and sensoring devices. Such provisions shall be made at the expense of the owner, the owner's agent, or lessee of the burner, equipment, apparatus or device. The owner, agent, or lessee shall be furnished with copies of the analytical results of the samples collected. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
ARTICLE III. - FUEL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 3-3-10. - Use of proper fuel in fuel burning equipment. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the use of a kind or grade of fuel in fuel burning equipment that is not designed to burn that kind or grade of fuel; and 
(b)  No person shall cause or permit the burning of fuel oil #6 as classified by the American Society for Testing Materials after July 31, 2016, or the burning of fuel oil #4 as classified by the American Society for Testing Materials after June 30, 2020. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-11. - Sulfur content of fuel. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, purchase, or fire any fuel which exceeds the applicable sulfur-in-fuel limitations established by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation in 6 NYCR SubPart 225-1. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-12. - Biodiesel content of fuel. 
(a)  After July 31, 2016, no person shall cause or permit the use in any building in the City or delivery to any building in the City for use in such building, heating oil that is fuel oil #2 or #4 containing less than (2) two percent biodiesel by volume. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to the use or delivery of heating oil for use in an emergency generator. 
(b)  The Commissioner may authorize the use of any renewable fuel in heating systems if it is determined that such fuel meets an applicable American Society for Testing and Materials standard or other standard as determined by the Commissioner, and the emissions from such fuel contain equal or lesser amounts of sulfur dioxide, PM and NOx than the emissions from fuel oil #2. 
(c)  The Commissioner may waive the requirements of paragraph (a) in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. A waiver may be issued for a particular type of Boiler or Burner if the Commissioner finds that: 
(1)  A sufficient quantity of bioheating fuel containing two (2) percent biodiesel is not available in the City for that Boiler or Burner type; 
(2)  The use of bioheating fuel would void the manufacturer's warranty for that Boiler or Burner type; or 
(3)  There is no applicable American Society of Testing and Materials standard or other standard as determined by the Commissioner to govern the specification of the bioheating fuel for purposes of receiving bids and enforcing contracts. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-13. - Permits and certificates of operation for boilers and burners. 
(a)  Existing Boilers and Burners. 
(1)  An owner who holds a valid Certificate of Operation for a Boiler and/or Burner that uses #4 oil may file an Amendment to convert the Boiler/and or Burner to use #2 oil and/or natural gas. An owner who holds a valid Certificate of Operation for a Boiler or Burner that uses #6 oil may file such an Amendment to convert the Boiler and/or Burner to use #2 oil, #4 oil and/or natural gas. An Amendment pursuant to this paragraph shall not require the replacement of a Boiler and/or Burner. 
(2)  The Commissioner will not approve any Amendment for a previously issued work permit or Certificate of Operation to convert a Boiler and/or Burner from using #2 oil, #4 oil and/or natural gas to using #6 oil or from #2 oil and/or natural gas to using #4 oil. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, the Commissioner shall not issue a work permit or a Certificate of Operation for a Boiler and/or Burner that uses #2 oil, #4 oil, #6 oil and/or natural gas unless the PM and NOx emissions of such Boiler and/or Burner meets any binding emissions standard established by state and/or federal law or regulation. 
(4)  The Commissioner may issue a renewal of a Certificate of Operation for a Boiler and/or Burner that uses #2 oil, #4 oil and/or natural gas in accordance with the White Plains Supplemental Building Code, Administration and Enforcement § (I)(1). 
(b)  New Installations. 
(1)  No permits shall be issued for the new installation of a Boiler or Burner that uses #4 or #6 oil. All applications, submitted in accordance with the White Plains Supplemental Building Code, Administration and Enforcement § (I)(1), for a work permit for a Boiler and/or Burner must specify that the equipment uses #2 oil and/or natural gas. 
(2)  In cases where a work permit has been issued prior to the effective date of these provisions for a Boiler and/or Burner that uses #4 oil, or #6 oil, but where a Certificate of Operation has not yet been issued, the owner of the equipment must file an Amendment specifying the use of #2 oil and/or natural gas. 
(c)  Sunset Provision. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, after June 30, 2020, all applications for a Certificate of Operation for a Boiler and/or Burner must specify that the equipment uses #2 oil and/or natural gas. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-14. - Records of shipments or deliveries. 
(a)  Persons selling fuels for use in the City shall maintain records of such sales of all fuel containing sulfur and shall make these records available for inspection by the Commissioner or duly authorized representative during normal business hours. The records shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of shipment or delivery; and 
(2)  The address to which the fuel is delivered; and 
(3)  The quantity, kind or grade of fuel; and 
(4)  The percentage of sulfur by weight of the fuel; and 
(5)  Any additional information, evidence or documentation required by the Commissioner. 
(b)  All records relating to the use of fuel, or the distribution, storage or transportation of fuel for use in the City shall be retained for not less than one year for inspection by the Department. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
ARTICLE IV. - EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE 
 
Sec. 3-3-15. - Sulfur exemption certificate. 
A sulfur exemption certificate shall be considered by the Commissioner in conjunction with the installation or operating permit application. The provisions of this article concerning testing, action on applications, conditions of certificate, suspension or revocation and transfers shall be applicable to sulfur exemption certificates, temporary sulfur exemption certificates or a renewal of either. 
(a)  The Commissioner may grant a certificate of exemption from the sulfur content restriction of Section 3-3-11 of this Code if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the fuel burning equipment is operated in such a manner and has such control apparatus as to continuously prevent the emission of any sulfur compound in an amount greater than that which would have been emitted from the fuel burning equipment in the absence of control apparatus and using fuel which complies with the sulfur content restriction permitted by Section 3-3-11. 
(b)  The Commissioner may grant a temporary sulfur exemption certificate if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the application is for the purpose of conducting an experimental operation prior to application for a sulfur exemption certificate. 
(c)  If a sulfur exemption certificate or a temporary sulfur exemption certificate is granted, the Commissioner shall require the installation of an air contaminant recorder capable of continuously recording emissions of sulfur compounds. The holder of the certificate shall be required to submit the record made by the air contaminant recorder to the Department every three months. The installation shall be made at the expense of the holder of the certificate. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-16. - Information required on applications for sulfur exemption certificates. 
An application to obtain a sulfur exemption certificate shall describe in detail the following: 
(a)  The kind and amount of fuel for which the sulfur exemption certificate is sought; and 
(b)  The location of the fuel burning equipment; 
(c)  The manner of operation of the fuel burning equipment; and 
(d)  Any additional information, evidence or documentation which may be required by the Commissioner. 
An exemption certificate shall expire 12 months after issuance unless renewed in writing by the Commissioner. However, a sulfur exemption certificate shall become void in the event the record, made by the air contaminant recorder in accordance with Section 3-3-15, indicates that any sulfur compound is emitted in an amount greater than permitted by Section 3-3-11. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-17. - Testing before granting or renewing sulfur exemption certificates. 
(a)  Before a sulfur exemption certificate is granted or renewed, the Commissioner may require the applicant to conduct such tests as are necessary in the opinion of the Commissioner to determine the kind or amount of air contaminant emitted from the equipment or to determine whether the equipment or apparatus, its operation, or the fuel or material used is contributing to or is in violation of this chapter. The tests shall be made at the expense of the applicant. 
(b)  Such tests shall be conducted, reviewed and certified as provided by Section 3-3-9 of this Code. The applicant shall notify the Department of the time and place of a test as provided by Section 3-3-9 of this Code. Reasonable facilities shall be made available for the Department to witness the test. 
(c)  If in the opinion of the Commissioner tests by the Department are necessary, the facilities for such tests, exclusive of sampling and sensory devices, shall be furnished by and at the expense of the owner, the owner's agent, or lessee, as provided by Section 3-3-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-18. - Operating certificate exception. 
An operating certificate is not required for fuel burning equipment, which is in a building to be demolished to permit the construction of a new building if: 
(a)  The new building application has been approved by the Department of Building; and 
(b)  Certificates of eviction have been issued by the state office of rent control, where required; and 
(c)  A final order for eviction has been issued. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-19. - Expiration and renewal of exemption certificates. 
(a)  A sulfur exemption certificate shall be valid for one year from the date granted or renewed, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Application for renewal shall be made by the holder of the certificate, and shall be postmarked or date stamped by the Department on personal delivery no later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the certificate. The Commissioner may renew a sulfur exemption certificate if he is satisfied that the provisions of this chapter and the conditions and terms contained in the certificate will be met. 
(b)  A temporary sulfur exemption certificate shall be valid for three (3) months from the date granted or renewed, unless sooner suspended or revoked. The Commissioner may not renew a temporary certificate more than once and then only upon application postmarked or Department date stamped no later than fourteen (14) days prior to the expiration of the original temporary certificate.  
ARTICLE V. - EMISSION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 3-3-20. - Jurisdiction. 
This article broadens the jurisdiction of the Department with respect to the emission of air contaminants. The provisions of this article apply to the emission into the air space over the City of air contaminants from sources outside of, as well as from sources within, the City. Thus, it is a violation of this chapter to emit air contaminants if such contaminants exceed the density or opacity standards after the plume crosses the jurisdictional boundary of the City, or if such contaminants detrimentally affect the safety, health, welfare or comfort of any inhabitants of the City, or cause damage to property or business in this City. The prohibited act, the emission, is explicitly defined as the dispersion into the open air of the City of air contaminant, the geographic location of the place of emission is not a factor in defining the violation. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-21. - Visible emissions monitoring, EPA Method 9, Visual Opacity (40 CFR Part 60 Appendix a-4). 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the emission of an air contaminant of: 
(1)  A density which appears as dark or darker than number 2 on the standard smoke chart or of an opacity which obscures vision to a degree equal to or greater than smoke number 2 density on the standard smoke chart; or 
(2)  A density which appears as dark or darker than number 1 on the standard smoke chart, but less than number 2 on said chart, or of such opacity as to obscure vision to a degree equal to or greater than smoke of number 1 density of the standard smoke chart, but less than number 2 on said chart, if such an emission continues for longer than two minutes in the aggregate in any sixty minute period. 
(b)  The density or opacity of an air contaminant shall be measured at the point of its emission, except: 
(1)  When the point of emission cannot be readily observed, it may be measured at an observable point on the plume nearest the point of emission or 
(2)  In the case of air contaminant emitted from a source outside of the City, it shall be measured after the plume crosses the jurisdictional boundary of the City. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-22. - Visible emissions monitoring, EPA Method 22, fugative emissions (40 CFR Part 60 Appendix A-7). 
(a)  The owner or operator shall conduct 10 minute observations (during normal operation) each operating day the affected facility fires fuel for which an opacity standard is applicable using Method 22 of appendix A-7 of Part 60 and demonstrate that the sum of the occurrences of any visible emissions is not in excess of 5 percent of the observation period (i.e., 30 seconds per 10 minute period). If the sum of the occurrence of any visible emissions is greater than 30 seconds during the initial 10 minute observation, immediately conduct a 30 minute observation. If the sum of the occurrence of visible emissions is greater than 5 percent of the observation period (i.e., 90 seconds per 30 minute period), the owner or operator shall either document and adjust the operation of the facility and demonstrate within 24 hours that the sum of the occurrence of visible emissions is equal to or less than 5 percent during a 30 minute observation (i.e., 90 seconds) or conduct a new Method 9 of appendix A-4 of Part 60 performance test using the procedures in paragraph (a) of this section within 45 calendar days according to the requirements in §60.45c(a)(8). 
(b)  If no visible emissions are observed for 10 operating days during which an opacity standard is applicable, observations can be reduced to once every 7 operating days during which an opacity standard is applicable. If any visible emissions are observed, daily observations shall be resumed. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-23. - Sulfur compounds from equipment used in a manufacturing process: volume standard. 
No person shall cause or permit the emission of air contaminant from equipment used in a manufacturing process if the air contaminant emitted as measured in the flue contains sulfur compounds, calculated as sulfur dioxide, of more than five hundred(500) parts per million. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-24. - Emission of particulate matter from fuel burning equipment or equipment used in a manufacturing process; weight-rate standard. 
No person shall cause or permit the emission of particulate matter in excess of .30 pounds per million BTU heat input from any fuel burning equipment. 
If two or more fuel burning units are connected to a single flue, the total capacity rating of all fuel burning units connected to the flue shall be the capacity rating for the purpose of computing the amount of particulate matter, which may be emitted. If a single fuel burning unit is connected to two or more flues the capacity rating of the single fuel burning unit shall be the capacity rating for the purpose of computing the amount of particulate matter, which may be emitted. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-25. - Emission standards for stationary combustion equipment. 
EPA EMISSION STANDARDS FOR STATIONARY COMBUSTION EQUIPMENT 
Regulatory Citation 	Emission Standards 
40 C.F.R. Part 60 Subpart Dc 	SO2, PM and opacity emissions standards applicable to steam generating units that commenced construction, modification or reconstruction, after June 19, 1989 having a heat input capacity of 100 MMBtu/hr or less, but greater than or equal to 10 MMBtu/hr. 
40 C.F.R. Part 60 Subpart GG 	SO2 and NOx emissions standards applicable to stationary gas turbines that commenced construction, modification or reconstruction after October 3, 1977 having a heat input at peak load greater than 10 MMBtu/hr. 
40 C.F.R. Part 63 Subpart JJJJJJ 	Filterable PM, mercury and CO emission limits applicable to certain categories of industrial, commercial, and institutional boilers located at facility designated as an area source of hazardous air pollutants. 
6 NYCRR Part 211 	General prohibition for limiting opacity emitted from any source of air pollution. 
6 NYCRR Part 225-1 	Limitations on sulfur content in fuels used in combustion sources. 
6 NYCRR Part 227-1 	PM and opacity emissions applicable to combustion sources. 
6 NYCRR Part 227-2 	NOx emissions limits applicable to combustion sources located at a facility designated as a major source of NOx emissions. 
 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2) 
_____ 
Sec. 3-3-26. - Emission of air contaminant; concealment and masking restricted. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit the installation or use of any device or use of any means which, without resulting in a reduction in the total amount of air contaminant emitted, conceals an emission of air contaminant, which would otherwise violate Sections 3-3-20 through 3-3-22 of this Code. 
(b)  No person shall cause or permit the installation or use of any device or use of any means designed to mask the emission of an air contaminant, which causes or may cause detriment to the health, safety or welfare of any person. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec 3-3-27. - Burning of solid combustible material. 
No person shall cause or permit the burning of any fuel or combustible material in a fireplace, fireplace insert, or wood burning stove other than clean, dry, untreated wood or wood related products or other products listed in the manufacturers literature as being approved for use in the specific appliance. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
ARTICLE VI. - APPEALS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 3-3-28. - Appeal of commissioner's action. 
(a)  When the Commissioner suspends or revokes an operating certificate or a sulfur exemption certificate the holder of the certificate or other aggrieved party affected thereby may request a hearing by the Commissioner to reconsider the action. The request for a hearing shall be served within five (5) days following the service of the notice of suspension or revocation, exclusive of the day of service, upon an employee of the Department designated for this purpose. 
(b)  The request for a hearing shall be addressed to the Commissioner and shall contain: 
(1)  The full name of the person making the request, and if the person making the request is not the holder of the certificate, a statement as to the relationship to the holder of the certificate; 
(2)  The location of the equipment or apparatus listed in the certificate to which the request relates; 
(3)  The date of the issuance of the operating certificate or sulfur exemption certificate; 
(4)  The date of the action taken by the Commissioner and the nature of the action; 
(5)  A statement that a hearing by the Commissioner to reconsider the action is requested; and 
(6)  The signature of the person making the request, or if such person is not an individual, the signature and title of a partner or other individual of the partnership or group, or of an officer of the corporation. 
(7)  The person making the request may submit a memorandum containing the objections to the action of the Commissioner within three (3) days following service of the request of a hearing exclusive of the day of service. 
(8)  Unless the Commissioner orders that the operating certificate be suspended or revoked during the pendency of the hearing, such suspension or revocation shall be stayed by the effective service of a notice for reconsideration until final determination by the Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Sec. 3-3-29. - Penalty for violations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, and on the first conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine up to twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) a day for each offense, or to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days for each offense, or to both such fine and imprisonment for each such offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided above, in each instance where the Commissioner has issued an order directing the taking of preventative and/or corrective measures pursuant to this chapter, any person who is convicted of failing to comply with such order within the time fixed by such order shall be subject to an additional penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day during which such offense continues, commencing on the first day after the expiration of the time fixed by the order of the Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 7-7-14(2), § 2)  
Chapter 3-4 - NOISE POLLUTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Noise by peddlers, hawkers and solicitors, § 4-9-4. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-4-1. - Legislative determinations. 
As a legislative determination it is found and declared that: 
(a)  The making and creation of loud, unnecessary and unusual noises within the limits of the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing. 
(b)  The making, creation, and maintenance of loud, unnecessary, unnatural, or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual or unnatural in their time, place, or use, do affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare or prosperity of the residents and persons within the city. 
(c)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibition hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants and persons within its limits. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 1)  
Sec. 3-4-2. - Prohibitions; enumerations of restricted noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, permit, allow, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise or any loud noise within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are determined and declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, namely: 
(1)  The using, playing or operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any receiving or playing radio set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph recording or playing device, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, in such manner or volume as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or occupants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient, normal hearing by the person or persons who are in the room or enclosure or place in which such equipment or device is operated and who are involuntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be distinctly audible to persons with normal hearing at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the room or building or structure in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(2)  The playing, using, or operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or any other machine or device or equipment for the producing or reproducing of voices or sound, which is directed to or cast or audible upon the public streets, for the purpose of commercial or business advertising or attracting the attention of the public or persons passing by to any abutting or nearby building or structure or place or any commercial or public operation conducted therein or thereon. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, parks or places, or a place of business or other establishment open to the public, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, repose, health, or peace of the neighboring inhabitants or occupants in any place of work or in any dwelling, hotel, or other residence, or of other persons in the vicinity of such acts. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing clearly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the source of the noise shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(4)  The keeping of any animal, bird or insect which, by causing frequent or continued loud noise or noises, shall unreasonably disturb the peace, comfort, or repose of neighboring inhabitants or occupants. Animal, bird or insect noises clearly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the source of the noise shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(5)  The erection, construction (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day of the week and other than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the commissioner of building, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. If the commissioner of building or commissioner of public works should determine that the public health and safety will not be seriously impaired by excavation, or the erection, construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or structure, or the construction or repair of streets and highways, within the hours of 7:00 p.m. and the following 7:00 a.m., and if either shall further determine that substantial loss or great inconvenience would result to any party in interest by requiring work to be limited to the daytime hours, he may grant permission for such work under his jurisdiction to be done within specified hours between 7:00 p.m. and the following 7:00 a.m., upon application being made when the permit is issued or during the progress of the work. 
(6)  The creation of any excessive or unnecessary noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, public library, church or courthouse while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes with the proceedings or workings of such school, institution, church or courthouse, or which disturbs or annoys patients and employees in the hospital provided conspicuous signs are displayed on such streets indicating that the same is a school, institution, public library, church, courthouse, or hospital zone. 
(7)  The operation of any machinery, commercial motor vehicle, refrigerator unit on trucks, equipment, pump, exhaust fan, attic fan, air-conditioning apparatus, snow plows or blowers, or similar mechanical device, loading or unloading of vehicles, or use of any instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of neighboring inhabitant or occupant, in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week. Such noise being clearly audible at any neighboring dwelling, hotel or other type of residence shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. This paragraph shall not apply to municipal vehicles. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any public utility company operating and maintaining parking facilities for its employees in the city may operate snow plows or blowers to clear snow from such parking facility at hours other than those specified above by obtaining permission therefor from the department of public safety. The request for such permission shall specify the hour at which such operation is desired and shall be made to the commissioner during business hours and at other times to the police desk officer then on duty at police headquarters. The commissioner or such officer may grant such permission if he determines, upon consultation with the department of public works, that snow conditions and accumulations or projected accumulations require such operation at the hours requested. Any request and the disposition thereof shall be recorded on forms provided by the commissioner or on the log of such police desk officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the operation of any air-conditioning equipment or part thereof, or any other type of mechanical equipment or apparatus installed on or attached to premises, to make, continue or cause to be made, excessive noise so as to cause annoyance, inconvenience or detriment to the public or to any person or persons. Noise shall be considered excessive if the sound level from the air-conditioning unit or any other type of mechanical equipment or apparatus installed on or attached to premises exceeds fifty-five (55) decibels as measured on the A, B or C scale of a General Radio Company type 1565-A level meter or American Standard Association approved equivalent, when the meter is located at a point not nearer than the property line nearest such air-conditioning unit, mechanical equipment or apparatus, nor nearer than fifteen (15) feet where air-conditioning unit, mechanical equipment or apparatus is measured within the same property. A decibel is the standard unit of sound level measurement. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to emergency generators installed to operate the life safety systems (e.g. smoke/fire alarms, elevators, smoke purge systems, emergency lighting, etc.) of a building. The noise from such equipment shall not exceed a sound level of sixty-five (65) decibels as measured on the A, B or C scales. In addition, such equipment shall only be permitted to be exercised between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any day of the week, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with the permission of the commissioner of building. 
(b)  If, as a result of a test, the air-conditioning equipment, mechanical equipment or apparatus installed on or attached to premises is found to violate the terms of this chapter, the operation of said equipment or apparatus shall be discontinued immediately and not resume unless proper corrections have been made and approved by the building department. 
(8)  (a)  The operation of any manually or electrically powered landscape maintenance equipment, such as lawn mowers, leaf blowers, chain saws and trimmers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. This subdivision shall not apply to municipal equipment in the event of an emergency. 
(b)  (i)  The operation of all gasoline powered landscape maintenance equipment, such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, chain saws and trimmers, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Saturday, Sundays and holidays, except grass may be cut with an internal combustion engine lawn mower by an occupant of the premises where it is being cut on weekdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.; 
(ii)  The operation of any gasoline powered landscape maintenance equipment, such as leaf blowers, lawn mowers, chain saws and trimmers, without factory installed noise reduction equipment in good working condition; 
(iii)  The operation of any gasoline powered landscape maintenance equipment, other than leaf blowers, such as lawn mowers, chain saws and trimmers that produce a sound level exceeding eighty-five (85) decibels on the "A" weighted scale at a distance of fifty (50) feet; or the operation of any gasoline powered leaf blowers that produce a sound level exceeding seventy (70) decibels on the "A" weighted scale at a distance of fifty (50) feet; 
(iv)  The simultaneous operation of more than one gasoline powered leaf blower on property of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less in area; 
(v)  The operation of gasoline powered leaf blowers during the period May 15 through September 30; and between December 16 through March 14; 
(vi)  All the aforementioned restrictions and prohibitions on said gasoline powered landscape maintenance equipment may be waived by the commissioner of public safety in the wake of a storm or other emergency. 
(9)  The sounding of any horn, bell, or any other noise producing signal or device or apparatus on or in any motor vehicle, motorcycle, bus, or any other vehicle, or the unnecessary racing of the motors thereof, in or upon any public street or place in the city while parked or at a standstill, except as a necessary warning of emergency or of impending danger, or the creation by any means of any unreasonable loud or harsh or annoying and disturbing sound in any such public street or public place in this city, or the sounding of any such device or signal apparatus for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time, or while traffic is for any reason at a standstill, except as a necessary emergency warning of impending danger. 
(Ord. of 5-7-13, § 2) 
Editor's note— Sections 1 and 2 of an ordinance adopted May 7, 2013, effective June 1, 2013, repealed the former § 3-4-2, and enacted a new § 3-4-2 as set out herein. The former § 3-4-3 pertained to loud, unnecessary or unusual noises prohibited and derived from Ord. of 6-19-67, § 3.  
Sec. 3-4-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted May 7, 2013, effective June 1, 2013, repealed § 3-4-3, which pertained to illustrative enumeration and derived from Ord. of 6-19-67, § 4; Ord. of 4-7-69; § 1; Ord. of 5-7-70; Ord. of 11-19-73, § 1; Ord. of 9-3-74, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-75, § 1; Ord. of 12-16-85, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 5-1-95, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-11, § 1.  
Sec. 3-4-4. - Commercial or business sound devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place for any commercial or business advertising purposes. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 5)  
Sec. 3-4-5. - Exemption. 
The chapter shall not be construed to prohibit: 
(a)  The use of radio or television or amplifying devices for the purpose of reporting unusual national, state or municipal events, or unusual sporting or other events of great public interest, during reasonable time and hours, in connection with events such as presidential or gubernatorial elections, inaugurations or similar events of great public interest; nor 
(b)  The necessary warning sounds of police, fire, civil defense, or ambulance vehicles or other emergency warnings by public authorities; nor 
(c)  The use or operation of any organ, radio, bell, chimes or other similar instrument, apparatus or device by any church, synagogue or school on or within its own premises, in connection with religious rites or ceremonies of such church or synagogue or in connection with schools' educational program. 
(Ord. of 6-19-97, § 7)  
Sec. 3-4-6. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or may be imprisoned for not more than fifteen (15) days or both. 
(Ord. of 6-19-97, § 8; Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 3-4-7—3-4-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NONCOMMERCIAL OR NONBUSINESS SOUND DEVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-4-16. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
(1)  The term, "sound device or apparatus" shall mean any radio device or apparatus or any device or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio, phonograph, or other sound-making or sound-producing de-vice, or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the human voice or other sounds. 
(2)  The phrase, "To use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place" shall mean to use or operate or cause to be used or operated any sound device or apparatus in or on a sound truck or any portable sound device or apparatus or any sound device or apparatus set upon the ground, a platform or other structure abutting on or adjacent to a public street, park or place where the sounds therefrom may be heard upon any public street, park or place. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(g))  
Sec. 3-4-17. - Hours of operation. 
The operation of a sound device or apparatus for other than commercial or business advertising purposes is prohibited all day on Sunday and on other days between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except that where a meeting or gathering is legally held on a Sunday in any park, street or other public or private outdoor place in the city, sound amplifying equipment may be used at such meeting place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. of 6-19-97, § 6(f)(1))  
Sec. 3-4-18. - Speed limit of sound truck and maximum time of operation. 
Sound amplifying equipment on a sound truck used for other than commercial or business advertising purposes shall not be operated unless the sound truck proceeds at a rate of at least ten (10) miles per hour except when said truck is stopped or is impeded by traffic and in either of such events, the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop. Where sound amplifying equipment is used in connection with a meeting or gathering legally held, such sound amplifying equipment may be used on a sound truck but the sound truck may remain stationary during the period of the meeting. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(f)(2))  
Sec. 3-4-19. - Location restrictions. 
Sound from sound device used for other than commercial or business advertising shall not be issued within three hundred (300) feet of a school, courthouse or church during the hours of school, court or worship respectively or within three hundred (300) feet of any hospital or similar institution. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(f)(3))  
Sec. 3-4-20. - Maximum volume. 
The volume of sound emanating from a device used for other than business or commercial advertising shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of three hundred (300) feet from the sound amplifying equipment and so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(f)(4))  
Sec. 3-4-21. - Amplification. 
No sound amplifying equipment used for other than commercial or business advertising shall be operated with power in excess of fifteen (15) watts in the last stage of amplification. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(f)(5))  
Secs. 3-4-22—3-4-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 3-4-31. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any sound device or apparatus in, on, near or adjacent to any public street, park or place, for other than commercial or business advertising purposes without a permit issued by the commissioner of public safety and unless he shall comply with the applicable provisions of this section and subject to the location or locations or routes set forth in such permit. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6)  
Sec. 3-4-32. - Application. 
Each applicant for a permit to use or operate a sound device or apparatus in, near or adjacent to any public street, public park or place shall file a written application with the commissioner of public safety at least two (2) days prior to the date upon which such sound device or apparatus is to be used or operated. Such application shall describe the specific location or route in which such sound device or apparatus is proposed to be used or operated, the day and hour or hours during which it is proposed to be used or operated and such other pertinent information as said commissioner may deem necessary to enable him to carry out the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(a))  
Sec. 3-4-33. - Issuance. 
The commission of public safety shall not deny a permit required herein for any specific time, location or use to any applicant who complies with the provisions of this section except for one or more of the reasons specified in section 3-4-34 of this Code or for nonpayment of the fee prescribed in section 3-4-35 of this Code. Each permit issued pursuant to this division shall describe the specific location or route in which such sound device or apparatus may be used or operated thereunder and the exact period of time for which such apparatus or device may be operated at such location. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(b))  
Sec. 3-4-34. - Denial. 
The commissioner of public safety shall not issue any permit for the use of a sound device or apparatus: 
(1)  In any location where the commissioner of public safety, upon investigation, shall determine that the conditions of the vehicular or pedestrian traffic or both are such that the use of such a sound device or apparatus will constitute a threat to or interfere with the safety of pedestrians or vehicular operators; 
(2)  In any location where the commissioner of public safety, upon investigation, shall determine that conditions of overcrowding or street repair or other physical conditions are such that the use of a sound device or apparatus will deprive the public of the right to safe, comfortable, convenient and peaceful enjoyment of any public street, park or place, for street, park or other public purposes, or will constitute a threat to or interfere with the safety of pedestrians or vehicle operators. 
In the event the commissioner of public safety shall refuse any location, he shall offer the applicant an alternative location. 
(Ord. of 6-19-87, § 6(c))  
Sec. 3-4-35. - Fee. 
Each application for a permit issued under the provisions of this division shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for use of each sound device or apparatus for each day, provided, however, that permits for the use of such sound device or apparatus shall be issued to any bureau, commission, board or department of the United States government, the state, the county, the city, the city school district, the White Plains Housing Authority, the White Plains Park Authority and the White Plains Urban Renewal Agency, without fee. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(d); Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 8-1-94, § 1; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 6)  
Sec. 3-4-36. - Compliance with permit. 
A person holding a permit issued pursuant to this division shall comply with the location and route restrictions set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6)  
Sec. 3-4-37. - Possession and display. 
A permit issued pursuant to this division shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound amplifying equipment and/or sound truck at all times while the amplifying equipment is in operation and said permit shall be promptly displayed and shown to any policeman of the city upon request. 
(Ord. of 6-19-67, § 6(e))  
Chapter 3-5 - STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS TO PROTECT AND PRESERVE ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE SITES AND FEATURES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Chapter 3-5 formerly was entitled "Wetlands" and was derived from §§ 1—4 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 16, 1976. Section 1.A of an ordinance adopted Dec. 18, 1989, retitled the chapter; and § 1.B—F enacted new §§ 3-5-1—3-5-5. 
 
Sec. 3-5-1. - Findings and legislative intent. 
In order to meet the city's stewardship responsibility under the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act ("SEQRA"), Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and the regulations thereunder promulgated by the Department of Environmental Conservation (the "DEC Regs.") and to protect its natural resources, ecological systems, open spaces, natural beauty, and the value of property within the city, it is necessary to assure that full consideration is given to the natural features enumerated herein. It is in the general interest of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of White Plains to encourage protection of water bodies, watercourses and watersheds, wetlands and aquifer recharge areas, mature trees, habitat for flora and fauna, steep slopes, highly erodible soils, rock outcroppings, and other natural features of the land. Protection of the features stabilizes and preserves real property values, encourages, passive recreation and appreciation of aesthetic and scenic beauty, and safeguards the public from flooding and erosion. 
(Ord. of 12-18-89, § 1.B)  
Sec. 3-5-2. - Environmentally sensitive sites and features. 
The following are determined to be environmentally sensitive sites and features when present on or within stated distances of a particular location at or in excess of the threshold quantities set forth in section 3-5-3 hereinbelow: 
(a)  Water resources, including perennial or intermittent watercourses, ponds, lakes, reservoirs, retention basins and watersheds therefor. 
(b)  Wetlands, defined as any area which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Lands and waters of the state that meet the definition provided in subdivision 24-0107.1 of the New York State Freshwater Wetlands Act (Article 24 of the New York Environmental Conservation Law (ECL)) but without regard to the minimum size standards set forth in the ECL; 
2.  Lands and waters of the state that meet the definition of wetlands provided in a report dated January 10, 1989, and entitled Federal Agency Committee for Wetland Delineation, 1989. Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands. U.S. Corps of Engineers, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C. Cooperative Technical Publication. 
(c)  Floodplains, as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and/or as determined by the commissioner of building, the commissioner of planning or the commissioner of public works to exhibit the characteristics of floodplains, including without limitation, horizontal and vertical proximity to watercourses and water bodies such that there is a reasonable probability of inundation at times of high water. 
(d)  Aquifer recharge areas, as identified by the Soils Conservationist of the United States Soil Conservation Service in Westchester County by the action of the Westchester County Soil Conservation Board. 
(e)  Erodible soils according to the United States Soil Conservation Service criteria. 
(f)  Steep slope areas. 
(g)  Rock outcroppings at or above the surface of the ground evidencing the original natural rock outcropping geological features indigenous to White Plains. 
(Ord. of 12-18-89, § 1.C; Ord. of 3-4-96, § 1)  
Sec. 3-5-3. - Thresholds, criteria, measurements. 
The following thresholds shall determine that a site or feature is environmentally sensitive: 
(a)  Any site, property or location which is traversed by, on the bank of, or within one hundred (100) feet of any river, creek, stream, brook or other flowing watercourse. 
(b)  An area of one thousand (1,000) square feet, or a combination or aggregation of areas each at least one hundred (100) square feet and totalling one thousand (1,000) square feet, of pond, lake, standing water, marsh, bog, swamp, or wetland as such terms are defined pursuant to the 1989 Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands. 
(c)  An area or a combination or aggregation of areas amounting to ten (10) percent of the site, property or location, which slopes in any direction or combination of directions by twenty (20) percent or more, as measured in accordance with the following methodology: 
(1)  Vertical measurement: Vertical measurement shall be determined by utilizing two-foot contours as documented and determined by on-site survey or the use of photogrammetric aerial topography. 
(2)  Horizontal measurement: Horizontal measurement shall be determined by the use of an appropriate scale, which unless directed otherwise by the City of White Plains Department of Building, shall be one (1) inch for fifty (50) feet measuring a minimum horizontal section thirty (30) feet in length. 
(3)  Application of vertical and horizontal measurements: The vertical and horizontal measurements are utilized to determine the slope by measuring the vertical rise, on the basis of two-foot contours, in a thirty-foot horizontal length. All surveys, calculations and documents shall be performed and submitted by, and shall bear the seal and original signature of, a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New York. 
(d)  An area of five hundred (500) square feet, or a combination or aggregation of areas each at least fifty (50) square feet and totalling five hundred (500) square feet, of exposed rock. 
(e)  Any combination of the above features no one of which meets the thresholds stated but which in combination meet the intent of the statute as determined by the commissioner of building after consultation with the environmental officer. 
(Ord. of 12-18-89, § 1.D; Ord. of 3-4-96, § 2)  
Sec. 3-5-4. - Regulated activities. 
(1)  Except pursuant to a permit issued therefor by the commissioner of building and/or the commissioner of public works in accordance with the zoning ordinance, the subdivision regulations, the building code, and/or any other applicable code, ordinance or regulation, no person shall conduct, allow, suffer or permit, either directly or indirectly, any form of draining, dredging, excavation, removal or addition of soil, mud, sand, gravel or other material; or any form of dumping, filling, grading or depositing of any soil, stones, sand, gravel, mud, rubbish or fill of any kind; or the erection of any structures or roads, the driving of pilings, or the placement of any other obstructions, whether or not changing or diverting the flow of water; or the introduction of any form of pollution, including but not limited to installing a septic tank, running a sewer outfall, discharging sewage treatment effluent or other liquid wastes into or so as to drain, fill, contaminate, clog, reroute or in any way affect, change or alter any environmentally sensitive site or feature. 
(2)  Regulated activities under this chapter shall not include swimming or fishing, where otherwise legally permitted; public health activities, orders and regulations of the state or county departments of health, grazing, farming and gardening; the operation and maintenance of dams, retaining walls, terraces, sluices, culverts or other water control structures or devices as were in existence on August 16, 1976; and the conduct of normal land maintenance and conservation measures, including tree trimming and pruning, the removal of dead or diseased vegetation, lawn and garden care, and the planting of decorative shrubs or trees. 
(Ord. of 12-18-89, § 1.E)  
Sec. 3-5-5. - Violations. 
In the event that any person conducts, allows, suffers or permits, without a proper permit therefor, any of the regulated activities or otherwise violates the provisions of this chapter, the commissioner of building shall issue such orders to cease and desist, and/or to restore and maintain the affected site or facility as deemed necessary and appropriate. In addition, the commissioner of building and/or the corporation counsel may prosecute the offender; and, upon conviction, the following penalties may be imposed: 
(1)  For a first offense, a fine not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500). 
(2)  For a second or subsequent offense, a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. Each and every day the violation continues to exist constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
In any event, the corporation counsel is expressly authorized, without further action by the common council, to seek such injunctive relief as may be deemed necessary and appropriate to preserve, protect, safeguard, restore and/or maintain, as the case may be, any environmentally sensitive state or feature as may be affected or threatened by violation. 
(Ord. of 12-18-89, § 1.F; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 1, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Chapter 3-6 - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 3-6-1.1. - Findings of fact. 
It has been determined by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) that: 
(a)  Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase storm water runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition; 
(b)  This storm water runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species; 
(c)  Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat; 
(d)  Improper design and construction of storm water management practices can increase the velocity of storm water runoff thereby increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation; 
(e)  Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow; 
(f)  Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on the waters of the City of White Plains and the state; 
(g)  Storm water runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of storm water runoff from land development activities; 
(h)  The regulation of storm water runoff discharges from land development activities in order to control and minimize increases in storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with storm water runoff is in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety; 
(i)  Regulation of land development activities by means of performance standards governing storm water management and site design will produce development compatible with the natural functions of a particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum storm water management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within the city and to address the state's findings of fact in section 3-6-1 hereof. This chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives: 
(a)  Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of New York State's SPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Water Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised; 
(b)  Require land development and redevelopment activities to conform to the substantive requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities GP-02-01 or as amended or revised; 
(c)  Minimize increases in storm water runoff from land development and redevelopment activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels, watercourses or waterways; 
(d)  Minimize increases in pollution caused by storm water runoff from land development and redevelopment activities which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
(e)  Minimize the total annual volume of storm water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development and redevelopment to the maximum extent practicable; and 
(f)  Reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through storm water management practices, devices and/or structures, and to ensure that these management practices, devices and/or structures are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public safety. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall be applicable to all land development and redevelopment activities as defined in section 3-6-5. 
(b)  The storm water management officer shall be the commissioner of public works or his or her duly authorized designee, who shall accept and review all storm water pollution prevention plans and shall cause the forwarding of such plans to the appropriate approving agency. The storm water management officer may (1) review the plans, (2) upon approval by the Common Council of the City of White Plains, engage the services of a licensed/certified professional to review the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a fee schedule established by said governing board, or (3) accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  All "land development or redevelopment activities" as defined by this chapter herein, subject to review and approval by the approving agency of the City of White Plains under subdivision, site plan and/or special permit regulations shall be reviewed subject to the standards contained in this chapter. 
(d)  All "land development activities" not subject to review as stated in section 3.6.3 (c) of this chapter shall be required to submit a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to the storm water management officer who shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-4. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from review under this chapter: 
(1)  Agricultural activity as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  Silvicultural activity except that landing areas and log haul roads are subject to this law. 
(3)  Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five (5) acres and are performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility. 
(4)  Repairs to any storm water management practice or facility deemed necessary by the storm water management officer. 
(5)  Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved by the city on or before the effective date of this chapter. 
(6)  Land development or redevelopment activities for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this chapter. 
(7)  Cemetery graves. 
(8)  Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles. 
(9)  Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or natural resources. 
(10)  Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and his or her family. 
(11)  Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing structure. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-5. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under this chapter shall have the meaning as set forth in this section. 
(1)  Agricultural activity - the activity of an active farm including grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities. 
(2)  Applicant - a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a land development or redevelopment activity. 
(3)  Approving agency - shall mean the City of White Plains governing body, board or officer charged by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of White Plains with the authority to approve a land use application, such as a special permit, site plan, subdivision, conservation development, area variance, or use variance. 
(4)  Building - any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area. 
(5)  City - the City of White Plains, New York. 
(6)  City engineer - the City Engineer of the City of White Plains, New York. 
(7)  Clearing - any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. 
(8)  Dedication - the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
(9)  Department - the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 
(10)  Design manual - the New York State Storm Water Management Design Manual, most recent version including applicable updates, that serves as the official guide for storm water management principles, methods and practices. 
(11)  Developer - a person who undertakes "land development activities." 
(12)  EPA - Environmental Protection Agency. 
(13)  Erosion - the removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or other geological agents. 
(14)  Erosion control manual - the most recent version of the "New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control" manual, commonly known as the "Blue Book." 
(15)  Grading - excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
(16)  Impervious cover - those surfaces, improvements and structures that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snow melt and water (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc). 
(17)  Industrial storm water permit - a state pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial storm water discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
(18)  Infiltration - the process of percolating storm water into the subsoil. 
(19)  Jurisdictional wetland - an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
(20)  Land development/redevelopment activity - construction activity including clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre, or activities disturbing less than one (1) acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and distinct land development or redevelopment activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(21)  Landowner - the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
(22)  Licensed/certified professional - a person currently licensed to practice engineering in New York State or a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC). 
(23)  Maintenance agreement - a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices. 
(24)  NYSDEC - New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 
(25)  Nonpoint source pollution - pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
(26)  Person - shall mean any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
(27)  Phasing - clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next. 
(28)  Planning board - the Planning Board of the City of White Plains. 
(29)  Pollutant of concern - sediment or a water quality measurement that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land development activity. 
(30)  Project - land development or redevelopment activity. 
(31)  Recharge - the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
(32)  Sediment control - measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
(33)  Sensitive areas - cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, and habitats for threatened, endangered or special concern species. 
(34)  SPDES general permit for construction activities GP-02-01 - A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate disturbance of one (1) or more acres of land. 
(35)  SPDES general permit for storm water discharges from municipal separate storm water sewer systems GP-02-02 - a permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA and/or NYSDEC established water quality standards and/or to specify storm water control standards 
(36)  Stabilization - the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
(37)  Stop work order - an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
(38)  Storm water - rainwater, surface runoff, subsurface drainage and snowmelt. 
(39)  Storm water hotspot - a land use or activity that generates higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in typical storm water runoff, based on monitoring studies. 
(40)  Storm water management - the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff and mitigate its adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment. 
(41)  Storm water management facility - one (1) or a series of storm water management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of controlling storm water runoff. 
(42)  Storm water management officer (SMO) - the City Engineer of the City of White Plains (or the person serving in the capacity of the city engineer) or his/her authorized deputies, agents or representatives, including employees of other city departments as appropriate. The SMO is designated by the city to accept and review storm water pollution prevention plans, cause the forwarding of the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect storm water management practices. 
(43)  Storm water management practices (SWMPs) - measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to storm water runoff and water bodies. 
(44)  Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) - a plan for controlling storm water runoff and pollutants from a site during and after construction activities. 
(45)  Storm water runoff - flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
(46)  Stream channel - a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water (see also watercourse, waterway). 
(47)  Surface Waters of the State of New York - lakes, bays, sounds, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within its jurisdiction. 
Storm sewers and waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from impoundment of waters of the state. 
(48)  Watercourse - a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water (see also stream channel, waterway). 
(49)  Waterway - a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain (see also stream channel, watercourse). 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE II. - STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS 
 
Sec. 3-6-6.1. - Storm water pollution prevention plan requirement. 
No application for approval of a land development or redevelopment activity shall be reviewed until the planning board or SMO has received a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-6.2. - Contents of storm water pollution prevention plans. 
(1)  All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and erosion and sediment controls: 
a.  Background information about the scope of the project, including location, type and size of project; 
b.  Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by the construction activity; existing and final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the storm water discharges(s). The site map should be at a scale no smaller than one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet; 
c.  Description of the soil(s) present at the site; 
d.  Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of construction activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other activity at the site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion Control Manual), not more than five (5) acres shall be disturbed at any one (1) time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP; 
e.  Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in storm water runoff; 
f.  Description of construction and waste materials expected to be stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to storm water, and spill-prevention and response; 
g.  Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing and grubbing to project close-out; 
h.  A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s), size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control practice; 
i.  Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and sizing of any temporary sediment basins; 
j.  Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent control measures; 
k.  Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and sediment control practices, including the timing of initial placement and duration that each practice should remain in place; 
l.  Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of the erosion and sediment control practice; 
m.  Name(s) of the receiving water(s); 
n.  Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each part of the site; 
o.  Description of structural practices designed to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to the degree attainable; and 
p.  Any existing data that describes the storm water runoff at the site. 
(2)  Land development or redevelopment activities as defined in section 3-6-5 and meeting condition "A", "B" or "C" below shall also include water quantity and water quality controls (post-construction storm water runoff controls) as set forth in section 3-6-6.2(3) below as applicable: 
Condition A - Storm water runoff from land development or redevelopment activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of impaired waters or a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) designated watershed for which pollutants in storm water have been identified as a source of the impairment. 
Condition B - Storm water runoff from land development or redevelopment activities disturbing five (5) or more acres. 
Condition C - Storm water runoff from land development or redevelopment activity disturbing between one (1) and five (5) acres of land during the course of the project, exclusive of the construction of single family residences and construction activities at agricultural properties. 
(3)  SWPPP Requirements for condition A, B and C; 
a.  All information in section 3-6-6.2(1) of this chapter; 
b.  Description of each post-construction storm water management practice; 
c.  Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction storm water management practice; 
d.  Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural components of the storm water management system for the applicable design storms; 
e.  Comparison of post-development storm water runoff conditions with pre-development conditions; 
f.  Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for each post-construction storm water management practice; 
g.  Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective operation of each post-construction storm water management practice; 
h.  Maintenance easements to ensure access to all storm water management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall remain in effect with transfer of title to the property; 
i.  Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent landowners served by the on-site storm water management measures in accordance with section 3-6-8 of this chapter; and 
j.  For condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that the design of all storm water management practices meet the requirements in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-6.3. - Other environmental permits. 
The applicant shall assure that all other applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the land development or redevelopment activity prior to approval of the final storm water design plan. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-6.4. - Contractor certification. 
(1)  Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who will be involved in soil disturbance and/or storm water management practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following certification statement before undertaking any land development or redevelopment activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards." 
(2)  The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature, address and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is made. 
(3)  The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for the land development activity. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-6.5. - Copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development or redevelopment activity during construction. 
A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land development or redevelopment activity during construction from the date of initiation of construction activities to the date of final stabilization. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE III - PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
All land development or redevelopment activities shall be subject to the following performance and design criteria: 
 
Sec. 3-6-7.1. - Technical standards. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for storm water management. Storm water management practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these technical documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this chapter: 
(1)  The New York State Storm Water Management Design Manual (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the design manual). 
(2)  New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the erosion control manual). 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-7.2. - Equivalence to technical standards. 
Where storm water management practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards set forth in section 3-6-7.1 and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed professional. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-7.3. - Water quality standards. 
Any land development or redevelopment activity shall not cause an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE IV - MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION AND REPAIR OF STORM WATER FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 3-6-8.1. - Maintenance and inspection during construction. 
(1)  The applicant or developer of the land development or redevelopment activity or their representative shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their design capacity has been reduced by fifty (50) percent. 
(2)  For land development or redevelopment activities as defined in Section 3-6-5 and meeting condition A, B or C in section 3-6-6.2.2, the applicant shall have a qualified professional conduct site inspections and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices every seven (7) days and within twenty-four (24) hours of any storm event producing 0.5 inches of precipitation or more. Inspection reports shall be maintained in a site log book. 
(3)  The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-8.2. - Maintenance easement(s). 
Prior to the issuance of any approval that has a storm water management facility as one of the requirements, the applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served by the storm water management facility. The easement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the Westchester County Clerk after approval by the corporation counsel for the city. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-8.3. - Maintenance after construction. 
The owner or operator of permanent storm water management practices installed in accordance with this chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or operator to achieve the goals of this chapter. 
(2)  Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training new maintenance personnel. 
(3)  Discharges from the SWMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance with section 3-6-7.3. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-8.4. - Maintenance agreements. 
The city shall approve a formal maintenance agreement for storm water management facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the Westchester County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of schedule B of this chapter entitled sample storm water control facility maintenance agreement. The city, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion may accept dedication of any existing or future storm water management facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 3-6-9.1. - Erosion and sediment control inspection. 
The city's SMO may require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the work completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter and the storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the city enforcement official at least forty-eight (48) hours before any of the following as required by the SMO: 
(1)  Start of construction 
(2)  Installation of sediment and erosion control measures 
(3)  Completion of site clearing 
(4)  Completion of rough grading 
(5)  Completion of final grading 
(6)  Close of the construction season 
(7)  Completion of final landscaping 
(8)  Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas. 
If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the SMO. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-9.2. - Storm water management practice inspections. 
The city's SMO, is responsible for conducting inspections of storm water management practices (SWMPs). Inspections may be performed by city staff or the city's SMO may designate an inspector required to have a professional engineer's (PE) license or certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) certificate, as long as the designated inspector is required to submit a report. All applicants are required to submit "as built" plans for any storm water management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all storm water management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-9.3. - Inspection of storm water facilities after project completion. 
Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the NYSDEC SPDES General Storm Water Permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other storm water management practices. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-9.4. - Submission of reports. 
The city's SMO may require monitoring and reporting from entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-9.5. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
When any new storm water management facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is made between private property and the public storm water system, the landowner shall grant to the city the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection as specified in section 3-6-9.3. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE VI. - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 
 
Sec. 3-6-10.1. - Construction completion guarantee. 
In order to ensure the full and faithful completion of all land development activities related to compliance with all conditions set forth by the city in its approval of the storm water pollution prevention plan, the city may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the city as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to be determined by the city based on submission of final design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released from liability by the city, provided that such period shall not be less than one (1) year from the date of final acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and that a one (1) year inspection has been conducted and the facilities have been found to be acceptable to the city. Per annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety is released from liability. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-10.2. - Maintenance guarantee. 
Where storm water management and erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required to provide the city with an irrevocable letter of credit from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper operation and maintenance of all storm water management and erosion control facilities both during and after construction, and until the facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain storm water management and erosion and sediment control facilities, the city may draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-10.3. - Recordkeeping. 
The city may require entities subject to this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 3-6-11.1. - Notice of violation. 
When the city determines that a land development or redevelopment activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land development or redevelopment activity into compliance with this code and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen (15) days of service of notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-11.2. - Stop work orders. 
The city may issue a stop work order for violations of this Code. Persons receiving a stop work order shall be required to halt all land development or redevelopment activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to the stop work order. The stop work order shall be in effect until the city confirms that the land development or redevelopment activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop work order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-11.3. - Violations. 
Any land development or redevelopment activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter, may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-11.4. - Penalties. 
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) nor more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than seven hundred dollars ($700.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-11.5. - Withholding of certificate of occupancy. 
If any building or land development or redevelopment activity is installed or conducted in violation of this chapter the SMO may prevent the occupancy of said building or land. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
Sec. 3-6-11.6. - Restoration of lands. 
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE VIII. - FEES FOR SERVICES 
 
Sec. 3-6-12. - Title. 
The city may require any person undertaking land development or redevelopment activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SWMP maintenance performed by the city or performed by a third party for the city. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1)  
ARTICLE IX. - SEVERABILITY 
 
Sec. 3-6-13. - Title. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 1) 
Schedule A 
Storm Water Management Practices Acceptable for Water Quality 
(From: New York State Storm Water Management Design Manual, Table 5.1) 
Group 	Practice 	Description 
Pond 	Micropool Extended 
Detention Pond (P-1) 	Pond that treats the majority of the water quality volume through extended detention, and incorporates a micropool at the outlet of the pond to prevent sediment resuspension. 
	Wet Pond (P-2) 	Pond that provides storage for the entire water quality volume in the permanent pool. 
	Wet Extended 
Detention Pond (P-3) 	Pond that treats a portion of the water quality volume by detaining storm flows above a permanent pool for a specified minimum detention time. 
	Multiple Pond System (P-4) 	A group of ponds that collectively treat the water quality volume. 
	Pocket Pond (P-5) 	A storm water wetland design adapted for the treatment of runoff from small drainage areas that has little or no baseflow available to maintain water elevations and relies on groundwater to maintain a permanent pool. 
Wetland 	Shallow Wetland (W-1) 	A wetland that provides water quality treatment entirely in a shallow marsh. 
	Extended Detention 
Wetland (W-2) 	A wetland system that provides some fraction of the water quality volume by detaining storm flows above the marsh surface. 
	Pond/Wetland System (W-3) 	A wetland system that provides a portion of the water quality volume in the permanent pool of a wet pond that precedes the marsh for a specified minimum detention time. 
	Pocket Wetland (W-4) 	A shallow wetland design adapted for the treatment of runoff from small drainage areas that has variable water levels and relies on groundwater for its permanent pool. 
Infiltration 	Infiltration Trench (I-1) 	An infiltration practice that stores the water quality volume in the void spaces of a gravel trench before it is infiltrated into the ground. 
	Infiltration Basin (I-2) 	An infiltration practice that stores the water quality volume in a shallow depression before it is infiltrated into the ground. 
	Dry Well (I-3) 	An infiltration practice similar in design to the infiltration trench, and best suited for treatment of rooftop runoff. 
Filtering Practices 	Surface Sand Filter (F-1) 	A filtering practice that treats storm water by settling out larger particles in a sediment chamber, and then filtering storm water through a sand matrix. 
	Underground Sand Filter (F-2) 	A filtering practice that treats storm water as it flows through underground settling and filtering chambers. 
	Perimeter Sand Filter (F-3) 	A filter that incorporates a sediment chamber and filter bed as parallel vaults adjacent to a parking lot. 
	Organic Filter (F-4) 	A filtering practice that uses an organic medium such as compost in the filter in place of sand. 
	Bioretention (F-5) 	A shallow depression that treats storm water as it flows through a soil matrix, and is returned to the storm drain system. 
Open Channels 	Dry Swale (O-1) 	An open drainage channel or depression explicitly designed to detain and promote the filtration of storm water runoff into the soil media. 
	Wet Swale (O-2) 	An open drainage channel or depression designed to retain water or intercept groundwater for water quality treatment. 
 
Schedule B 
SAMPLE STORM WATER CONTROL 
FACILITY MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT 
WHEREAS, the City of White Plains ("City") and the ___________ ("facility owner") want to enter into an agreement to provide for the long term maintenance and continuation of storm water control measures approved by the City for the below named project, and 
WHEREAS, the City and the facility owner desire that the storm water control measures be built in accordance with the approved project plans and thereafter be maintained, cleaned, repaired, replaced and continued in perpetuity in order to ensure optimum performance of the components. Therefore, the City and the facility owner agree as follows: 
1.  This agreement binds the City and the facility owner, its successors and assigns, to the maintenance provisions depicted in the approved project plans which are attached as Schedule A of this agreement. 
2.  The facility owner shall maintain, clean, repair, replace and continue the storm water control measures depicted in Schedule A as necessary to ensure optimum performance of the measures to design specifications. The storm water control measures shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: drainage ditches, swales, dry wells, infiltrators, drop inlets, pipes, culverts, soil absorption devices and retention ponds. 
3.  The facility owner shall be responsible for all expenses related to the maintenance of the storm water control measures and shall establish a means for the collection and distribution of expenses among parties for any commonly owned facilities. 
4.  The facility owner shall provide for the periodic inspection of the storm water control measures, not less than once in every five year period, to determine the condition and integrity of the measures. Such inspection shall be performed by a Professional Engineer licensed by the State of New York. The inspecting engineer shall prepare and submit to the City within 30 days of the inspection, a written report of the findings including recommendations for those actions necessary for the continuation of the storm water control measures. 
5.  The facility owner shall not authorize, undertake or permit alteration, abandonment, modification or discontinuation of the storm water control measures except in accordance with written approval of the City. 
6.  The facility owner shall undertake necessary repairs and replacement of the storm water control measures at the direction of the City or in accordance with the recommendations of the inspecting engineer. 
7.  The facility owner shall provide to the City within 30 days of the date of this agreement, a security for the maintenance and continuation of the storm water control measures in the form of (a Bond, letter of credit or escrow account). 
8.  This agreement shall be recorded in the Office of the County Clerk, County of Westchester together with the deed for the common property and shall be included in the offering plan and/or prospectus approved pursuant to ___________. 
9.  If ever the City determines that the facility owner has failed to construct or maintain the storm water control measures in accordance with the project plan or has failed to undertake corrective action specified by the City or by the inspecting engineer, the City is authorized to undertake such steps as reasonably necessary for the preservation, continuation or maintenance of the storm water control measures and to affix the expenses thereof as a lien against the property. 
10.  This agreement is effective ___________.  
Chapter 3-7 - COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION (ENERGY) PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 3-7-1. - Legislative findings; intent and purpose; authority. 
(a)  It is the policy of both the City of White Plains and the State of New York to reduce costs and provide cost certainty for the purpose of economic development, to promote deeper penetration of energy efficiency and renewable energy resources such as wind and solar, and wider deployment of distributed energy resources as well as to examine the retail energy markets and increase participation of and benefits for residential and Small Commercial customers in those markets. Among the policies and models that may offer benefits in New York is community choice aggregation, which allows local governments to determine the default supplier of electricity and natural gas on behalf of its residential and Small Commercial customers. 
(b)  The purpose of this Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program is to allow participating local governments including the City of White Plains to procure energy supply service for their residential and Small Commercial customers, who will have the opportunity to opt out of the procurement, while maintaining transmission and distribution service from the existing Distribution Utility. This Chapter establishes a program that will allow Sustainable Westchester on behalf of the City of White Plains to put out for bid the total amount of natural gas and/or electricity being purchased by local residential and Small Commercial customers. Bundled Customers will have the opportunity to have more control to lower their overall energy costs, to spur clean energy innovation and investment, to improve customer choice and value, and to protect the environment; thereby, fulfilling the purposes of this Chapter and fulfilling an important public purpose. 
(c)  The City of White Plains is authorized to implement this Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program pursuant to Section 10(1)(ii)(a)(12) of the New York Municipal Home Rule Law; and State of New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0564, Petition of Sustainable Westchester for Expedited Approval for the Implementation of a Pilot Community Choice Aggregation Program within the County of Westchester, Order Granting Petition in Part (issued February 26, 2015) as may be amended, including subsequent orders of the Public Service Commission issued in connection with or related to Case No. 14-M-0564 (collectively, the "Order"). Order shall also mean orders of the Public Service Commission related to State of New York Public Service Commission Case No. 14-M-0224, Proceeding on Motion of the Commission to Enable Community Choice Aggregation Programs (issued December 15, 2014) to the extent that orders related to Case No. 14-M-0224 enable actions by the City of White Plains not otherwise permitted pursuant to orders related to Case 14-M-0564; provided, however, that in the event of any conflict between orders from Case No. 14-M-0564 and orders from Case No 14-M-0224, orders from Case No 14-M-0564 shall govern the Community Choice Aggregation Program. 
(d)  This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program Law of the City of White Plains". 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 3-7-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context otherwise requires, the terms in this Chapter shall have the meanings employed in the State of New York Public Service Commission's Uniform Business Practices or, if not so defined there, as indicated below: 
(a)  Bundled Customers - Residential and Small Commercial customers of electricity or natural gas ("fuels") who are purchasing the fuels from the Distribution Utility. 
(b)  Small Commercial - Non-residential customers as permitted by the Order. 
(c)  Community Choice Aggregation Program or CCA Program- A municipal energy procurement program, which replaces the incumbent utility as the default Supplier for all Bundled Customers within the City of White Plains. 
(d)  Distribution Utility - Owner or controller of the means of distribution of the natural gas or electricity that is regulated by the Public Service Commission. 
(e)  Public Service Commission - New York State Public Service Commission. 
(f)  Suppliers - Energy service companies (ESCOs) that procure electric power and natural gas for Bundled Customers in connection with this Chapter or, alternatively, generators of electricity and natural gas or other entities who procure and resell electricity or natural gas. 
(g)  Sustainable Westchester- A not-for-profit organization comprised of member municipalities in Westchester County, New York. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 3-7-3. - Establishment of a community choice aggregation (energy) program. 
(a)  A Community Choice Aggregation (Energy) Program is hereby established by the Common Council of the City of White Plains, whereby the City of White Plains shall work together with Sustainable Westchester to implement the CCA Program to the full extent permitted by the Order, as set forth more fully herein. The City of White Plains' role under the CCA Program involves the aggregating of the electric and/or natural gas supply of its residents and the entering into a contract with one or more Suppliers for supply and services. Under the CCA Program, the operation and ownership of the utility service shall remain with the Distribution Utility. 
(b)  The City of White Plains' purchase of energy supply through a CCA Program constitutes neither the purchase of a public utility system, nor the furnishing of utility service. The City of White Plains will not take over any part of the electric or gas transmission or distribution system and will not furnish any type of utility service, but will instead allow Sustainable Westchester to negotiate on behalf of the City of White Plains with Suppliers on behalf of participating residential and Small Commercial customers. The gross receipts tax will be paid by companies delivering and supplying energy, including but not limited to, one or more ESCOs. 
(c)  In order to implement the CCA Program, the City of White Plains will adopt one or more resolutions that outline the process of and conditions for participation in the CCA Program, including but not limited to signing a contract for a compliant bid with one or more Suppliers, all as consistent with this Local Law and the Order. 
(d)  The Public Service Commission supervises retail markets and participants in these markets through legislative and regulatory authority and the Uniform Business Practices, which includes rules relating to the eligibility of participating ESCOs, the operation by which ESCOs provide energy services, and the terms on which customers may be enrolled with ESCOs. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 3-7-4. - Procedures for eligibility; customer data sharing. 
(a)  As permitted by the Order, Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the City of White Plains, may request from the Distribution Utility's aggregated customer information by fuel type and service classification on a rolling basis. 
(b)  Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the City of White Plains, shall issue one or more requests for proposals to Suppliers to provide energy to participants and may then award a contract in accordance with the CCA Program. 
(c)  Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the City of White Plains, will then request individual customer data from the Distribution Utility in accordance with the CCA Program. 
(d)  Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the City of White Plains, and the selected Supplier will then notify Bundled Customers of the contract terms and their opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program. 
(e)  In accordance with and for purposes of the Order, the existing Distribution Utility, Consolidated Edison Company of New York, Inc., will provide to Sustainable Westchester aggregate and customer-specific data (including usage data, capacity tag obligations, account numbers, and service addresses) of all Bundled Customers in the City of White Plains not currently enrolled with an ESCO. 
(f)  Sustainable Westchester and the City of White Plains, will protect customer information as required by law, subject to the Order and the limitations of the New York State Freedom of Information Law. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 3-7-5. - Choice of energy supplier; opt-out notice and procedure. 
(a)  Sustainable Westchester, on behalf of the City of White Plains, will notify the existing Distribution Utility's residential and Small Commercial customers, by letter notice, of the City of White Plains' decision to establish the CCA Program, of the contract terms with an ESCO, and of the opportunity to opt out of the CCA Program. 
(b)  The letter notice will be sent to each customer at the address provided by the Distribution Utility and explain the CCA Program and the material provisions of the ESCO contract, identify the methods by which the customer can opt out of the CCA Program, and provide information on how the customer can access additional information about the CCA Program. 
(c)  The opt-out period shall be twenty (20) days from the notice date. 
(d)  CCA Program Bundled Customers, upon enrollment, will receive a welcome letter from the ESCO that will explain the customer's options for canceling the enrollment if they believe they were enrolled incorrectly or otherwise decide to withdraw from the CCA Program in favor of another Supplier. The welcome letter also will explain that residential customers are entitled to the added protection of the mandated three (3) day rescission period as detailed in Section 5(B)(3) of the New York Uniform Business Practices Law. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 3-7-6. - Verification and reporting. 
Sustainable Westchester shall be responsible for filing an annual report with the Public Service Commission, which identifies the number of customers enrolled in the CCA Program by municipality and customer class, the number of customers who returned to utility service or service with another Supplier during the reporting period, and the average cost of commodity supply by month for the reporting period. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
TITLE IV. - LICENSES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
CHAPTER 
 4-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 4-2  AMBULANCES 
 4-3  AUCTIONEERS 
 4-4  CABARETS 
 4-5  CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
 4-6  COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING MACHINES AND ESTABLISHMENTS 
 4-7  COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRIES 
 4-8  GASOLINE STATIONS 
 4-9  HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
 4-10  HOUSING AND RENT CONTROL 
 4-11  PAWNBROKERS 
 4-12  RESIDENTIAL ZONE COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING RESTRICTIONS 
 4-13  SECONDHAND DEALERS, RUMMAGE SALES, ETC. 
 4-14  SHOWS, CIRCUSES, ETC. 
 4-15  TAXICABS 
 4-16  TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES 
 4-17  WINDOW CLEANERS 
 4-18  ALARM SYSTEMS AND BUSINESSES 
 4-19  FAIR HOUSING 
 4-20  FARM PRODUCE MARKETS 
 4-21  MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS 
 4-22  HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES 
 4-23  TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND LICENSING 
 4-24  IDENTITY THEFT PROGRAM 
 4-25  VIDEO CAMERA SYSTEMS 
 4-26  FILMING 
 4-27  VALET PARKING 
 4-28  SHARED ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION DEVICES 
 4-29  RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRY AND LICENSE PROGRAM 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Related laws reference— Tax on fire insurance premiums, Art. A, Div. 4. 
Cross reference— Sales and use tax, § 2-4-81 et seq.; tax on furnishing utility services, § 2-4-106 et seq.; assignment of policemen or firemen to public events, § 2-5-9; air pollution, ch. 3-3; permit for amplifiers in certain areas of city, § 3-4-31 et seq.; business activities on Memorial Day and Independence Day prohibited, § 5-1-1; bicycle registration, § 8-3-21 et seq.; license for special residence facilities, § 9-9-26 et seq. 
 
Chapter 4-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 4-1-1. - Games of chance legalized. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining and having in effect a license as provided in The Games of Chance Licensing Law, to conduct games of chance within the territorial limits of the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section and the administration of the provisions of The Games of Chance Law, the commissioner of public safety is the chief law enforcement officer of the city, and the city clerk is the clerk of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 7-5-77, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note— The ordinance from which this section is derived was approved by the electorate at the November 8, 1977 election as required by law (General Municipal Law, § 188). See Official Proceedings of the Common Council, Vol. 62, No. 32, p. 1017 (December 19, 1977). 
State Law reference— The Games of Chance Licensing Law, General Municipal Law, §§ 185—195-n.  
Sec. 4-1-2. - Bingo legalized. 
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization as defined in section 476 of Article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, and any amendments thereto, upon obtaining the required license, to conduct bingo games within the city, subject to the provisions of this section, article 14-H of the General Municipal Law and any amendments thereto, article 19-B of the Executive Law and any amendments thereto, the rules and regulations of the state bingo control commission and the following restrictions: 
(1)  No person other than a licensee under the provisions of article 14-H of the General Municipal Law, shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect. 
(2)  No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the operation of such game. 
(3)  No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of article 4-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization. 
(4)  The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the same. 
(5)  No prize shall exceed the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in any single game of bingo. 
(6)  No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(7)  No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall participate in the management or operation of such game. 
(8)  No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the management or operation of any game of bingo. 
(9)  The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of any provision of this section shall constitute and be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(10)  Limited period bingo shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this section and the rules and regulations of the commission. 
(Ord. of 5-15-72, § 1) 
State Law reference— The Bingo Licensing Law, General Municipal Law, §§ 475—499.  
Sec. 4-1-3. - Non-criminal applicant fingerprint submission to the division of criminal justice services (DCJS) for certain license applications. 
1.  All applicants to the City of White Plains for a license to be a window cleaner, second hand dealer, pawnbroker, auctioneer, chauffeur, taxicab driver, cabaret operator, hawker, peddler or solicitor shall be fingerprinted. 
2.  The department of public safety shall cause the applicant's fingerprints and appropriate fee to be forwarded to the division of criminal justice services (DCS) in the form and manner as prescribed by DCS for a complete criminal check. 
3.  The commissioner of the department of public safety or his/her designee(s) shall review all information provided by DCS in connection with the applicant's criminal background and investigation. 
4.  If a prospective applicant for any of the aforementioned licenses has been convicted of a crime, any decision regarding such prospective applicant's fitness for a license will be made upon consideration of New York State Correction Law §§ 701-703-b and §§ 751-753. 
(L.L. No. 2-2011, § 1, 8-1-11)  
Sec. 4-1-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Formerly, §§ 4-1-3 and 4-1-4 specifically permitted the exhibition of motion pictures and the playing of certain sports games after 2:00 p.m. on Sunday. Such sections were repealed by §§ 1, 2, of an ordinance adopted Sept. 2, 2003. Prior to repeal the sections derived from an ordinance adopted Oct. 31, 1949, § 1; and ordinances adopted Aug. 5, 1929, § 1; Dec. 19, 1949, § 1; and July 6, 1970, § 1.  
Sec. 4-1-5. - Solicitors and others on private property. 
(a)  No person shall enter upon any private residential property in the city without the consent of the occupant of the premises having been given for the following purposes: 
(1)  Vending, peddling or soliciting orders for any merchandise, device, book, periodical or printed matter whatsoever; 
(2)  Soliciting alms, or for a subscription or contribution to any church, charitable or public institution whatsoever; 
(3)  Distributing any handbill, pamphlet, tract, notice or advertising matter; 
(4)  Selling or distributing any ticket or chance whatsoever. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to any person who has been a bona fide resident of the city for a period of at least six (6) consecutive months last past, nor to any person who has maintained a place of business in the city for a period of at least six (6) consecutive months, prior thereto, or his duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine which shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in amount or imprisonment not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) days or to both such fine and imprisonment. 
(d)  This section is enacted pursuant to the police power of the city and in order to protect the citizens of the city against crime and preserve the private property, peace and comfort of the occupants of private residences in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-20-42, §§ 1—4) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37. 
Cross reference— Charitable solicitations, Ch. 4-5; hawkers, peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 4-9. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate and license occupations and businesses, General Municipal Law, § 20(13).  
Sec. 4-1-6. - Conversions to cooperative or condominium ownership (General Business Law, § 352-eee). 
The City of White Plains hereby elects that the provisions of section 352-eee, as amended, of the General Business Law, be applicable within The City of White Plains. 
(Res. of 9-2-80)  
Chapter 4-2 - AMBULANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State regulation of emergency service ambulances, Public Health Law, § 3000 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-2-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter the term "emergency ambulance service" means the furnishing of transportation to facilities providing medical treatment services where immediate transportation to such facility of such sick or disabled person is needed or appears to be needed to prevent undue suffering or loss of life of the person needing or appearing to need such transportation with emergency care in transit. 
(Ord. of 12-16-75, § 2)  
Sec. 4-2-2. - Established. 
An emergency ambulance service for the city is hereby established. 
(Ord. of 12-16-74, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to establish ambulance service, General Municipal Law, § 122-b.  
Sec. 4-2-3. - Rules and regulations, fees and charges—Authorized. 
The director of the bureau of emergency planning and civil defense is hereby authorized to prepare and submit for approval of the common council rules and regulations relating to the use of emergency ambulance service provided by the city and fix a schedule of fees or charges to be paid by persons requesting the use of such facilities. 
(Ord. of 12-16-75, § 3)  
Sec. 4-2-4. - Same—Current rules, regulations, etc. 
(a)  All emergency ambulance and transportation requests when reported to the police department will be dispatched by the police department communications office, to Abbey Richmond Ambulance Service, Division of Arco Medical Supply Corporation. However, all ambulance calls, regardless of origin shall be honored within the city limits and confirmed by the ambulance company, with the police communications officer, as soon as possible. 
(b)  All documented emergency ambulance police department calls, will be forwarded to the emergency planning director in report form by data processing print-out sheets monthly. 
(c)  The director of emergency planning will submit the dollar value of ambulance costs monthly to the commissioner of finance in accordance with the terms of the approved contract. 
(d)  The director of emergency planning will prepare a claim voucher for services rendered to the commissioner of finance for payment. 
(e)  The department of public safety shall have the responsibility of inspection of vehicle and determining the availability of the ambulance, as specified in the approved contract. 
(f)  The director of emergency planning will be responsible for providing weather reports as received, to Abbey Richmond, Division of Arco Medical Supply Corporation. 
(g)  A pre-arranged hospital zone is established as follows: 
(1)  Only in the event a patient or patient's family does not request a specific hospital. 
(2)  Transports to St. Agnes Hospital: South on North Broadway into South Broadway to Armory Place Hill including both sides of Bloomingdale Road, South to Mamaroneck Avenue, to the city limits. 
(3)  Transports to White Plains Hospital: West side of mentioned boundaries listed above through the city limits. 
However, Abbey Richmond personnel shall have a legitimate option of choice of hospitals if such factors as traffic and weather conditions are such that compliance to the zone would be detrimental to the patient's well being. 
(h)  Under provision of the contract a billing memo will be supplied no later than ten (10) days by the ambulance company, to the director of emergency planning. 
(i)  An out-of-town rate is established for noncity residents at a call rate of sixty dollars ($60.00) regardless of time. 
(j)  The ambulance company shall maintain communications equipment on the existing emergency planning radio system frequency of 29.61. The radio system is presently installed in police headquarters, emergency planning bureau, and all emergency ambulance calls shall be dispatched to the ambulance company utilizing this system. This radio system also is in operation at the Lexington and Hamilton Avenue fire house, and all the four local hospitals. However, a telephone hot line system will be installed from police headquarters to the ambulance company. This will also serve as a back-up system, and allow adequate delivery in regard to the purchase of radio communications equipment mentioned. 
(k)  The established payment for services rendered is as follows: 
(1)  Billing monthly for a period of three (3) months. 
(2)  Legal action for collection of fees will begin commencing the fourth month. 
(l)  The director of emergency planning accepts full responsibility for collection of any fees from patients for whom service is provided under Section 122-b of the General Municipal Law. 
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES 
(1)  Day ambulance rate (weekdays): 
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. ..... $140.00 
(2)  Off-hour and holiday rates: 
Weekdays—6:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. ..... 160.00 
Weekends—6:00 p.m. Friday to 9:00 a.m. Monday ..... 160.00 
Holidays—Full 24 hours ..... 160.00 
Non-city resident rates ..... 160.00 
(3)  Mileage rates (Medicare reimbursement only) ..... 2.50 
(4)  Charges, per patient, when carrying more than one patient in any one given ambulance: 
Stretcher cases—Full charges 
Day ..... 140.00 
Night ..... 160.00 
Ambulatory cases—½ normal charge (after first stretcher case) 
Day ..... 70.00 
Night ..... 80.00 
(5)  Canceled call charge—Call canceled after dispatch of ambulance—½ normal charge: 
Days ..... 70.00 
Nights and weekends ..... 80.00 
(6)  Waiting time charge other than municipal requirements, per hour ..... 45.00 
(7)  Oxygen service charge ..... 25.00 
(8)  Extra man charge ..... 29.00 
(9)  Advanced life support treatment as per same itemized breakdown in items (1) and (2) above: 
Day ..... 240.00 
Night ..... 260.00 
(10)  All medical supplies expended or furnished to authorized users of the ambulance service and damage done by demented beneficiaries of the service will be billed at the prevailing cost. 
(Res. of 12-16-74; Ord. of 6-21-85; Ord. of 6-2-86)  
Chapter 4-3 - AUCTIONEERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General police power of city, § 4. 
State Law reference— Auctions and auctioneers generally, General Business Law, § 21 et seq.; power of city to license and regulate occupations and businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-3-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
Auctioneer: Any person who sells or offers goods, wares and chattels at public auction. 
Goods, wares and chattels: These terms shall include, but shall not be limited to, all commodities, compounds, chattels, merchandise, watches, clocks, jewelry, and all other personal property which may be lawfully kept or offered for sale; but shall not include goods damaged at sea or by fire and sold or to be sold for the benefit of the owner's insurers or for the account of whom it may concern or goods sold by virtue of judicial decree. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 1)  
Sec. 4-3-2. - Use of criers, music, etc., to attract persons. 
No auctioneer shall employ a bellman, crier, instrument of music, loud speaker or other means of attracting the attention of passersby. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 13(4); Ord. of 12-1-80, § 13(4))  
Sec. 4-3-3. - Flag or sign. 
Any flag or sign used by an auctioneer to attract the attention of passersby shall bear the license number of the auctioneer. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 13(4); Ord. of 12-1-80, § 13(4))  
Sec. 4-3-4. - Conducting sales for transient merchants. 
No auctioneer shall conduct any auction sale for a transient merchant or other person who or which has not procured a permit as required by law or ordinance or whose permit has expired or been revoked. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 13(5); Ord. of 12-1-80, § 13(5))  
Sec. 4-3-5. - Hours of sale. 
No person shall conduct a public auction sale between 5:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except that an auction conducted for the limited purpose of "going out of business" may be conducted after 9:00 a.m. and continuing until 10:30 p.m. in a nonresidential district in connection with an existing retail use, provided that no auction permit for any sale at such location shall be issued for a period of longer than thirty-five (35) days in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 23; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 4-3-6. - Sales on Sundays and legal holidays. 
No person shall conduct a public auction sale on Sundays or legal holidays, except that an auction conducted for the limited purpose of "going out of business" may be conducted after 1:00 p.m. and continuing until 10:30 p.m. in a nonresidential district in connection with an existing retail use, provided that no auction permit for any sale at such location shall be issued for a period of longer than thirty-five (35) days in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 22; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 2)  
Sec. 4-3-7. - Deceptive or fraudulent practices. 
No auctioneer shall do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Make any false representation as to the character, quality, condition, previous history, value or ownership of any property offered for sale. 
(2)  Substitute any other article for the article sold to the bidder. 
(3)  Bid in any property offered for sale by himself and no person shall act as an accomplice or "capper" for the purpose of making mock bids at any auction. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 13(1)—(3); Ord. of 12-1-80, § 13(1)—(3))  
Sec. 4-3-8. - Transactions involving minors. 
No auctioneer knowingly shall receive for sale by auction or sell by auction any goods, wares or merchandise from or to any minor. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 13(7); Ord. of 12-1-80, § 13(7))  
Sec. 4-3-9. - Records. 
Every auctioneer, upon the receipt or acceptance by him of any goods for the purpose of sale at auction and before offering the same or any part thereof for sale at auction, shall write or cause to be written, in a book to be kept by him for such purpose: 
(1)  The name and address of the person who employed him to sell such goods at auction; 
(2)  The name and address of the person for whose benefit, behalf or account, such goods are to be sold at auction; 
(3)  The name and address of the person from whom such auctioneer received or accepted such goods; 
(4)  The name and address of the person who was the owner, the authorized agent of the owner or the consignor of such goods immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance for the purpose of sale at auction of the same by such auctioneer; 
(5)  The location, with street and number, if any, of such goods immediately prior to the receipt or acceptance of the same by such auctioneer for the purpose of sale at auction; 
(6)  The date of the receipt or acceptance by such auctioneer of such goods for the purpose of sale at auction; 
(7)  The place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods are to be held, kept or stored until sold or offered for sale at auction; 
(8)  The place, with street and number, if any, in which such goods are to be sold or offered for sale at auction; 
(9)  A description of such goods, the quantity thereof and the distinctive marks thereon, if any; and 
(10)  The terms and conditions upon which such auctioneer receives or accepts such goods for sale at auction. 
Such book and the entries therein made, as provided for in this section, shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the city clerk, the commissioner of public safety or their duly authorized agents. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 14; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 14)  
Sec. 4-3-10. - Vehicular parking. 
The commissioner of public safety shall have the authority to require that the auctioneer provide, at the auctioneer's expense, for police personnel to enforce the restrictions as to parking provided by the auctioneer. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 22; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 22)  
Sec. 4-3-11. - Exceptions. 
Nothing herein contained shall apply to judicial sales or sales by or for the account of executors or administrators, by trustees under deed of assignment, by lienors, or by public officers in the manner prescribed by law, or by bona fide religious or charitable organizations conducting auctions on premises regularly occupied or used by said organization for its activities. Sales by or for the account of executors or administrators are those sales comprised of the goods, wares and chattels of an estate of a descendant. Auctioneers shall not include in the inventory of such sales any goods, wares or chattels that are not part of said estate without complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 3; Ord. of 3-1-71, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 3)  
Sec. 4-3-12. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense or by imprisonment for fifteen (15) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and may result, in addition to the imposition of fines and penalties, in the revocation of the offender's license or permit. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 24; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 23) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-3-13—4-3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-3-21. - Required. 
No person shall carry on the trade of auctioneer or shall act as an auctioneer without having first secured a license therefor and no sale at public auction of goods, wares and chattels shall be held within the city unless such sale shall be directly conducted by a licensed auctioneer pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 2; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 2)  
Sec. 4-3-22. - Application. 
Every person desiring to procure the license required by this article shall file with the city clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared and furnished by the city. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The name and business and residence address of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicants' date of birth; 
(3)  His previous employment and where; 
(4)  Whether he has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony and if so what offense, when and in what court; 
(5)  Whether he has either alone or with someone else ever engaged in the business of auctioneer and if so when and where. 
Such application shall be signed and verified before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths in the state. Such application shall be accompanied by a photograph of applicant, in triplicate, in such position as the city clerk may direct, taken within thirty (30) days preceding the filing of the application. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 4; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 4)  
Sec. 4-3-23. - Investigation of applicant. 
When an application is filed pursuant to this article the city clerk shall request the commissioner of public safety to investigate whether the applicant is of good character and repute. Under the supervision of said commissioner fingerprints shall be taken of the applicant. The commissioner of public safety shall furnish to the city clerk, in writing, the information derived from such investigation, accompanied by a recommendation as to whether the license should be granted or refused. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 5; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 5)  
Sec. 4-3-24. - Bond. 
An application for the license required by the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a bond in favor of the people of the city, approved as to form and manner of execution by the corporation counsel, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned that the applicant will faithfully perform his duties as such auctioneer as required by law and ordinances and render such accounts and pay such duties as may be required of him by law. In lieu of such bond, a certified check payable to the city, to be held in a non-interest bearing trust account may be submitted. This certified check will be returned to the auctioneer upon the expiration of his license. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 6; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 6; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-3-25. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon filing the application, bond and information as required in this article, the city clerk may, upon approval of such application and the payment to the city of the license fee provided for in this article, issue to the applicant a license to engage in the business of auctioneer. No license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the protection of the public safety, good order and morals. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the date of issuance and expiration of the license, the fee paid and the name and business address of the licensee. 
(b)  No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further application until a period of at least six (6) months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection unless applicant can show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists, or unless such application was erroneously refused. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 7; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 7)  
Sec. 4-3-26. - Fee. 
The annual fee for auctioneer's license, shall be the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00), seventy-five dollars ($75.00) of which shall be payable directly to the department of public safety for the cost of a criminal background check and fingerprinting. Auctioneer's license can be renewed for two (2) consecutive annual renewals upon payment of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 8; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 8; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-3-27. - Expiration and renewal. 
Every license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next after its issuance. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 9; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 9; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-3-28. - Transfer or delegation of authority. 
(a)  No license under the provisions of this article shall be transferred or assigned to any person or used by any person other than the licensee to whom it was issued. 
(b)  No person having a license granted under this article shall delegate his power to any clerk, partner or person; the privilege given shall be personal to the person named in the license and shall be exercised by him alone. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 10; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 10)  
Sec. 4-3-29. - Replacement of lost or destroyed license. 
If a license issued pursuant to this article is lost, stolen, or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application may be issued by the city clerk upon the filing of an affidavit satisfactorily explaining the facts of such loss or theft and upon the payment of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 11; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 11; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-3-30. - Destruction, alteration, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface or injure a license issued pursuant to this article, or to change the name, numbers or dates thereon. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 11; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 11)  
Sec. 4-3-31. - Display. 
No auctioneer shall refuse to exhibit his license to any police officer upon demand at the place where the auction is being conducted. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 13(6); Ord. of 12-1-80, § 13(6))  
Sec. 4-3-32. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The city clerk may at any time for such cause as the city clerk, upon investigation, deems sufficient, suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this article. Violations of any of the prohibitions set forth in sections 4-3-2 through 4-3-4, 4-3-7 and 4-3-8 of this Code shall be deemed sufficient cause. 
(b)  Whenever any license shall be so revoked no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made and no license shall be granted to any person whose license has been revoked, in the discretion of the city clerk, within a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation. 
(c)  Notice of the suspension or revocation and the reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by the city clerk upon the person named in the license application by mailing the same to the business address given in such application and upon filing a copy of such with the commissioner of public safety. Within forty-eight (48) hours after service of the notice of suspension or revocation the licensee may apply to the commissioner of public safety to hear and review the act of the city clerk and the commissioner of public safety shall affirm or disaffirm said suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 12; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 12)  
Secs. 4-3-33—4-3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 4-3-41. - Required. 
No person shall sell, at public auction, any goods, wares or chattels without a permit issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 15; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 15)  
Sec. 4-3-42. - Application. 
A person required by this article to obtain a permit shall make application to the city clerk. Such application shall be in writing and shall be verified and filed not more than fifteen (15) nor less than five (5) days before the commencement of such sale. It shall set forth: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the auctioneer; 
(3)  The street and number of the premises in which it is proposed to conduct such sale; and 
(4)  The place of business of the applicant for the two (2) years next preceding the date fixed for the sale. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, §§ 15, 16; Ord. of 12-1-80, §§ 15, 16)  
Sec. 4-3-43. - Inventory. 
(a)  There shall be attached to the application for the permit required by this article an inventory, in triplicate, showing in detail: 
(1)  The quality, quantity, kind or grade of goods, wares and chattels proposed to be sold; 
(2)  The established current retail prices, if any, of the goods, wares and chattels; 
(3)  The ownership of the items or articles. 
The inventory shall be verified by the applicant if he be an individual, by one of the partners, if a partnership, or by a duly authorized officer, if a corporation. No goods, wares or chattels shall be added to the verified inventory after same has been filed nor shall any goods, wares or chattels be sold which are not included in such verified inventory. 
(b)  The city clerk, or his duly authorized agent, before issuing a permit shall examine and investigate the goods, wares and chattels specified in the inventory to be offered for sale in order to determine whether the inventory correctly sets forth the items to be sold and their estimated value. The city clerk may require such additional information as may be necessary to ascertain the correctness of the items set forth in the inventory. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, §§ 17, 18; Ord. of 12-1-80, §§ 17, 18)  
Sec. 4-3-44. - Fee. 
Upon the application for a permit to conduct a sale at public auction, or renewal thereof, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk a fee in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a one-day permit, and a fee in the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a permit in excess of one (1) day but not to exceed ten (10) days in duration. If an application is disapproved said payment shall not be returned but shall be retained by the city to cover the cost of investigating the statements contained in the application. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 19; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 19; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-3-45. - Denial. 
The city clerk shall refuse to issue a permit for a sale at public auction in the event any material misrepresentations have been made in the application or inventory provided for in this article. Notice of the refusal and the reason or reasons therefor, in writing, shall be served by the city clerk upon the person named in the application by mailing the same to the business address given in the application and upon filing a copy of such with the commissioner of public safety. Within forty-eight (48) hours after service of the notice of refusal the person who was denied a permit may apply to the commissioner of public safety to hear and review the act of the city clerk and the commissioner of public safety shall affirm or disaffirm the refusal to issue a permit. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 18; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 18)  
Sec. 4-3-46. - Sales on Sunday and legal holidays. 
No permit shall be issued to conduct a sale at public auction on Sundays or legal holidays, except that an auction conducted for the limited purpose of "going out of business" may be conducted after 1:00 p.m. and continuing until 10:30 p.m. in a non-residential district in connection with an existing retail use, provided that no auction permit for any sale at such location shall be issued for a period of longer than thirty-five (35) days in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 20; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 20; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 3)  
Sec. 4-3-47. - Hours of sale. 
No permit shall be issued to conduct a sale at public auction between 5:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., except that an auction conducted for the limited purpose of "going out of business" may be conducted after 9:00 a.m. and continuing until 10:30 p.m. in a non-residential district in connection with an existing retail use, provided that no auction permit for any sale at such location shall be issued for a period of longer than thirty-five (35) days in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. of 4-19-51, § 21; Ord. of 12-1-80, § 21; Ord. of 7-5-94, § 4)  
Chapter 4-4 - CABARETS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General police power of city, § 4. 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate occupations and businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1, amended ch. 4-4, art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. I, §§ 4-4-1—4-4-12, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 9-5-23, §§ 3, 12—17, 19—21; Ord. of 5-7-28, § 1; Ord. of 12-7-36, § 2; Ord. of 11-21-66, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 12-19-66, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-15 § 1; Ord. of 3-2-15(1), § 1. 
 
Sec. 4-4-1. - Purpose and construction. 
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the protection of the economic and social welfare, health, peace and morals of the people of the city and all its provisions shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-2 - Definitions. 
Cabaret: Any room, space or area used in connection with a business enterprise, in which musical entertainment, singing, dancing or other form of amusement by performers and/or by patrons ("Entertainment") is allowed. A "cabaret" is only permitted in connection with a "restaurant." However, the following shall not constitute a cabaret: 
A restaurant or bar located in a hotel having more than 50 sleeping rooms; or 
A restaurant or café that provides incidental Entertainment, without dancing, either by: 
• electrical devices such as, but not limited to stereos, radios or media players, but not including music provided by a disc jockey; or 
• not more than four (4) persons playing non-amplified music; or 
• a person with or without a portable low-wattage amplifier associated with a single instrument or microphone. 
Accessory Cabaret: A "cabaret" in which the Entertainment and/or dancing do not, in the aggregate, occupy more than 40% of the Net Floor Area of the principal business of a "restaurant." 
Primary Cabaret: A "cabaret" in which the Entertainment and/or dancing, in the aggregate, occupy more than 40% of the Net Floor Area of the principal business of a "restaurant." 
Net Floor Area: The floor area of a premises open to the public excluding bathroom facilities. 
Restaurant: a "restaurant" is a business enterprise primarily engaged in preparing, cooking, and serving food and beverages on premises; selected from a full menu by patrons seated at a table or counter; served by a waiter or waitress; and consumed on the premises. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-3. - Operation and hours. 
(a)  Operation. It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret to delegate the responsibility of the operation of the cabaret, including security thereat, to any person or entity that is not an employee of said cabaret operator. An owner or employee of the cabaret licensee must be present at the cabaret during all hours of operation and must be in charge of the operation of said cabaret. 
(b)  Hours. It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret to operate a cabaret on any day between the hours of 3:01 a.m. and 11:59 a.m., however the facility may continue to operate as a restaurant after those hours. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-4. - Intoxicating liquors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or have in his or her possession or partake of any intoxicating liquors in any cabaret. This section shall not apply to cabarets where intoxicating liquors may be lawfully sold under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-5. - Nudity. 
No person shall be permitted to appear in any cabaret with the chest, breasts or buttocks fully exposed or any portion of the genitals exposed. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-6. - Sound amplification. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret to operate a cabaret in violation of the following: 
(a)  Sound Level. The sound level of either live or recorded music or other attendant noise as measured from the exterior of the cabaret premises shall not exceed 85 decibels (dB) at any time as measured at a reasonable distance not less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen (15) feet from the premises of the cabaret establishment. A noise level evaluation of the operation of the cabaret use, paid for by the Applicant or owner, shall be conducted by the Department of Building every three (3) months of operation of the cabaret use, with the results to be submitted to the Common Council within two (2) weeks of said evaluation and made available to the public. 
(b)  Sound Amplification Equipment. No Sound Amplification Equipment (speakers, amplifiers, audio systems, radios, televisions, or any other device that can produce or reproduce sound) shall be installed or operated indoors with the intent to amplify the sound outdoors and/or within any temporary structures(s). 
(c)  Sound Amplification Shut-Off. Whenever the building or space fire alarm system is activated all Sound Amplification Equipment within the cabaret shall be shut off. Sound Amplification Equipment shall mean speakers, amplifiers, audio systems, radios, televisions, or any device that can produce or reproduce sound. 
(d)  Reduction of Sound Transmission. In an effort to reduce sound transmission, all doors related to the cabaret use, including those from the street, shall be equipped with automatic self-closers, remain closed during operation of the cabaret use and shall not be permitted to be propped open at any time. Doors may be used for ingress and egress only and must be sealed tightly when closed. In addition, unless technically infeasible, all new cabarets shall incorporate an interior vestibule at the entrance to the room, space or area where the cabaret is proposed. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-7. - Food service. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret to operate a cabaret without food service available from a printed menu. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-8. - Employee roster. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret to fail to maintain a roster, which contains the name, address and telephone number of all employees, excluding kitchen and wait-staff, working at any given time when such cabaret is open. Such roster shall be maintained on the premises of the cabaret for six (6) months and available for inspection by the Department of Public Safety promptly upon request. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-9. - Entry fee. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of an accessory cabaret to charge an entry fee payable at or prior to admission. However this shall not prohibit: 
(1)  imposing a fee or fixed charge for entertainment or service that is added to a bill for patrons with reserved table seating; or 
(2)  the selling of tickets in advance or the charging of a fee inside the premises for live musical entertainment, excluding a disc jockey, provided the Department of Public Safety approves a Live Musical Entertainment Permit, the Application for which shall be submitted at least ten (10) days in advance of the scheduled performance. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-10. - Entry powers of police officers and housing/building inspectors. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret or restaurant to refuse admission or entry to the public areas of the cabaret or restaurant during operating hours to any officer charged with enforcing the penal laws of New York State, the New York State Building Code, the White Plains Supplemental Building Code or the City of White Plains Municipal Code. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-11. - Temporary closure. 
If in the opinion of the Commissioner of Public Safety, or the Commissioner's designee, an owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret, creates, maintains or permits a condition that endangers or threatens to endanger the safety or health of the public, the Commissioner, or designee, may order the immediate temporary closure of the cabaret. It shall be unlawful for an owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any cabaret, to fail to comply with such order. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-12. - Penalty. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand five dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense or by imprisonment for each offense for a period of not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 7-6-15, § 1)  
Secs. 4-4-13—4-4-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-4-26. - Required. 
No person shall conduct, manage or operate a cabaret without a license issued by the commissioner of public safety. 
(Ord. of 9-5-23, § 4)  
Sec. 4-4-27. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to procure a cabaret license shall make application therefor to the commissioner of public safety upon a form as shall be designated and furnished by the commissioner of public safety. 
(b)  Said application shall be signed and duly verified by the applicant before an officer authorized to administer oaths. No such application shall be granted to conduct such cabaret on premises which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter and all laws and regulations of the state and all ordinances and regulations of the city. In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall supply any and all reasonably relevant information, including, but not limited to financial information and records of the applicants, their officers, directors, and shareholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, of if a partnership, all partners, concerning its application to operate a cabaret when requested to do so by the commissioner of public safety. 
(c)  All applicants, their officers, directors, and shareholders holding more than ten (10) percent of outstanding voting stock, or if a partnership, all partners, shall submit to fingerprinting by the police department of the department of public safety. Fingerprint cards shall be forwarded by the police department to the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS), along with the appropriate processing fees paid by the applicant as established by DCJS for identification processing. The commissioner or designee shall be responsible for the submission and review of the criminal history record information disseminated by DCJS. The commissioner of public safety may use such information provided by DCJS in making a determination concerning the fitness of the applicants under Section 4-4-28 (infra) for licensing but shall also take into account any certificates granted to an applicant under Article 23 of the Correction Law. The information obtained from DCJS shall be kept confidential to the extent permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-5-23, § 5; Ord. of 2-6-06, § 1)  
Sec. 4-4-28. - Issuance and renewal of license. 
(a)  The commissioner of public safety may refuse to issue or renew a license to an applicant upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Any of the applicants, their officers, directors and shareholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, or if a partnership, any of the partners, have not submitted complete and accurate information required by the commissioner of public safety in connection with: 
a.  An application for a license or renewal thereof; 
b.  An application for the approval of a change of ownership; and 
c.  The furnishing of fingerprints as required by subsection 4-4-27(c) hereof. 
(2)  The premises on or in which the licensed business is to be conducted have not been certified as in compliance with the health, fire, building, zoning, water, gas and electricity safety requirements and standards established by the laws of the City of White Plains, the County of Westchester, and the State of New York or any other governmental authority having jurisdiction thereof. 
(3)  With respect to a new license application for the premises on or in which the licensed business is to be conducted, there is no current certificate of occupancy for the premises and/or a special permit to operate a cabaret. 
(4)  The applicant licensee, its officers, principals, directors, shareholders owning more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, partners, agents or employees or in a closely held corporation, shareholders have not complied with the regulations of the commissioner of public safety or have violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Any of the applicants, their officers, directors and shareholders owning more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, or if a partnership, any of the partners, have been convicted of: 
a.  Any offense which is a felony under the laws of this state or a crime committed in violation of the laws of any other jurisdiction which if committed in this state would be a felony. 
b.  Any offense which is a misdemeanor related to and/or involving the premises on or in which the licensed business is to be conducted. 
(6)  Any of the applicants, their officers, directors and shareholders owning more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, or if a partnership, any of the partners, have suffered or permitted the premises on or in which the licensed business is to be conducted, through improper or inadequate maintenance and supervision, to be used for the commission of any of the offenses set forth in subsection (5) of this subdivision. 
(7)  Any of the applicants, their officers, directors, and shareholders owning more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, or if a partnership, any of the partners, have not paid, within the time permitted by law, any fine, penalty or judgment duly imposed in connection with or arising from the use, occupation, or operation of the premises on which the licensed business is to be conducted. 
(8)  Any of the applicants, their officers, directors, and shareholders owning more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, or if a partnership, any of the partners have suffered or permitted individuals of less than eighteen (18) years of age to commercially promote use of the premises as a cabaret. 
(9)  Any of the applicants, their officers, directors and shareholders owning more than ten (10) percent of the outstanding voting stock, or if a partnership, any of the partners, have been enjoined against operation of the cabaret and/or civil penalties have been assessed in connection with or related to such injunction. 
(b)  Each applicant and licensee shall notify the department of public safety in writing by registered mail, return receipt requested, within three (3) business days of receipt of notice of service of a summons for a violation relating to the operation of the business licensed or to be licensed or to the premises on or in which the business licensed or to be licensed is to be conducted and of a conviction for any offense set forth in subdivision (a)(5) hereof occurring after the filing date of the application for a license or a renewal thereof or occurring during the term of the license. 
(c)  In the manner prescribed in Rule 318 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules, each applicant or licensee shall designate an agent, a substitute agent and a successor agent located within the City of White Plains for receiving service of process and communications from the commissioner of public safety. Proof of such designation shall be filed with the license application at the department of public safety. 
(d)  Upon request of the commissioner of public safety, each applicant and licensee shall produce its security plan, including, but not limited to the adequacy and number of security personnel employed and/or retained on the licensed premises to the commissioner of public safety at the time of the application for a license hereunder and at any other time on request of the commissioner of public safety. Each applicant and licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises a list and pedigree of all security personnel who are currently and who have worked for the preceding twelve-month period on the licensed premises and shall produce such list and photographs to the commissioner of public safety at his or her request. All security personnel employed and/or retained on the licensed premises shall be registered with the Department of State pursuant to Article 7-A, Security Guard Act, of the General Business Law. 
(Ord. of 9-5-23, §§ 4a, 6; Ord. of 11-21-66, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-06, § 2)  
Sec. 4-4-29. - Issuance or denial and hearing on denial. 
(a)  The commissioner of public safety, upon presentation of an application for a cabaret license and before acting upon it, shall refer it to the chief of police for a full investigation as to the truth of the statements contained therein, and as to any or all other matters which might tend to aid the commissioner of public safety in determining whether or not the application should be granted. 
(b)  Within a reasonable time after such an application has been referred to him, the chief of police shall furnish a written report to the commissioner of public safety containing the result of his investigation. If the commissioner of public safety is satisfied that the statements contained in the application are true, that the premises described in the application comply with the requirements of this article and that the issuance of the license is not prohibited by section 4-4-28 of this Code he shall issue such license. 
(c)  If the commissioner of public safety is not satisfied that the provisions of section 4-4-28 do not prohibit the issuance of the license, he shall hold a hearing on the application after a minimum of three (3) days' notice to the applicant. At the hearing the applicant shall be given an opportunity to prove by competent evidence that the license should be granted. After the hearing the commissioner of public safety shall grant the license if he is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence that its issuance is not prohibited by section 4-4-28; if the commissioner finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the issuance of the license is prohibited by section 4-4-28, he shall deny the license. The action of the commissioner of public safety shall be final. 
(Ord. of 9-5-23, § 6; Ord. of 2-6-06, § 3)  
Sec. 4-4-30. - Fee, expiration and transfer. 
The annual fee for a cabaret license shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); provided that in the event a license be granted after July first of any year the license fee shall be one-half (½) the amount of the annual license fee. The commissioner of public safety shall not issue a cabaret license until the applicant has paid such fee to the city. All such licenses shall expire on December 31 next following their issue. Such license shall not be transferable and shall not authorize the person to whom it is granted to conduct a cabaret at any location other than that specified therein. 
(Ord. of 9-5-23, § 7; Ord. of 12-7-36, § 1; Ord. of 2-2-15 § 2; Ord. of 3-2-15(2), § 2; Ord. of 7-6-15, § 2; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 9)  
Sec. 4-4-31. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  The commissioner of public safety may suspend or revoke a license for conduct of the licensee, its officers, principals, directors, partners, agents or employees or in a closely held corporation, shareholders that would constitute grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license pursuant to section 4-4-28. 
(b)  At least three (3) days before suspending or revoking any license, the commissioner of public safety shall cause to be mailed to the holder of the license at the address provided or the designated agent pursuant to subsection 4-4-28(c) hereof, a notice, stating a time and place of a hearing concerning the suspension or revocation at which the licensee shall be entitled to be heard and introduce the testimony of witnesses. The action of the commissioner of public safety relative to such suspension or revocation shall be final. 
(c)  Upon application to the commissioner of public safety and prior to the reinstatement or reissuance of a suspended or revoked license, the licensee, with the commissioner of public safety's approval, shall, upon payment of the fee as specified in section 4-4-30, be permitted to operate for six (6) months on a probationary license. At the end of such six-month period, the license shall be reinstated or reissued unless the commissioner of public safety finds that the licensee, its officers, principals, directors, agents or employees or, in a closely held corporation, stockholders, have engaged in conduct that would constitute grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license pursuant to section 4-4-28. Upon a finding of such conduct, the probationary license shall be revoked and shall not be reissued for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 9-5-23, § 8; Ord. of 2-6-06, § 4)  
Sec. 4-4-32. - Summary suspension. 
(a)  A license may be summarily suspended if the commissioner of public safety determines there is an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public at the licensed premises or on any parking site or similar facility used by customers of the licensed business or used as part of the licensed business operation. The commissioner of public safety may consider an imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public which exists within one hundred (100) feet of the licensed business premises or within one hundred (100) feet of any parking site or similar facility used by the customers of the licensed business or used as part of the licensed business operation. 
(b)  The commissioner of public safety's determination that there is an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare shall be based on one or more of the following: 
(1)  There is an urgent need to take immediate action to protect the public from an imminent threat of injury or harm; 
(2)  There has been a violation of a license condition or other requirement of this Code that creates an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or 
(3)  There has been a violation of municipal, state or federal law, in connection with the operation of the licensed business, that created an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  The summary suspension shall remain in effect for no more than thirty (30) days. 
(d)  Written notice of summary suspension shall be delivered to the licensee at the address provided or to the designated agent pursuant to subsection 4-4-28(c) hereof. Notice given to the licensee shall include the following information: 
(1)  The length of time the summary suspension shall remain in effect; 
(2)  The grounds and reasons upon which the summary suspension is based; and 
(3)  That the licensee aggrieved by the summary suspension may immediately request relief from the summary suspension by requesting that the commissioner of public safety schedule a hearing and the method for requesting such a hearing. 
(e)  If the licensee wishes to be relieved from the summary suspension, the licensee must request a hearing by following the procedures set forth in the notice of summary suspension. 
(f)  The commissioner of public safety or designee must respond to the licensee's request for a hearing by scheduling a hearing to affirm, modify or overrule the summary suspension within five (5) business days of the licensee's request, unless the licensee requests an extension of the time for the hearing. Said hearing shall be before a hearing officer designated by the commissioner of public safety. 
(g)  At the hearing before the hearing officer, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to present evidence that either rebuts the ground(s) for which the summary suspension was issued or demonstrates that the reason or reasons leading to the summary suspension have been mitigated or corrected. 
(h)  The hearing will be conducted informally and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. Any and all other evidence which the hearing officer deems reliable, relevant and not unduly repetitious may be considered. 
(i)  Following the conclusion of the hearing, and after a review of the recommendations of the hearing officer, the commissioner of public safety shall issue a decision which affirms, modifies or overrules the summary suspension, as specified in subsection (j). In connection with the modification of the summary suspension, the hearing officer designated by the commissioner of public safety may recommend the imposition of additional conditions upon the license if those conditions were reviewed at the hearing and the conditions are aimed at protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public or preventing the conduct or condition that lead to the summary suspension. 
(j)  The decision of the commissioner of public safety shall be communicated to the licensee within three (3) business days after completing the review of the hearing officer's recommendation by sending the decision to the licensee at the address provided or to the designated agent pursuant to subsection 4-4-28(c) and to the address at which the cabaret business is conducted, unless such premises have been closed. 
(Ord. of 2-6-06, § 5)  
Sec. 4-4-33. - Rules and regulations. 
The commissioner of public safety is authorized to adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the proper control, operation, and supervision of cabarets. Each licensee shall receive a copy of such rules and regulations on issuance of a license. 
(Ord. of 2-6-06, § 6)  
Chapter 4-5 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Solicitors on private property, § 4-1-5; hawkers, peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 4-9. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-5-1. - Labeling of collection boxes and containers. 
Persons holding licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall label all collection boxes or containers used in the public solicitation of funds either by appeal in person or by the placing of receptacles for the receipt of such public contributions in stores, factories, shops, offices, theatres, hotels, restaurants, railway stations or other public places, with the name of the organization for which the license has been issued and in such conspicuous manner as the commissioner of public safety may direct. 
(Ord. of 4-26-26, § 4)  
Sec. 4-5-2. - Regulations authorized. 
The commissioner of public safety may establish such regulations as he deems necessary in carrying out the purposes and objects of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-26-26, § 3)  
Sec. 4-5-3. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates this chapter or who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 4-26-26, § 5) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-5-4—4-5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-5-16. - Required. 
No person shall solicit money, donations or financial assistance of any kind upon the streets or in public places in the city without a license issued by the commissioner of public safety. 
(Ord. of 4-26-26, § 1)  
Sec. 4-5-17. - Application. 
Applications for the license required by the provisions of this article to publicly solicit funds for any cause whatever shall be addressed to the commissioner of public safety and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and purpose of the cause for which permission is sought. 
(2)  Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization. 
(3)  Time for which permission is sought and localities and places for solicitation. 
(4)  Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to be expended in connection with such solicitation. 
(5)  Such other information as the commissioner of public safety shall require. 
(Ord. of 4-26-26, § 2)  
Sec. 4-5-18. - Statement as to monies collected. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public safety before granting any license to solicit in public to compel the applicant to file with him a sworn statement of all moneys collected in the calendar year or the fiscal year of such organization, society, association or corporation previous to the application, the expenditures connected therewith, together with the names and addresses of all persons receiving wages, commissions or emoluments and the amounts so expended. 
(Ord. of 4-26-26, § 3)  
Chapter 4-6 - COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING MACHINES AND ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code provisions dealing with coin-operated dry cleaning machines, § 9-6-8.01 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate business, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-6-1. - Legislative determination. 
As a legislative determination, it is deemed necessary to the safety, health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city that certain coin-operated dry cleaning machines and establishments be regulated and restricted in order to prevent injury and damage to persons and property in the city, and to eliminate conditions dangerous to the safety, health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 1)  
Sec. 4-6-2. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, when used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning herein respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Commissioner: The commissioner of public safety or his duly authorized representative. 
(2)  Premises: Any place, whether self-service or otherwise, maintained for use of and by the general public for the purpose of dry cleaning of clothing, apparel or other fabrics or household articles by or in automatic or coin-operated machines, excepting, however, such places in private homes. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 2)  
Sec. 4-6-3. - Scope. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all coin-operated dry-cleaning premises, whenever established. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 14)  
Sec. 4-6-4. - Prohibited in multiple residences. 
Automatic or coin-operated dry-cleaning devices shall not be installed or used in any multiple residence. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 3)  
Sec. 4-6-5. - Attendant; supervision. 
All coin-operated dry cleaning establishments shall have an attendant on the licensed premises at all times when the premises are open for business or public use, said attendant shall not be less than twenty-one (21) years of age. No coin-operated dry cleaning machine shall be used by the general public unless under the continuous, direct supervision of an employee or owner of the coin-operated dry cleaning establishment who has previously been examined and certified in writing by the fire chief as competent to handle such machines. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 8)  
Sec. 4-6-6. - Departmental approvals. 
All coin-operated dry cleaning machines and locations must be approved by the city departments having jurisdiction, prior to the installation of machinery. A floor plan showing the business premises and the location, type and manner of installation of all equipment shall be submitted with each license application. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 9)  
Sec. 4-6-7. - Operating restrictions. 
(a)  No coin-operated dry cleaning licensee shall permit or allow such machines to be used by any person who is less than sixteen (16) years of age. A suitable sign indicating such age restriction must be prominently posted and maintained on the premises. 
(b)  All coin-operated dry cleaning machines shall be fitted with a device which will prevent the opening of the door of any such machine while such machine is in operation and until all solvent vapors have been removed from any textile, fabric, garment or other article, and from the drum in which the same shall be placed. 
(c)  In the event that Perchlorethylene or any chlorinated hydro-carbon is a component part of any solvent used in a coin-operated dry cleaning machine, then such machine shall not be used: 
(1)  if the odor of Perchlorethylene or any chlorinated hydro-carbon is masked or altered in any fashion; or 
(2)  if the concentrations of solvent vapor of such Perchlorethylene or chlorinated hydro-carbon is greater than forty (40) parts of such vapor to one million (1,000,000) parts of air at any time and anywhere in such machines or appurtenant equipment. 
(d)  In any coin-operated dry cleaning establishment, solvent storage tanks, power boxes and other sources of danger shall be so situated as to be inaccessible to the general public and patrons of such establishment. 
(e)  Spotting operations utilizing flammable liquids shall not be permitted in this type of occupancy. 
(f)  Only the front or customer side of dry cleaning machines shall be exposed in the customer area. The working or maintenance portion of the equipment shall be separated from the front of such machines by a solid partition. Access doors to the enclosure back of the machines shall be kept closed and locked. The enclosure for the dry cleaning machines shall not be a part of or interconnected with those areas that contain heating devices requiring air for combustion, such as dryers, water heaters and boilers. 
(g)  An exhaust system shall be provided for the removal of toxic vapors. This exhaust system consists of the individual exhaust on each dry cleaning machine, scavenger ducts strategically located, exhaust fans for the enclosure behind such machines, and the front grill of loading door air intakes on each machine. 
(h)  The central exhaust ventilating system for dry cleaning machines as described above shall be operated continuously while the premises are open to the public. The vapor removal system shall be interlocked with the dry cleaning machines so that the latter cannot be operated without actuating the exhaust system. The manifold exhaust system shall exhaust to the outside, not terminate within twenty-five (25) feet of any building opening, not expose the passing public, and be located as remotely as possible from appliance air intakes. In addition to the individual exhaust for the vapor from each such machine a scavenger duct shall be provided for each two machines to pick up vapors surrounding the equipment near the floor. The suction of these scavenger pipes should be located two (2) to four (4) inches above the floor. A general ventilation fan shall also be installed within the rear enclosure of such machine to be used in case of serious solvent spill. Each such machine shall be designed so that when the machine is not in operation air is drawn through the front door or grill of the machine at a face velocity of at least one hundred (100) feet per minute. 
(i)  Provisions shall be made for makeup air to compensate for that which is exhausted to the outside. 
(j)  Such dry cleaning machines shall be provided with some satisfactory means to limit vapor accumulation and to salvage the solvent resulting from a spill due to an accident or failure of equipment, such as by diking the entire system with a four (4) inch curb on the floor which will contain the solvent and drain it to an underground tank where it can be recovered. When an underground tank is not feasible, the curbed area can be provided with a sump pump that will pump the solvent to an above ground tank. 
(k)  All coin-operated dry cleaning establishments shall have two (2) exits which shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet apart from each other and shall lead directly to the outside. 
(l)  Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be disposed of so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance. A locked covered metal container shall be used for temporary storage outside the building. 
(m)  All direct equipment exhausts or vents shall be provided with mesh lint arrestors which shall be kept clean unless lint traps are provided on the dry cleaning unit. 
(n)  Each self-service dry cleaning establishment shall be provided with a portable fire extinguisher of the carbon dioxide or dry chemical type. 
(o)  Each day, dry cleaning machines shall be serviced, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Adding "charged" solvent to restore the main supply. 
(2)  Cleaning the button trap and the lint bag, trap or screen. 
(3)  Cleaning the tank sump and removing the sludge. 
(4)  Adding filter aids to dispersers. 
(5)  Resetting the cycle counter, if one is provided. 
(6)  Emptying the water from the separator. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 10)  
Sec. 4-6-8. - Instruction to public. 
(a)  All coin-operated dry cleaning establishments shall prominently display lighted indoor signs warning the general public of the danger of excessive solvent vapor inhalation and skin irritation from unevaporated dry cleaning solvent. 
(b)  A step-by-step instruction list shall be posted in a conspicuous location near each dry cleaning machine for customer use. There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed and maintained at all times on the premises a legible sign, on a form to be provided by the commissioner, stating the name, address and telephone number of the owner or managing agent, and which telephone number shall be listed at police headquarters for emergency assistance. 
(c)  All machines shall be checked daily and kept in good repair by the licensee. All maintenance personnel shall be familiar with all necessary machinery repairs and instructed as to the solvent hazards. 
(d)  Only the solvent specified by the equipment manufacturer shall be used. 
(e)  Coin-operated dry cleaning plants shall utilize only solvents classified as nonflammable or as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and uses. 
(f)  There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed and maintained at all times on the premises, the license issued by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 11)  
Sec. 4-6-9. - Hours of operation. 
No coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall be open for business between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 12)  
Sec. 4-6-10. - Penalty. 
Any person maintaining or conducting or carrying on or operating a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation, or to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or fraction of a day on which each such violation shall continue shall be construed as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 13) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-6-11—4-6-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-6-21. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment in any premises in the city without a license therefor. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 3)  
Sec. 4-6-22. - Application and issuance. 
(a)  The application for a license or for any renewal thereof to conduct a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the commissioner and shall state the specific location of such establishment and the number and type of all machines to be maintained therein. Before issuing any such license, the commissioner shall cause all necessary investigations to be made of the premises described in such application for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of all applicable state, county, health and local laws, ordinances and regulations are fully complied with. 
(b)  If the commissioner shall be satisfied that such premises conform to the provisions of this chapter and other laws relating thereto, he shall issue or cause to be issued a license authorizing such applicant to establish, maintain, conduct or operate a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment at the place, and with the number of machines, as specified and designated in such application, for and during the period of such license. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 4)  
Sec. 4-6-23. - Fee; bond. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a coin-operated dry cleaning establishment license, each applicant therefor shall pay an annual license fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each machine installed therein for the license period May 1 to April 30, and furnish a continuing bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such bond shall be executed by a duly authorized surety company, and be approved as to form by the corporation counsel, shall be payable to the city and shall be conditioned upon the licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon the further condition that the licensee will pay to said city any fine, penalty, or other obligation within thirty (30) days of its final imposition. 
(b)  For licenses issued between November 1 and April 30 only one-half of the annual license fee shall be payable. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 5)  
Sec. 4-6-24. - Term and transfer. 
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the last day of April following the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked by the commissioner. Such license shall not be transferable from person to person or from the location for which it is originally issued. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 6)  
Sec. 4-6-25. - Revocation. 
The commissioner may, at any time, for violation of this chapter or of any applicable law, regulation or ordinance, or such other cause as the commissioner, upon investigation and after a hearing, deems sufficient, suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this chapter. Notice in writing of the proposed suspension or revocation and the reason or reasons therefor, and of the time and place of a hearing to be held thereon by the commissioner shall be served upon the licensee either personally or by certified or registered mail to the business address given in the application at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Whenever any license shall be so revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. No license shall be granted to any person whose license has been revoked within a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation, except in the discretion of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 7)  
Chapter 4-7 - COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Building code, Ch. 9-5; provisions of fire prevention code dealing with coin-operated laundries, § 9-6-8.09; plumbing code, Ch. 9-7. 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate occupations and businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-7-1. - Legislative determination. 
As a legislative determination, it is deemed necessary to the safety, health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city that certain coin-operated laundry establishments within the city be regulated and restricted, as herein set forth, in order to prevent injury and damage to persons and property in the city, and to eliminate conditions dangerous to the safety, health and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 1)  
Sec. 4-7-2. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, when used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning herein respectively ascribed to them: 
Commissioner: The commissioner of public safety or his duly authorized representative. 
Premises: Any place, whether self-service or otherwise, maintained for use of and by the general public for the purpose of washing and drying of clothing, apparel or other fabrics or household articles by or in automatic or coin-operated machines, excepting, however, such places in private homes and apartment houses used solely by residents thereof. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 2)  
Sec. 4-7-3. - Approval of location of machine. 
All coin-operated washing and drying machines and locations must be approved by the city departments having jurisdiction, prior to the installation of machinery. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 8)  
Sec. 4-7-4. - Hours of operation. 
No coin-operated laundry establishment shall be open for business between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 9)  
Sec. 4-7-5. - Health and safety precautions. 
The following provisions shall apply to all coin-operated laundry establishments: 
(a)  Filter residue shall be disposed of so as not to create a health hazard or nuisance. A locked, covered metal container shall be used for temporary storage outside the building. 
(b)  All equipment exhausts or vents for drying machines shall be provided with mesh lint arrestors which shall be kept clean. Lint traps shall be provided on all drying units. 
(c)  Each self-service or coin-operated laundry establishment shall be provided with a portable fire extinguisher of the carbon dioxide or dry chemical type. 
(d)  All machines shall be checked daily and kept in good repair. 
(e)  Drying machines shall be serviced each day, including, but not limited to cleaning the lint bag, trap or screen. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 10)  
Sec. 4-7-6. - Posting of certain information. 
A step-by-step instruction list shall be posted in a conspicuous location near each washing and drying machine for customer use located in a coin-operated laundry establishment. There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed and maintained, at all times, on the premises a legible sign on a form, to be provided by the commissioner, stating the name, address and telephone number of the owner or managing agent, which telephone number shall be listed at police headquarters for emergency assistance. There shall be posted and conspicuously displayed and maintained, at all times, on the premises, the license issued by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 11)  
Sec. 4-7-7. - Penalty. 
Any person maintaining or conducting or carrying on or operating a coin-operated laundry establishment, who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation, or to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or fraction of a day on which each such violation shall continue shall be construed as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 12) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-7-8—4-7-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-7-16. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate a coin-operated laundry establishment in any premises in the city without a license issued by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 3)  
Sec. 4-7-17. - Application and issuance. 
(a)  The application for a license or for any renewal thereof to conduct a coin-operated laundry establishment shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the commissioner and shall state the specific location of such establishment and the number and type of all machines to be maintained therein. A floor plan showing the business premises and the location, type and manner of installation of all equipment shall be submitted with each license application. Before issuing any such license, the commissioner shall cause all necessary investigations to be made of the premises described in such application for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of all applicable state, county, health and local laws, ordinances and regulations are fully complied with. 
(b)  If the commissioner shall be satisfied that such premises conform to the provisions of this chapter and other laws relating thereto, he shall issue or cause to be issued a license authorizing such applicant to establish, maintain, conduct or operate a coin-operated laundry establishment at the place, and with the number of machines, as specified and designated in such application, for and during the period of such license. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, §§ 4, 8)  
Sec. 4-7-18. - Fee. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a coin-operated laundry establishment license, each applicant shall pay an annual license fee as indicated in the following schedule: 
Number of Machines 
  In Premises     License Fee 
 1—30 ..... $ 150.00  
31 and over ..... 250.00  
(b)  For licenses issued between the first day of November and the thirtieth day of April, inclusive, only one-half of the annual license fee shall be payable. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 5; Ord. of 5-17-16 , § 7)  
Sec. 4-7-19. - Bond. 
Prior to the issuance of a coin-operated laundry establishment license the applicant shall furnish a continuing bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such bond shall be executed by a duly authorized surety company, and be approved as to form by the corporation counsel, shall be payable to the city and shall be conditioned upon the licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon the further condition that the licensee will pay to said city any fine, penalty, or other obligation within thirty (30) days of its final imposition. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 5(a))  
Sec. 4-7-20. - Expiration and transfer. 
Each license for a coin-operated laundry establishment shall expire on the thirtieth day of April following the date of its issuance unless sooner suspended or revoked by the commissioner. Such a license shall not be transferable from person to person or from the location for which it is originally issued. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 6)  
Sec. 4-7-21. - Revocation. 
The commissioner may, at any time, for violation of this chapter or of any applicable law, regulation or ordinance, or such other cause as the commissioner, upon investigation and after a hearing, deems sufficient, suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this chapter. Notice in writing of the proposed suspension or revocation and the reason or reasons therefor, and of the time and place of a hearing to be held thereon by the commissioner shall be served upon the licensee either personally or by certified or registered mail to the business address given in the application at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Whenever any license shall be so revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. No license shall be granted to any person whose license has been revoked within a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation, except in the discretion of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-2-65, § 7)  
Chapter 4-8 - GASOLINE STATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Permit to store flammable liquids, § 9-6-15.103; dispensing gas, § 9-6-15.503; garage or repair shops, § 9-6-17.04. 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
Sec. 4-8-1. - Posting of price. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at retail any gasoline or diesel fuel unless such seller shall post and keep continually posted on the individual pump or other dispensing device, a sign twelve (12) inches in height and twelve (12) inches in width, stating clearly and legibly thereon in letters sufficiently large to be read by a person having normal vision from the public street closest to the place of business, the total price of such gasoline or diesel fuel, including all taxes. 
(b)  Each pump or dispensing unit shall have a similar sign equally legible setting forth the trade name, brand and grade or classification of such gasoline or diesel fuel permanently affixed thereto. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon the first conviction therefor be subject to a fine which shall not exceed more than fifty dollars ($50.00) and on any subsequent conviction therefor shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in amount or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days or to both such fine and imprisonment for each such violation. 
(Ord. of 11-4-74, §§ 1—3) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 4-9 - HAWKERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Solicitors and others on private property, § 4-1-5; charitable solicitations, Ch. 4-5; transient retail businesses, Ch. 4-16. 
State Law reference— Peddlers generally, General Business Law, §§ 32—36; power of city to license and regulate occupations and businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-9-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(1)  Established place of business: A building, store or vacant property in which or where the person transacts business and deals in goods, wares and merchandise he hawks, peddles or for which he solicits during regular business hours. 
(2)  Hawker or peddler: Any person, either principal or agent, who, from any boat or car on a railroad track or in any public street or public place or by going from house to house or place of business to place of business on foot or on or from animal or vehicle, sells or barters, offers for sale or barters or carries or exposes for sale or barter any goods, wares or merchandise, except milk or newspapers. 
(3)  Solicitor: Any person who goes from place to place or house to house or who stands in any street or public place requesting, either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property or anything of value; taking or offering to take orders for goods, wares and merchandise, except milk or newspapers, or for services to be performed in the future, or for selling, making, manufacturing or repairing any articles or thing whatsoever for future delivery. 
(4)  Veteran: Every honorably-discharged soldier, sailor or marine of the military or naval service of the United States, and a veteran of either the Civil War, Spanish-American War or any other war or who shall have served in the armed forces of the United States overseas, who is a resident of the county and the widow of any such veteran, if she be a resident of the county. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 1; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 11-5-12, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-2. - Vehicles generally. 
Every vehicle used by a hawker, peddler or solicitor in or about his business shall have the name of the licensee and his address plainly, distinctly and legibly painted in letters and figures at least two (2) inches in length in a conspicuous place on the outside of each side of every such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 8)  
Sec. 4-9-3. - Sanitation. 
A peddler, hawker or solicitor shall keep the vehicles and receptacles used by him in a clean and sanitary condition and the food stuffs and edibles offered for sale well covered and protected from dirt, dust and insects. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10(c))  
Sec. 4-9-4. - Noise. 
A peddler, hawker or solicitor shall not blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other noisy device to attract public attention to his wares, or shout or cry out his wares. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10(d))  
Sec. 4-9-5. - Fraud or sale of diseased merchandise. 
No hawker, peddler or solicitor shall falsely or fraudulently misrepresent the quantity, character or quality of any article offered for sale, or offer for sale any unwholesome, tainted or diseased provisions or merchandise. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10(a))  
Sec. 4-9-6. - Receipts for orders. 
All orders taken by licensed solicitors, who demand, accept or receive payment or deposit money in advance of final delivery, shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance, and one copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the deposit of money is paid to the solicitor. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 11)  
Sec. 4-9-7. - Sales near schools. 
No peddler, hawker or solicitor shall sell any confectionery or ice cream within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of any school between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10)  
Sec. 4-9-8. - Standing of vehicle. 
No peddler, hawker or solicitor shall stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in one place in any public place or street for more than ten (10) minutes, or in front of any premises for any time if the owner of or lessee of the ground floor thereof objects. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10(e))  
Sec. 4-9-9. - Parking on crosswalk. 
No peddler, hawker or solicitor shall permit any vehicle used by him to stop or remain on any crosswalk. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10(g)) 
State Law reference— Parking on crosswalk, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1202.  
Sec. 4-9-10. - Obstruction of streets and public places. 
A peddler, hawker or solicitor shall not create or maintain any booth or stand or place any barrels, boxes, crates or other obstructions upon any street or public place for the purpose of selling or exposing for sale any goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10(h))  
Sec. 4-9-11. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to: 
(1)  Any sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court, to any person selling personal property at wholesale or dealers in such articles; 
(2)  Persons having an established place of business within the city or their employees for soliciting orders from customers and delivering the same; or 
(3)  Farmers or truck gardeners who themselves or through their employees vend, sell or dispose of products of their own farms and gardens. 
This chapter shall also not apply so as unlawfully to interfere with interstate commerce. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 2) 
State Law reference— Exemption for veterans and their widows, General Business Law, § 32.  
Sec. 4-9-12. - Penalty. 
Any person, who himself or by his clerk, agent or employee, shall act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor as herein defined, without a license, or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who, having had his license revoked, shall continue to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 13; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-9-13—4-9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-9-26. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a hawker, peddler or solicitor in the city without a license issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 3; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-26a. - Do-not-knock registry. 
(1)  Any owner or occupant of property located in the City who wishes to prohibit hawkers, peddlers or solicitors on the premises shall complete a form available in the City Clerk's office. The completion of the form will allow the owner/occupant's premises to be included on a list of properties that do not permit solicitation (hereinafter referred to as the "do-not-knock registry" or "registry"). 
(2)  In order to be removed from the registry, the owner and/or occupant must complete a form indicating that he/she does not want the property to be included on the registry. 
(3)  Any owner or occupant who has requested enlistment on the do-not-knock registry shall be able to purchase from the City Clerk's office, for a nominal fee, a sticker for display indicating enlistment on the do-not-knock registry. 
(4)  All hawkers, peddlers and solicitors shall obtain the current do-not-knock registry at the time of issuance of a license or at the time of registration pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this Chapter. 
(5)  The City Clerk shall update the do-not-knock registry on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 or each year, which updated registry shall constitute the current do-not-knock registry. Copies of the current do-not-knock registry shall be available at the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12, § 2)  
Sec. 4-9-26b. - Unwanted hawking, peddling and solicitation prohibited. 
(1)  Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors shall not engage as such at any premises identified on the current do-not-knock registry. 
(2)  Activities related to a service requested by the owner or occupant of the property and undertaken in the ordinary course of business, including but not limited to deliveries of utility notices, telephone directory deliveries, regular newspaper deliveries, work order notices and service inquiries, are presumed to be requested or invited for the purpose of this section. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the distribution of leaflets, pamphlets or other literature such as commercial, political or religious material distributed in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12, § 2)  
Sec. 4-9-27. - Application and investigation. 
(a)  Any person desiring to procure a license required by this article shall file with the city clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared by the city clerk and furnished by the city, and shall file at the same time satisfactory proof of good character. Such application shall include the following: 
(1)  The license plate and registration numbers and kind of vehicle to be used by the applicant in carrying on the business for which the license is desired; 
(2)  The kind of goods, wares and merchandise he desires to sell or the kind of services he desires to perform, and the method of distribution; 
(3)  The name, address and age of applicant; the name and address of any person represented; 
(4)  If the applicant is a veteran or the widow of a veteran, the name and address as appears on the application for his county peddler's license, date of issuance of county license and the license number; 
(5)  The applicant's photograph, in triplicate, in such position as the city clerk may direct, taken within thirty (30) days preceding the filing of the application; and 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by the city clerk from said person, veteran or the widow of a veteran. 
(b)  Such application shall be accompanied by a certificate from the sealer of weights and measures certifying that all weighing and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have been examined and approved. 
(c)  The city clerk shall thereupon request the commissioner of public safety to investigate the applicant. As part of the investigation the applicant shall submit to having the fingerprints taken at police headquarters. Such fingerprints shall be kept on file at police headquarters as a permanent record. The commissioner of public safety shall furnish to the city clerk in writing the information derived from his investigation accompanied by a recommendation as to whether the license should be granted or refused. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 4; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-28. - Persons ineligible to apply for license. 
No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had a license revoked shall make further application until at least six (6) months has elapsed since the last previous rejection or revocation unless he can show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 5; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-29. - Issuance and denial of certificate of registration. 
Upon filing of the complete application by the applicant and providing all of the information requested, certificate and recommendation as provided in Section 4-9-27(c), the city clerk shall, upon approval of such application, within ten (10) business days issue to the applicant a license as provided in section 4-9-26, signed by the city clerk. Except as hereinafter provided, no license shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the protection of the public safety, health, morals or general welfare as stated below: 
a)  Applicant is under the age of eighteen (18); 
b)  The location and time of the activities described in the application would endanger the safety and welfare of the applicant and its customers; 
c)  Investigation reveals that applicant falsified information on the application; 
d)  Applicant has been criminally convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, or violation involving a sex offense, sale or distribution of controlled substances, or any violent acts against persons or property which would endanger the safety and welfare of specific individuals, the general public, and public or private property; 
e)  Applicant has been incarcerated in federal or state prison for crimes which would endanger the safety and welfare of specific individuals, the general public, and public or private property; 
f)  A civil judgment has been entered against applicant indicating that applicant engaged in fraud, deceit or misrepresentation within the last five (5) years. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 5; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-9-30. - Fee. 
The initial fee for a license shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
a)  seventy-five dollars ($75.00) of which shall be payable directly to the department of public safety for the cost of a criminal background check and fingerprinting. 
b)  one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) of which shall cover the cost of processing the application by the city clerk and issuing the license. 
The license can be renewed for two consecutive annual renewals at a fee of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00), if there have been no legitimate complaints made against the applicant verified by the commissioner of public safety and applicant has not engaged in any activity in violation of this chapter or any other law which would warrant for a discontinuance and/or denial of the applicant's license. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 6; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1, Ord. of 6-6-83, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-9-31. - Expiration. 
Licenses shall be issued for a twelve-month period commencing the first day of the month in which such permit is issued and expiring on the last day twelve (12) months subsequent. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 5; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-32. - Assignment or allowing another to use license. 
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be assignable and it shall be unlawful for its holder to allow another to use such license. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article which was not issued to him. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 5; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-33. - Display. 
A hawker, peddler or solicitor, while engaged as such, shall carry the license issued to him pursuant to this article with him and shall exhibit the same upon demand. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 5; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-34. - Number of vehicles license covers. 
A license issued pursuant to this article shall include the right to use only one vehicle in carrying on the business for which the person is licensed. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 5; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-35. - License generally. 
The city clerk shall issue an official license with photograph to each hawker, peddler and solicitor. Such license shall not be transferred or assigned. On the expiration of the license the licensee shall surrender such license to the city clerk. It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy or deface such license in any manner, or change the number or date thereon. It shall also be unlawful for any person to have in his possession such license unless he be the licensed hawker, peddler or solicitor in whose name the license is issued. The carrying of the license is hereby made a condition of every license and failure by the licensee to carry the license while in the exercise thereof, shall be cause for revocation of such license. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 7; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95)  
Sec. 4-9-36. - Replacement of lost or destroyed license. 
Whenever a license is lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application may be issued by the city clerk upon the filing with the clerk by the licensee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of the loss and what, if any, search has been made for it and upon payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 5; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-37. - Displaying license badge after expiration or revocation. 
A hawker, peddler or solicitor shall not display the license provided by the city after the expiration or revocation thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 10(b); Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-9-38. - Revocation. 
The commissioner of public safety may, at any time, suspend or revoke any license for any reason warranting a denial of a license or for a violation of this chapter. When a license shall be revoked no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. The commissioner of public safety shall notify the city clerk of the revocation of any license and the reason or reasons therefore and notice of such revocation and the reason or reasons therefore in writing shall be served by the city clerk upon the person named in the application, or by mailing the same to the address given in the application. A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 9; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-9-39. - Records. 
The city clerk shall keep a record of all applications and of all licenses granted under the provisions of this article, giving the number and date of each license, the name and residence of the persons licensed, the amount of the license fee paid and also the date of revocation of all licenses revoked. 
(Ord. of 10-5-31, § 12; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Chapter 4-10 - HOUSING AND RENT CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fair housing, Ch. 4-19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-10-1. - Scope of Emergency Housing Rent Control Law. 
The common council of The City of White Plains hereby elects that the provisions of paragraph (k) of subdivision 2 of section 2 of the Emergency Housing Rent Control Law shall not apply in the city. 
(Res. of 5-13-57) 
State Law reference— Emergency Housing Rent Control Law, Unconsol. L., §§ 8581—8597 (McKinney); paragraph (k) of subdivision 2 of section 2 is § 8582, 2(k); power of city to pass resolution to this effect, Unconsol. L., § 8592, 4 (McKinney).  
Secs. 4-10-2—4-10-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION OF EMERGENCY TENANT PROTECTION ACT OF 1974 
 
Sec. 4-10-16. - Definition. 
As used in this article the term "Act" shall mean the Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974, as amended, (Laws 1974, Chapter 576, as amended). 
State Law reference— Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974, Unconsol. L., §§ 8621—8634 (McKinney).  
Sec. 4-10-17. - Legislative determination. 
The common council, on July 29, 1974, declared an emergency pursuant to the Emergency Tenant Protection Act of 1974, providing for regulation of rents of all housing accommodations subject to regulation under the "act". Section 8 of the "act" requires that the city pay the costs incurred by the state division of housing and community renewal in administering the rent regulations under the "act", by making deposits in a revolving fund. 
Section 8-b of the "act", authorizes the city to impose on the owners of every building containing housing accommodations, subject to regulation under the "act", an annual charge for each such accommodation, in such amount as the city determines to be necessary for the expenses thereby incurred in the administration of such regulation. The procedures for enforcing the charges establishing rates, penalties and liens therefor are established in this article pursuant to the power delegated to the city in subdivision 5, § 10 of the Statute for Local Governments, and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 9-8-81, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to declare emergency pursuant to act, Unconsol. L., § 8623 (McKinney); section 8-b is § 8628b (McKinney).  
Sec. 4-10-18. - Administrative charges. 
The owner of every building containing housing accommodations, subject to regulation pursuant to the act, shall pay to the city an annual charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each such housing accommodation in a building owned by said owner for the fiscal period commencing January 1 and ending the following December 31. 
(Ord. of 9-8-81, § 2; Ord. of 9-7-82, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-83, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-88, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-03)  
Sec. 4-10-19. - Billing and collection procedures. 
(a)  The commissioner of planning shall prepare a tentative list of owners of buildings to be charged the annual charge, identifying the address and tax lot reference of the premises and the address of the owner thereof, taken from the assessor's records and other available information as to the names and addresses of the owners. The list shall state as to each building the number of units of housing accommodations at the premises subject to regulation under the "act." This list shall be posted in a public place at the office of the Commissioner of Planning for a period of two (2) weeks from January 1 in each year. 
(b)  Notice of such posting shall be published in the official newspaper at least twice between January 1 and January 15. During the period between January 1 and January 31, during the regular business hours, objections shall be heard by the commissioner of planning or his designated representative, as to any claim or discrepancy in the amount of units for which the annual charge is to be made. 
(c)  The commissioner of planning shall make a record of any such objections and determine the merits of such objections and amend the tentative list consistent with the determination of objections, establishing thereby the final list of annual charges. 
(d)  After January 1, but prior to January 31, the commissioner of planning shall file with the commissioner of finance a certified copy of the list of annual charges. 
(e)  The commissioner of finance shall then render bills on account of the annual charge to the owners in the amounts designated on the list, and mail the bills to the owners at the addresses designated thereon in the same manner as is provided for the billing of the second half city taxes. The annual charges shall become a lien, be due and payable, interest charged, penalties accrued, and collections enforced in the same manner as is provided by the Charter for taxes levied pursuant to section 84 of the Charter. 
(f)  The commissioner of finance shall, upon receipt of the adjusted bill to the city at the close of the state fiscal year as provided for in section 8-a of the "act," render a bill for the adjusted annual charge to the person billed for the initial annual charge. When a refund is otherwise payable upon the annual charge for a building, but the annual charge has not been paid, then the commissioner of finance shall render a corrected bill setting forth the balance owing, inclusive of penalties and interest. 
(Ord. of 9-8-81, § 3; Ord. of 1-4-88, §§ 2, 3) 
State Law reference— Power of local government to fix, levy, impose, collect and administer fees and liens on local property in connection therewith, Statute of Local Governments, § 10(5).  
Chapter 4-11 - PAWNBROKERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, General Business Law, §§ 40—55; power of city to license and regulate businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
Sec. 4-11-1. - License. 
Every pawnbroker shall pay a yearly license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each established business in the city. The initial license fee for a pawnbroker license shall be two hundred and seventy-five dollars ($275.00) which shall include a fingerprinting fee. All licenses shall be issued as of May 1, and shall continue in force until April 30 next succeeding the issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked by the city's commissioner of public safety, or other local licensing authority. 
(Ord. of 5-15-61, § 1; Ord. of 9-6-11, § 1) 
State Law reference— Licensing of pawnbrokers by city, General Business Law, §§ 40, 41.  
Chapter 4-12 - RESIDENTIAL ZONE; COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING RESTRICTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Garaging auto trucks or light delivery cars in residential zones, § 9-2-5J; building code, Ch. 9-5. 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-12-1. - Legislative finding. 
(a)  Despite the prohibition in the existing zoning ordinance prohibiting and restricting the parking of commercial vehicles in residentially zoned areas, there has been a tendency to violate the ordinance arising out of hardship by many citizens who employ auto trucks or light delivery cars to go to and from their employment, or place of business, and their residences. The standing of such commercial vehicles in residential zones tends to deteriorate the quality of living in such zones by the ugliness of most commercial vehicles; by the creation of hazards by reason of the types of material carried in such commercial vehicles; by the increase in hazards to neighbors by reason of the increased traffic of heavy vehicles in the neighborhood as compared to the lighter weight passenger vehicles normally considered to use the roads and driveways of such residential neighborhoods; by generation of violations of the building code and aspects of the zoning ordinance by reason of the placement of commercial vehicles in garages not designed for the housing of such vehicles and which were intended by the zoning ordinance to house only private vehicles; by generating disobedience to the provisions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community at large of the protections intended by the zoning ordinance and building code for the community. 
(b)  Concurrently with the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the common council liberalized, but carefully controlled, the conditions under which such commercial type vehicles may be garaged in a residentially zoned area in a private garage and found it necessary to require that the vehicle intended to be used in such private garage in a residential zone, shall be carefully regulated by means of an annual inspection of the vehicle to determine that the vehicle is of the appropriate size and is equipped as to the essential safety devices necessary to protect the community when such vehicles are permitted in such zones. The amount of the license fee adopted in this chapter is intended to offset the expected costs of annual registration and inspection and identification of the vehicles so licensed. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 1)  
Sec. 4-12-2. - Use of authorized garage required. 
No person shall park or otherwise allow an auto truck or light delivery car to stand on private property in a residential zone otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, unless it is garaged, parked or allowed to stand in a private garage duly authorized for such use pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 2) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 4-12-3. - Compliance with other laws. 
A vehicle licensed pursuant to this chapter shall not be used for any purpose prohibited by any law, code, rule or regulation pertaining to the premises. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 5)  
Sec. 4-12-4. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter may be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each day or fraction of a day on which any such violation occurs, may be separately charged as a separate and distinct violation for the purpose of punishment. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 7) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-12-5—4-12-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-12-16. - Required. 
No person shall park or otherwise allow an auto truck or light delivery car to stand on private property in a residential zone otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers, unless it has affixed to it and displayed on its hood, a current license issued by the commissioner of building for such use. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 2)  
Sec. 4-12-17. - Application and fee. 
(a)  The application for a license or for any renewal thereof under this article shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the commissioner of building which shall require: 
(1)  A statement of the specific location of the private garage to be used; 
(2)  A copy of the current state department of motor vehicles owner registration form for the vehicle; 
(3)  A certification by the owner of the vehicle that the vehicle is not to be used for the purpose of conducting any business or any occupation prohibited by the zoning ordinance at the premises, signed by both the owner of the vehicle and the owner of the premises; and 
(4)  Such other information reasonably required by the commissioner of building to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)  A nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid for the initial application for the license for garaging of a particular vehicle and fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be paid for the annual renewal of such license. The fee shall accompany the initial application and the application for renewal. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 3(a), (b))  
Sec. 4-12-18. - Issuance. 
(a)  The commissioner of building, upon receipt of an application for the license required by this article, shall order an inspection of the premises to determine whether the premises may be lawfully used under all applicable codes, rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the premises and particularly for the parking or standing of such auto truck or light delivery cars at the premises. If the commissioner of building determines that the vehicle may be lawfully parked or allowed to stand at the premises, he shall issue a license authorizing the vehicle to be garaged at the designated private garage for the calendar year, or part thereof, for which the vehicular license is to be issued and shall require that the license be affixed to the exterior of the vehicle upon its hood. 
(b)  The license so issued shall state as a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The plate number and maximum gross weight of the vehicle as appears on the certificate of registration as issued by the state department of motor vehicles then in effect for the vehicle; 
(2)  The name of the owner of the vehicle; 
(3)  The name of the owner of the premises at which the vehicle is to be allowed to be parked in a private garage; 
(4)  The date of issuance and the date of expiration of the license issued by the commissioner of building. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 3(c), (d))  
Sec. 4-12-19. - Expiration. 
Each license issued pursuant to this article, including any renewal thereof, shall expire on the last day of December of the year of its issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked by the commissioner of building. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 4)  
Sec. 4-12-20. - Transfer. 
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be transferable or assignable and shall only be valid for use at the premises designated thereon. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 5)  
Sec. 4-12-21. - Cancellation. 
If, at any time during the period for which a license has been issued pursuant to this article, the commissioner of building shall receive information that the vehicle so licensed is being used contrary to any law, code, rule or regulation issued thereunder, pertaining to use of premises in the city, the commissioner of building shall serve a notice of intention to cancel the license, in writing, served by certified mail addressed to the owner of the premises and to the owner of the vehicle. Such notice shall specify the day, time and place of the hearing to be conducted by the commissioner of building, or his designee, upon at least ten (10) days' notice prior to the hearing. Upon a determination of the commissioner after such hearing that a violation has occurred, or if there is a default in appearing for such hearing, or upon a waiver of such hearing, the commissioner is authorized to cancel or revoke such license. 
(Ord. of 5-2-77, § 6)  
Chapter 4-13 - SECONDHAND DEALERS, RUMMAGE SALES, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
State Law reference— Sale of secondhand watches, General Business Law, § 392; power of city to license and regulate occupations and businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-13-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(1)  Rummage sale: A sale of goods or odds and ends, accumulated or collected for a sale for charity. 
(2)  Secondhand dealer: Any person engaging in the business of the purchase from the public at large of any and all secondhand goods or articles of personal property and the re-sale thereof, and holds himself out as engaging in such business, either through advertising or other means. 
(3)  Secondhand goods or secondhand articles: Any material or article of personal property of which prior use has been made. 
(4)  Thrift shop: A shop where used and new merchandise is donated and offered for sale for welfare and charitable purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 1; Ord. of 6-17-63, § 1)  
Sec. 4-13-2. - Reports to commissioner of public safety. 
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall deliver to the commissioner of public safety or his representative within four (4) hours after demand the records or portions thereof specified by the commissioner, or copies or extracts thereof required to be kept in section 4-13-4 of this Code of all goods, articles or things purchased, received or sold in the course of business of the dealer. The contents of such records, copies or extracts thereof shall not be communicated to any person for the purpose of publication but shall be used by the commissioner of public safety and others in authority to protect the public interest and detect crime. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 14)  
Sec. 4-13-3. - Purchase from minor or intoxicated persons. 
No dealer in secondhand articles shall purchase any secondhand goods, articles or things whatsoever from any minor or a person who is actually or apparently intoxicated, knowing or having reason to believe the person to be such. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(3))  
Sec. 4-13-4. - Record of purchases and sales. 
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall keep a substantially bound book in which shall be legibly written in ink and in English at the time of every purchase or sale a description of every secondhand article so purchased or sold, the number or numbers and any monograms, inscriptions or other marks of identification that may appear on the article, the name, residence, general description and signature of the person from whom such purchase was made and the name and residence of the person to whom sold. Such book shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection, or for copying or photostating, by the commissioner of public safety or his duty [duly] authorized agents. No entry in such book shall be erased, obliterated, altered or defaced and such book shall be kept and maintained for a period of two (2) years from the date of the latest purchase or sale entry made therein. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 13)  
Sec. 4-13-5. - Misleading signs. 
No dealer in secondhand articles shall display any sign which is calculated to mislead others. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(4))  
Sec. 4-13-6. - Acting or being licensed as pawnbroker, junk peddlers, etc., prohibited. 
No dealer in secondhand articles, while licensed as such, shall be licensed as a pawnbroker, a junk peddler or junk merchant or a used car dealer, nor shall any sign or other device or subterfuge be displayed, used or employed by any dealer in secondhand articles in or about the premises where such business is conducted which in any wise resembles the emblem or sign commonly used by pawnbrokers or which is intended to give the appearance that the business conducted on such premises is connected with the business of a pawnbroker. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(4))  
Sec. 4-13-7. - Tagging items. 
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall at the time of making any purchase and until resale attach and keep affixed a properly numbered tag to, or otherwise keep legibly numbered, each secondhand article bought and shall also make entry of such number in the book provided for in section 4-13-4 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(6))  
Sec. 4-13-8. - Inspection of premises and records. 
A secondhand dealer shall allow his place of business and all secondhand articles and records therein to be at all reasonable times examined by the commissioner of public safety or his duly authorized agents. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(5))  
Sec. 4-13-9. - Buying goods from other than owners. 
No secondhand dealer shall buy any secondhand articles of any kind which are distinctly and plainly marked as being the property of any person other than the person offering to sell the same, unless the person offering to sell the same shall show satisfactory evidence in writing that he is the legal and lawful owner of such property. Such written evidence shall be posted in the book provided for in section 4-13-4 of this Code and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The source of the property; 
(2)  Date of purchase; purchase price; and 
(3)  The length of time the property was in the possession of the seller. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(9))  
Sec. 4-13-10. - Signs generally. 
(a)  Every secondhand dealer shall post in a conspicuous place in his place of business a sign indicating that he deals in secondhand goods. 
(b)  A secondhand dealer shall not display on the premises any sign with reference to rummage sales. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(10), (11); Ord. of 6-17-63, § 2)  
Sec. 4-13-11. - Reporting suspicious characters. 
In case any suspicious or known dishonest person shall offer for sale to any secondhand dealer, his employee, agent or servant, any article of value and he has reason to believe from any circumstances that the same has been stolen or acquired by dishonest means, it shall be his duty to report the same immediately to the commissioner of public safety or his representatives. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 16)  
Sec. 4-13-12. - Lost or stolen property. 
The commissioner of public safety shall furnish to every dealer in secondhand articles a list of all articles reported to the police department as lost or stolen. If the commissioner of public safety shall notify a secondhand dealer that any goods, articles or things have been lost or stolen and if any goods, articles or things described in the notice shall be or shall come into the possession of any such person, he shall immediately give to the commissioner of public safety information in writing that certain goods, articles or things listed by the police are in his possession and shall not dispose of the same except upon written authority so to do from the commissioner of public safety. Every dealer in secondhand articles who shall have or receive any goods, articles or things lost or stolen, or alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall exhibit the same on demand to the commissioner of public safety or his duly authorized agents. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 17)  
Sec. 4-13-13. - Special provisions for thrift shops and rummage sales. 
(a)  No person whether as principal, agent or employee shall establish, engage in, or carry on a thrift shop without the written consent of the commissioner of public safety. 
(b)  No person whether as principal, agent or employee shall establish, engage in, or carry on a rummage sale without the written consent of the commissioner of public safety. Such consent shall be granted only to a person who is a resident of the city or who maintains an office for the conduct of business in the city. 
(c)  A rummage sale conducted pursuant to the written permission of the commissioner of public safety shall not exceed a period of seven (7) days and the applicant may not conduct more than two (2) rummage sales within a one year period commencing with the date of issuance of the first permit by the commissioner of public safety. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, §§ 18, 19; Ord. of 6-17-63, § 4)  
Sec. 4-13-14. - Posting of chapter. 
Every person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall post in a conspicuous place in his place of business a copy of this chapter, to be furnished by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(7))  
Sec. 4-13-15. - Exemption. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to retail stores selling articles taken as part-payment on new merchandise or to the sale of books, magazines, pianos, cooking ranges, refrigerators, washing machines, automobiles or automobile accessories, including tires, or to exchanges, returns or credits of merchandise when the articles exchanged, returned or credited are accepted in full or part-payment, nor to church or other religious or charitable association rummage or similar sales. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 1)  
Sec. 4-13-16. - Violations. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine that shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in amount or by imprisonment not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 20; Ord. of 6-13-63, § 3) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-13-17—4-13-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE FOR SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 4-13-26. - Required. 
No person, either as principal, agent or employee shall establish, engage in or carry on the business of dealing in secondhand articles, either separately or in connection with some other business, without a license issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 2)  
Sec. 4-13-27. - Application. 
(a)  Every person desiring to procure a secondhand dealer's license, as herein provided, shall file with the city clerk a written application upon a blank form prepared and furnished by the city. Such application shall contain the name and residence or the names and residences of the applicant, if an individual, partnership or firm, or the names and residences of the principal officers and stockholders owning more than twenty (20) per cent thereof, if the applicant is an association or corporation. Such applicant shall also describe in detail the character of the business in which he, they or it desire to engage. 
(b)  The application shall also state the following: 
(1)  The length of time such applicant or applicants, if an individual, firm or partnership, or the officer, manager or person in charge if the applicant is a firm, partnership or association, has or have resided in the city, his or their place of previous employment, whether he or they or any of them have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, what offense, when and in what court. 
(2)  The premises where such business is to be located or carried on, giving street and number. 
(3)  Whether the applicant or any officer or manager thereof has, either alone or with someone else, previously been a dealer in secondhand articles. 
(c)  Such application shall be signed and sworn to before a notary public or other official authorized to administer oaths in the city. Such application shall be accompanied by a photograph of applicant, if an individual, in triplicate, in such position as the commissioner of public safety may direct, taken within thirty (30) days preceding the filing of the application; similar photographs shall be required of each partner of a co-partnership, each officer and managing agent of a corporation and of each member of any other legal entity. Photographs shall be of a size which may be easily attached to the license, one of which shall be attached to the license when issued and the others filed with the application. Such application shall be accompanied by fingerprints of the above described persons whose photographs are required. A copy of the fingerprints and of the photographs so taken shall be kept on file at police headquarters as a permanent record. 
(d)  Any changes in any facts or information required on said application occurring after filing thereof shall be reported by the licensee in writing to the commissioner of public safety within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 3)  
Sec. 4-13-28. - Bond. 
An application for a secondhand dealer's license shall be accompanied by a bond in favor of the people of the city, approved as to form and correctness by the corporation counsel, in the penal sum of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00), conditioned for the due observance during the term of the license of any and all ordinances which are now in force or may hereafter be adopted by the common council respecting the business of dealing in secondhand articles. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 4; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-13-29. - Investigation. 
When an application for a secondhand dealer's license is filed, the city clerk shall request an investigation to be made by the commissioner of public safety to ascertain whether the applicant and the persons required to be fingerprinted and photographed are of good character and repute, and to further ascertain whether proper precautions against danger from fire, both within and without the premises named in the application, have been taken. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 5)  
Sec. 4-13-30. - Issuance generally. 
Upon the filing of the application, bond and satisfactory investigation report by the commissioner of public safety, the city clerk may, upon approval of such application and the payment to the city of the proper license fee hereinafter provided, issue to the applicant a license to engage in business as a secondhand dealer. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and shall state clearly the location of the place of business in which the person receiving such license shall be authorized to establish, engage in or carry on the business, the kind of business, the dates of issuance and expiration of the license and the name and address of the licensee. No applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further application until a period of at least six (6) months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection unless he can show that the reason for such rejection no longer exists. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 6)  
Sec. 4-13-31. - Fee. 
Every dealer in secondhand articles shall pay a license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), seventy-five ($75.00) of which shall be payable directly to the department of public safety for the cost of a criminal background check and fingerprinting. Such license may be renewed yearly for a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Every license may be renewed for two (2) consecutive annual renewals as of the first day of January upon payment of the required fee and filing a renewal application, under oath, on a form furnished by the city clerk certifying that no changes have occurred with respect to any of the facts or information required or supplied on the original application or, if there have been any changes, the applicant shall furnish the facts and information relating to all such changes and shall comply with the requirements of section 4-13-27 of this Code with respect thereto. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 7; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-13-32. - Persons ineligible for license. 
No secondhand dealer's license shall be granted to any person who shall have been convicted within three (3) years of the date of application of a violation of this chapter, or a felony, petty larceny or knowingly receiving stolen goods. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(8))  
Sec. 4-13-33. - Expiration and renewal. 
Every secondhand dealer's license shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next after its issuance. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 8; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-13-34. - Transfer. 
No license under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred or assigned to any person or used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 9)  
Sec. 4-13-35. - Alteration, injury, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall deface or injure any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or change the name, numbers or dates on such license. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 10)  
Sec. 4-13-36. - Replacement of lost or destroyed license. 
If a secondhand dealer's license is lost, stolen or destroyed without fault on the part of its holder, a duplicate may be issued by the city clerk upon the filing of an affidavit satisfactorily explaining the facts of such loss or theft and upon the payment of one dollar ($1.00) for such duplicate license. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 10)  
Sec. 4-13-37. - Changing place of business. 
In case any person holding a secondhand dealer's license moves his place of business from the place designated on the license, he shall immediately thereupon give notice to the city clerk and have the same endorsed on the license. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 12)  
Sec. 4-13-38. - Use of location specified in license required. 
No person holding a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall carry on business at any place other than the one designated in his license. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(1))  
Sec. 4-13-39. - Revocation or suspension. 
Any license granted under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked, for cause, after a hearing for that purpose. The hearing upon such charges shall be held by the city clerk, or other person designated by the city clerk in writing. In the case of a hearing officer so designated, he shall make a record of such hearing which shall, with his recommendation, be returned to the city clerk for review and decision. Any such hearing shall be held after reasonable written notice by the city clerk to the licensee of the charges, and the licensee shall have the right to counsel and to present evidence. Violation by the licensee or his agent or employee of any of the provisions set forth in sections 4-13-2 through 4-13-10, 4-13-12, 4-13-14, 4-13-33 or 4-13-34 of this chapter shall be deemed sufficient cause for such suspension or revocation but shall not be limited thereto. Notice of the suspension or revocation and the grounds therefor, in writing, shall be sent by the city clerk to the licensee by mailing same to the business address of the premises or to the last-known place of residence of the licensee. Whenever any license shall be so revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. No license shall be granted to any person whose license has been revoked for a period of three (3) years from the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 11; Ord. of 9-4-84, § 1)  
Sec. 4-13-40. - Carrying on business after license revoked or expired prohibited. 
No dealer in secondhand articles shall continue to carry on business after his license is revoked or expired. 
(Ord. of 5-4-53, § 15(2))  
Chapter 4-14 - SHOWS, CIRCUSES, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate occupations and businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 4-14-1—4-14-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMANENT SHOWS, CIRCUSES, ETC. 
 
Sec. 4-14-16. - Investigations. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public safety to investigate the character of the exhibitions given in any place of public amusement in the city in accordance with the provisions of this article to ascertain whether any of the provisions of this article are being violated and as to whether there is any offense against morality, decency or public welfare committed in said exhibitions. The members of the police force of the city shall investigate the character of such exhibitions and report to the commissioner of public safety any offense against morality, decency or public welfare committed in such exhibitions. 
(Ord. of 3-24-19, § V)  
Sec. 4-14-17. - Exemption. 
This article shall not apply to any building, hall, room or rooms, in which only private theatricals and exhibitions for charitable and religious performances are given, or to the manager of exhibitions given by amateurs for the benefit of any church, mission, parish, or Sunday School, or for any other charitable or religious performance. 
(Ord. of 3-24-19, § VII)  
Sec. 4-14-18. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates or refuses or neglects to comply with any provisions of this article, shall, upon convictions thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. And any such person shall also, for each offense, be subject to the payment of a penalty in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) to be recovered in a civil action. 
(Ord. of 3-24-19, § IX) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-14-19—4-14-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former §§ 4-14-26—4-14-29 were substantive sections set out herein as a Div. 2, Licenses, derived from ordinances adopted Mar. 24, 1919, §§ I—IV, VI; Jan. 17, 1921, § 1; Jan. 20, 1958, § 1; and June 9, 1983, § 1. Such provisions were repealed by an ordinance adopted Sept. 2, 2003, § 3.  
ARTICLE III. - TRANSIENT SHOWS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-14-41. - Investigations. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public safety to investigate the character of any of the exhibitions or shows licensed in this article to ascertain whether any of the provisions of this article are being violated and as to whether there is any offense against morality, decency or public welfare committed in any such exhibitions. The members of the police force of the city shall investigate the character of such exhibitions and report to the commissioner of public safety any offense against morality, decency or public welfare committed in any such exhibitions. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 4)  
Sec. 4-14-42. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates or refuses or neglects to comply with any provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 7) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 4-14-43—4-14-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 4-14-51. - Required. 
No person shall exhibit any menagerie, feats of horsemanship, circuses, carnivals, caravans of animals, animal shows, tent shows or transient shows or exhibitions of such nature, within the city without a license for such performance from the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 1)  
Sec. 4-14-52. - Issuance; fee; term; renewal. 
The city clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to grant and issue, the license required by this division upon receipt for such license the sum of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00). Such license shall be for a period of one (1) day only. The city clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to renew said license from day to day, upon receiving thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per day for each day after the first day. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-14-53. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to this division by the preceding sections may be revoked by the commissioner of public safety, upon proof of any violation of the provisions of this article. The proof shall be taken before such commissioner of public safety upon notice of not less than two (2) hours, to show cause why such license should not be revoked. He shall hear the proofs and allegations in the case and determine the same summarily. The decision of the commission of public safety shall be final. 
(b)  Any person whose license is revoked shall not thereafter be entitled to a license under this division. On any examination pursuant to a notice to show cause, as aforesaid, the licensee may be a witness in his own behalf. 
(c)  If after such hearing the commissioner of public safety determines that the exhibition it is for has committed any offense against morality, decency or public welfare, the license for such exhibition shall be revoked. Such revocation shall take effect immediately upon the commissioner of public safety filing with the city clerk written notice of his finding. Upon the revocation of said license, the city clerk shall not issue a new license for said exhibition. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, §§ 3, 5)  
Chapter 4-15 - TAXICABS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Traffic and street use, Tit. 8; horse-drawn carriages, Ch. 4-22. 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate taxicabs, General Municipal Law, § 181. 
Editor's note— Ord. of April 4, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 4-15, §§ 4-15-1—4-15-73, and enacted a new Ch. 4-15 as set out herein. The former Ch. 4-15 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ; Ord. of 5-19-59, § 1(9b.); Ord. of 5-19-69, §§ 1(2, a, 1), 1(2, a, 2), 1(2, a, 3(a)—(e), 1(2, b, 1, (a)—(j), 1(2, b, 1, (h), 2, b, 2, 1(2, b, 3—6), 1(3b), 1(3, a), 1(3, c, 1, 2(a)—(j), 1(4)—(7), 1(8a—8d), 1(9a.); Ord. of 4-16-69; Ord. of 5-19-69, § 1(1); Ord. of 11-5-73, § 1; Ord. of 6-16-75, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-6-79, §§ 3—5; Ord. of 4-16-79, §§ 1, 6, 8, 9—12; Ord. of 5-16-83, § 1, 2); Ord. of 1-5-87, §§ 1—7); Ord. of 9-8-87, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 2-8-88, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-88, §§ 1—12; Ord. of 2-5-91, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-91, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-92, §§ 1—8; Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-93, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-96, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-00); Ord of 5-1-00, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-00, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-03, § 1; Ord. of 5-28-03, §§ 1—6; Ord. of 7-1-04, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-05, § 1; Ord. of 6-5-06, § 1; Ord. of 12-4-06, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-07, § 1; Ord. of 5-5-08, § 1; Ord. of 5-22-08, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-09, § 1; Ord. of 5-28-09, § 1; Ord. of 3-1-10, §§ 1—5; Ord. of 4-7-11, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-11, § 1; Ord. of 2-6-12, § 1; Ord. of 2-3-14, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-15, § 1, eff. 1-1-15). 
 
Sec. 4-15-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(1)  Accessible taxicab: An accessible taxicab is a vehicle that complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 and all regulations promulgated thereunder, and meets the minimum requirements of an accessible vehicle as specified by the Department of Public Safety. 
(2)  Base station: A central facility which manages, organizes, and/or dispatches taxicabs. Base stations must be located within the City of White Plains in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance of the city. 
(3)  Driver's license: The permission granted by the State of New York to a person to operate a vehicle. 
(4)  Fleet: Five (5) or more taxicabs, owned and licensed by the same individual, or owned and licensed by individuals but operated in conjunction with the same corporate identity. 
(5)  Hailing: A request, either through a verbal action such as calling out, or whistling, and/or a visible physical action such as raising one's hand or arm, by a person who is currently ready to travel. Hailing shall be permitted only in the Hail Zone. 
(6)  Hail zone: The business and parking district that encompasses the following area: Ferris Avenue south of Water Street to Martine Avenue; Martine Avenue east to South Lexington Avenue; South Lexington Avenue south to West Post Road; West Post Road southwest to Soundview Avenue; West Post Road northeast to Maple Avenue; Maple Avenue east to Mamaroneck Avenue; Mamaroneck Avenue southeast to Bloomingdale Road; Bloomingdale Road north to Westchester Avenue; Westchester Avenue east to South Kensico Avenue; South Kensico Avenue north to Lake Street; Lake Street west to North Broadway; North Broadway north to Barker Avenue; Barker Avenue west to Water Street; and Water Street west to Ferris Avenue. 
(7)  Rate card: a rate card is the official listing of rates issued by the Department of Public Safety, The rate card shall be displayed at all times, in the interior of the taxicab where it can be readily seen by the passengers. 
(8)  Service animal: any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including but not limited to guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sound, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheel chair or fetching dropped items. 
(9)  Special Patrol Officer: An employee of the City of White Plains who shall have duties as prescribed by the Public Safety Commissioner with respect to the orderly operation of taxicabs and shall be assigned to the White Plains TransCenter or such other location as the Commissioner deems necessary. 
(10)  Taxicab: Any motor vehicle having a seating capacity of not more than seven (7) persons in addition to the driver bearing a taxi license plate issued by the NY State Department of Motor Vehicles, a City of White Plains Taxicab medallion, and engaged in the business of picking up passengers within the city, and transporting passengers within or outside the City of White Plains, for compensation. A taxicab may operate from a taxi stand, may respond to calls from a base station or may respond to a hail only in the business and parking district more fully described herein. 
(11)  Taxicab driver: Any person holding a Class A, B, C or E license from the NY State Department of Motor Vehicles, and a White Plains Taxicab operator's license, whether such a person be the owner of such taxicab or employed by a taxicab medallion owner. 
(12)  Taxicab operator's license: the license issued by the City of White Plains Department of Public Safety authorizing the driver to operate a taxicab in the City of White Plains. 
(13)  Taxicab operator's badge: An identification badge issued by the Department of Public Safety to be worn by the driver at all times while operating the taxicab. The badge shall bear the driver's photo and display the driver's name and taxicab operator's license number. 
(14)  Taximeter: A mechanical instrument or device, approved by the Department of Public Safety, by which the charge for hire of a White Plains taxicab is mechanically calculated and on which said charge is plainly indicated. 
(15)  Taxicab decal: Decals issued exclusively by the Department of Public Safety which shall be placed on both the rear driver and passenger side doors identifying the taxicab as a licensed White Plains taxicab. 
(16)  Taxicab medallion license: A taxicab medallion license is issued by the Department of Public Safety, authorizing the use of the described vehicle as a taxicab. 
(17)  Taxicab medallion license owner: An individual, partnership, corporation, or any other entity in whose name the state registration is issued pursuant to the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and who has been issued a White Plains taxicab medallion license for such vehicle. 
(18)  Taxicab medallion sticker: The sticker issued exclusively by the Department of Public Safety, and placed on the vehicle by the licensing officer, certifying the vehicle as a licensed White Plains taxicab as defined in this chapter. The sticker shall state the taxicab medallion license number and the year for which it is issued. 
(19)  Taxicab stand: Any place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which is exclusively reserved for the use of taxicabs. Only taxicabs with a White Plains taxicab medallion may use taxi stands in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-2. - Issuance of taxicab medallion licenses. 
A.  Limitation on taxicab medallion licenses: Two hundred (200) taxicab medallion licenses are hereby found adequate to serve the needs of the public and the city; and such number is hereby established as the maximum amount of taxicab medallion licenses to be issued pursuant to this chapter. Of the 200 taxicab medallion licenses authorized, five (5) shall be specifically designated for accessible taxicabs, and shall be designated thus in perpetuity. The 5 accessible medallions shall be sold for $20,000.00 each. 
B.  Change in the number of taxicab medallion licenses: The Common Council may review the number of taxicab medallion licenses to determine whether a change in the maximum number of taxicab medallion licenses is warranted. The Council shall make a determination based upon the input of the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
C.  If a determination is made that additional taxicab medallion licenses are necessary, or if an existing medallion is forfeited, then such medallions shall be sold at public auction with a minimum opening bid of $25,000. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-3. - Unlicensed operation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful, without a valid White Plains operators license and a White Plains medallion license, to: 
A.  Pick up passengers for a fare within the City of White Plains by prearrangement or in response to a street hail. 
B.  Park or otherwise occupy a taxi stand located in the City of White Plains. 
C.  Await employment or solicit riders by standing on any public street within the City of White Plains. 
D.  Have affixed to the vehicle a White Plains Taxicab decal or a facsimile of the White Plains decal. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-4. - Taxicab medallion licensing. 
Each applicant for a White Plains taxicab medallion license shall comply with the requirements of and the application process set forth in this section. 
A.  General Requirements 
(1)  Age: Applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Character: Applicant must be of good character and reputation. 
(3)  Citizenship or status as alien: Upon submission of the application, the applicant shall show proof of citizenship of the United States or proof of legal alien status. 
(4)  Vehicle ownership and insurance: Upon submission of the application, the applicant shall show proof that he/she is the true owner of the vehicle; which vehicle is insured pursuant to the requirements of state law. 
(5)  Application fees: All new White Plains taxicab medallion license applicants and all renewal applicants shall pay the required application fees as set forth in section 4-15-14 of this chapter. 
B.  Application 
An application for a taxicab medallion license shall be made by the vehicle owner on forms provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety. Such application shall contain but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Licensee information: 
a)  Applicant's Full Name 
b)  Date of birth 
c)  Proof of citizenship status 
d)  Current residence 
e)  Contact phone number 
f)  Corporation or DBA name if applicable, business phone number and corporation contact name, date of birth and name and address of corporate designee for acceptance of legal service and notices. 
g)  Previous medallion ownership history 
h)  Criminal convictions 
(2)  Vehicle information: 
a)  Make 
b)  Model 
c)  Year 
d)  Color 
e)  Mileage 
f)  NY State inspection 
g)  Seating capacity 
h)  Vehicle Identification number 
i)  Vehicle Registration 
(3)  Criminal record: Applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony, or any crime involving violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy, moral turpitude, driving while under the influence of alcohol, gambling, or illegal use or possession of drugs. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall, nevertheless, apply the standards for licensure and employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses embodied in article 23-a of the Correction Law. 
(4)  Fingerprinting: Each individual applicant and, if applicable, each corporate officer, as well as all those who hold at least a 25 percent ownership interest in the corporation, shall submit to fingerprinting by the Department of Public Safety. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall cause an investigation to be made relative to the character and criminal record, if any, of said applicant and pay any state or federal required fee for the fingerprinting process. The city shall be entitled to an additional processing fee as set forth in section 4-15-14 of this chapter. 
(5)  Maximum vehicle mileage: Remove from service any licensed taxicab that has an odometer reading of more than 400,000 miles. The taxicab medallion license shall be transferred to a vehicle that meets the mileage requirements of this chapter or surrendered to the Department of Public Safety. 
(6)  Vehicle inspection: The vehicle has been inspected under the direction of the Commissioner of Public Safety and found to be completely safe and operable for the transportation of passengers. 
(7)  Accessible taxicabs: Owners of accessible taxicab medallions must provide an original letter from an approved vehicle modifier indicating that the modifications to the vehicle have been made in accordance with ADA regulations and specifications, and the minimum requirements for an accessible vehicle as specified by the Department of Public Safety. 
C.  Compliance: The criteria necessary to obtain a taxicab medallion license, as set forth in (A) and (B) of this section, shall be continually maintained for the license to remain in effect. Any lapse of a required condition of this chapter may result in the suspension or revocation of the taxicab medallion license. 
D.  Annual renewal: Renewals shall be processed annually and shall be upon the same basis as a new application, provided the application is filed not less than thirty (30) days, nor more than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of current license on forms supplied by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
E.  Authorization to investigate: Authorization to the Commissioner of Public Safety to obtain proof of financial capability of the owner including authorizations for the release of information from bank accounts or any other places where assets of the applicant are said to be maintained. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-5. - Taxicab operator's licensing. 
Each applicant for a White Plains taxicab operators license shall comply with the requirements of and the application process set forth in this section. 
(a)  General Requirements 
(1)  Age: Applicant must be eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(2)  NY State driver's license: Applicant must hold a valid NY State Class A, B, C or E. 
(3)  Physical condition: Each application shall include a medical certificate signed by a physician duly licensed by the State of New York, certifying that he/she has examined the applicant within the thirty-day period prior to the filing of the application and that in his/her opinion the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or physical or mental condition or infirmity which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver of a taxicab. 
(4)  Drug testing: Applicant shall submit to a drug test. Such testing shall be performed by an individual or entity designated by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and possessing the requisite permit by the New York State Department of Health pursuant to the authority contained in Title V of Article 5 of the New York State Public Health Law. 
(5)  Defensive driving course: Applicant shall complete/pass a New York State Department of Motor Vehicles certified defensive driving course within six (6) months prior to the date of the initial application, and within 3 years prior to the date of any renewal application. 
(6)  Criminal record: Applicant shall not have been convicted of a felony, or any offense involving violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy, moral turpitude, driving while under the influence of alcohol, gambling, or illegal use or possession of drugs. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall, nevertheless, apply the standards for licensure and employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses embodied in article 23-a of the Correction Law. 
(7)  Literacy: Applicant must be able to read, write and speak the English language. 
(8)  Character: Applicant shall be of good character and reputation. 
(9)  Application fees: All new White Plains taxicab license applicants and all renewal applicants shall pay the required application fees as set forth in section 4-15-14. 
(b)  Application 
(1)  Application: Applicant must complete a White Plains taxicab operator's license application as approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety. Such application shall contain but not be limited to: 
a)  Full name and place of residence for past (5) years; 
b)  The applicant's age, height, gender, ethnicity, eye color, hair color, place of birth, citizenship status; 
c)  Previous employment history; 
d)  Criminal convictions; 
e)  Proof of completion of an accessible taxicab passenger assistance training course, if applicable. 
(2)  Photographs: Each applicant for a White Plains taxicab operator's license shall be photographed by the Department of Public Safety. 
(3)  Fingerprinting: Each applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the Department of Public Safety and pay any state or federal fee required for the fingerprinting process. In addition, the city shall be entitled to an additional processing fee as set forth in section 4-15-14 of this chapter. 
(4)  Written examination: Each applicant shall take a written exam to ascertain the applicant's knowledge of the provisions of this chapter, the traffic regulations and geography of the City of White Plains, as well as the vehicle and traffic laws of the State of New York. 
(5)  Investigation: The Commissioner of Public Safety shall investigate the character and criminal record, if any, of said applicant. Each application shall include a signed authorization permitting the Commissioner of Public Safety to conduct a background investigation of the applicant including any matter which might otherwise be confidential without limitation. No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter until the Commissioner of Public Safety has completed the background investigation and has indicated, in writing; his approval. 
(6)  Citizenship or status as alien: Upon submission of the application, the applicant shall show proof of citizenship of the United States or proof of legal alien status. 
C.  Probationary Period 
There shall be a six (6) month probationary period for all newly licensed taxicab drivers. During this probationary period, the Commissioner of Public Safety may revoke the license upon the determination that the licensee failed to comply with the requirements enumerated herein. 
D.  Annual Renewal 
Renewals shall be processed annually and shall be upon the same basis as a new application, provided the application is filed not less than thirty (30) days, nor more than sixty (60) days prior to expiration of current license on forms supplied by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
E.  Refusal of Taxicab Operator's License 
Each applicant for a White Plains taxicab operator's license shall comply with the taxicab operator licensing requirements as set forth in this section. If the applicant fails to meet any of the general requirements or the results of any of the examinations are unsatisfactory, as determined by the Commissioner of Public Safety, the applicant shall be refused a license. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-6. - Duties and responsibilities of taxicab medallion owners. 
The owner of every vehicle licensed under the provisions of this chapter operating within the City of White Plains, shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Responsibilities relating to drivers 
(1)  Authorized driver employees: Employ only drivers who hold a valid White Plains taxicab operator's license. 
(2)  Work shift limitation: Prohibit any taxi driver from operating any vehicle: 
a)  For longer than twelve (12) hours of any twenty-four-hour period; or 
b)  For longer than twelve (12) hours in any one (1) tour or shift of duty; or 
c)  With less than eight (8) hours relief from duty after working twelve (12) hours of the twenty four hour period preceding the commencement of such relief from duty. 
(3)  Reports on drivers: Report any driver to the Commissioner of Public Safety who no longer meets the qualifications to hold a taxi driver's license, stating the reason therefore. 
(4)  Trip sheets: Provide each driver with a trip sheet to be used during daily operations that shall, at a minimum, identify: 
a)  The name and taxicab operator's license number of the driver operating such vehicle for the trips recorded on the trip sheet; 
b)  The taxicab medallion license number of the vehicle; 
c)  The time the vehicle commenced and ceased operation and the mileage on the vehicle at such times; 
d)  The date, commencement time in hour and minute(s), and origin point for each trip for each passenger in chronological order; 
e)  The date, drop off or termination time in hour and minute(s), and destination or termination location for each trip for each passenger in chronological order; 
f)  The fare charged and collected for each trip from each passenger; 
g)  The date, time in hour and minute(s), and location of any accident or breakdown causing an interruption or discontinuance of the operation of such taxicab. 
h)  The date and time in hour and minute(s) of any other incident, such as lost property or assistance to the police. 
i)  Trip sheets: Shall be retained and made available for audit, examination, and inspection by the Commissioner of Public Safety at all reasonable times for a minimum period of three years. 
(5)  List of drivers: Maintain a current list of driver employees and furnish the list, upon request, to the Commissioner of Public Safety or his/her designee. 
(6)  Driver discharge notification: Notify the Department of Public Safety regarding the discharge of any driver. 
(7)  Supervisory responsibility: Diligently supervise his or her employees to assure compliance with this chapter. Multiple convictions of employees for violations under this chapter, shall be construed as evidence of failure to supervise and may result in fines or the revocation or suspension of the owner's taxicab medallion license. 
B.  Responsibilities related to vehicles 
(1)  Maximum vehicle mileage: Remove from service any licensed taxicab that has an odometer reading of more than 400,000 miles. The taxicab medallion license shall be transferred to a vehicle that meets mileage requirements of this chapter or surrendered to the Department of Public Safety. 
(2)  Vehicle cleanliness and maintenance: Maintain and make appropriate repairs to the exterior and interior of taxicab including but not limited to body work, rusting metal, hanging fenders, missing hub caps and torn or worn upholstery. Maintain interior and exterior of taxicab in a clean and sanitary condition. Vehicles found to be improperly maintained will be taken out of service until such time as repairs are made. 
(3)  Safety inspections: Inspect the vehicle for any equipment violations at least daily, and make such repairs as may be required by the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(4)  Vehicle inspections: Submit vehicles for inspection whenever required by the Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee. 
(5)  Rate card: Display the rates of fare on a rate card provided by the Department of Public Safety as outlined in section 4-15-19. The rate card shall be displayed in the interior portion of the vehicle in such a manner as to be visible at all times to all passengers and shall not obstruct the driver's view of the windshield. 
(6)  Taxi user's bill of rights: Display a copy of the Taxi user's bill of rights as provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety inside each taxicab, where it can be readily seen by the riding public. 
C.  Responsibilities related to administration 
(1)  Vehicle transfer: Promptly report to the Commissioner of Public Safety the transfer of any vehicle medallion issued hereunder and concurrently turn in to the Commissioner of Public Safety the taxicab medallion issued for the use of such vehicle. 
(2)  Insurance: Insure all taxicabs in accordance with the New York State Motor Vehicle Law. It shall be the duty of the owner to report a cancellation or revocation of insurance immediately to the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-7. - Duties and responsibilities of taxicab drivers. 
Taxicab drivers operating within the City of White Plains shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
A.  Duties related to passengers 
(1)  Conveyance of passengers: No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request in the city unless previously engaged or unable to, based on the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Exclusive use: Taxicab drivers shall not carry any person other than the person first employing the taxicab unless such person consents to the acceptance of an additional passenger. However, during times of peak demand the Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee may direct taxicab drivers to accept multiple passengers. 
(3)  Child safety seats: Taxicab driver shall not prevent a passenger from using his or her own child safety seat while employing the vehicle. 
(4)  Courtesy: Taxicab drivers shall be courteous to passengers and others. 
(5)  Appearance and dress: Taxicab drivers shall be neat in dress and appearance, at all times, when on duty. Taxicab drivers shall also comply with any dress code which may be required by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(6)  Identification: A taxicab driver shall state his or her name, badge number, and employer while on duty, to any passenger or police officer upon request. 
(7)  Soliciting prohibited: A taxicab driver may not yell, shout, use his or her vehicle horn, disrupt the normal flow of traffic, or make physical contact with a prospective passenger in solicitation of a fare. 
(8)  Route: Taxicab drivers shall proceed with passengers to the destination by the shortest possible route unless otherwise directed. 
(9)  Responding to a hail: Taxicab drivers may only respond to a street hail in the Hail Zone which is the area in which taxicabs are permitted to accept passengers by hail in the street and specifically defined in Section 4-15-1 (6). 
(10)  Climate control: All vehicles bearing White Plains medallions shall maintain working air conditioning and heating systems. Taxicab drivers shall adjust air conditioning and heating systems in the vehicle at the request of a passenger. 
(11)  Over and under charging: No taxicab driver shall solicit tips, gratuities, credit card surcharge, or any charges other than those authorized herein for transporting a passenger. No taxicab driver shall charge rates different than those specified on the Taxicab Rate card or taximeter. 
(12)  Receipts to passengers: Upon the request of a passenger, taxicab drivers shall issue a receipt for fares paid by the passenger; and if the Commissioner of Public Safety has prescribed a particular form of receipt, he shall use that particular form, identifying the taxicab owner, taxicab identification number, date of trip, amount paid and be signed by the driver. 
B.  Duties related to vehicle operations 
(1)  Vehicle cleanliness: Taxicab drivers shall maintain exterior and interior of taxicab in a clean and sanitary condition during their work shift. 
(2)  Transport of animals: There shall be no additional charge for transporting a service animal accompanying its handler. Non service animals must be transported in a carrier and will be charged according to the baggage rate provided in section 4-15-19. 
(3)  Lost articles: Taxicab drivers shall examine the interior of the vehicle after the termination of each trip for any articles left or lost in the vehicle and immediately take any such property to the desk officer at the police department in compliance with Article 7-B of the Personal Property Law of the State of New York. 
(4)  Smoking: Smoking is prohibited at all times in vehicles bearing White Plains taxicab medallions. 
(5)  Locked doors: Taxicab drivers shall not operate a vehicle with a passenger therein while the passenger doors are locked. 
(6)  Passenger seating: Passengers are prohibited from using the front seat unless the passenger is infirm and cannot use the rear door or unless the back seat is fully occupied by other passengers. Under no circumstance shall the number of passengers plus the driver exceed the number of seatbelts in the vehicle. 
(7)  Driver seating: Taxicab drivers shall not sit in any part of the vehicle except the driver's seat. 
(8)  Nonpaying passengers: Taxicab drivers shall not permit any passenger in a taxicab, except a paying fare passenger during such time as the taxi is being used for business purposes or is being made available for the carrying of paying passengers. 
C.  Duties related to administration 
(1)  Change of residence: Taxicab drivers shall report each change of residence within ten (10) days after such change to the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(2)  Suspended, canceled or revoked license: A taxicab driver shall not operate any such vehicle while his/her New York State Class A, B, C or E driver's license is suspended or revoked or canceled. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report the suspension or revocation of his New York State Class A, B, C or E driver's license immediately to the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(3)  Operations records (Trip Sheets): Taxicab drivers shall keep a record of all operations as set forth in section 4-15-6 A (4) of this chapter. 
(4)  Badge and license use and display: A taxicab driver shall not operate a taxicab without being in actual possession of both his/her identification card and badge, and in the event of loss of either such item shall immediately notify the license division of the Department of Public Safety. The badge issued to a licensed taxi driver must be worn by the taxi driver when on duty, on the outermost garment, centered two (2) inches from the left arm and about ten (10) inches below the collarbone. At all times while on duty, have displayed in the interior of the vehicle in a place visible to any passenger, his/her taxicab operator's license. A taxicab driver shall not permit his/her badge or license to be used by another person. 
(5)  Work shift limitation: Prohibit any taxi driver from operating any vehicle: 
a)  For longer than twelve (12) hours of any twenty-four-hour period; or 
b)  For longer than twelve (12) hours in any one (1) tour or shift of duty; or 
c)  With less than eight (8) hours relief from duty after working twelve (12) hours of the twenty four hour period preceding the commencement of such relief from duty. 
(6)  Sanitation and disease: Taxicab drivers shall immediately report to the police department the fact of having carried any person affected with a contagious disease and if so instructed thereafter shall bring his vehicle to a suitable place for such cleaning or fumigation as may be directed by the health authorities having jurisdiction in the city. 
(7)  Reporting of arrests, personal summonses and traffic tickets: Taxicab drivers shall report all arrests, personal summonses and traffic tickets, issued to them by law enforcement while operating a licensed taxicab to the taxicab medallion owner within 24 hours of being arrested or served such summons or traffic ticket. 
(8)  Reporting of accidents: Notwithstanding the requirements of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York regarding the reporting of accidents, all accidents, regardless of the amount of personal injury or property damage, must be reported to the taxicab medallion owner and the Department of Public Safety within 48 hours of occurrence. 
(9)  Cooperation with police: Taxicab drivers shall not conceal any evidence of crime, nor voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. He shall report as soon as possible to police any unlawful act connected with his vehicle or any attempt to use his vehicle to commit a crime or escape from the scene of a crime. He shall fully cooperate with the police in all official matters. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-8. - Suspension, revocation or refusal to renew taxicab operator license and medallion license. 
A.  Reasons for suspension, revocation or refusal to renew. The Commissioner of Public Safety, or the commissioners designee with the approval of the Commissioner, may suspend, cancel or revoke a taxicab operator's license or taxicab medallion owner's license and may refuse to approve an application or a renewal for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction: The conviction of the applicant or licensee of a felony or misdemeanor under the New York Penal Law of any crime or offense involving violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy, moral turpitude, gambling or the illegal use, sale or possession of drugs. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall nevertheless, apply the standards for licensure and employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses embodied in Article 23-a of the Correction Law. 
(2)  False application: If the licensee or applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the application for a license or the renewal thereof. 
(3)  Drug testing: For taxicab drivers, upon a positive drug test result, or failure to submit to a drug test. 
(4)  Defensive Driving Course: For taxicab drivers, failure to complete/pass a New York State Department of Motor Vehicle certified defensive driving course. 
(5)  Violations: If the licensee has been convicted or has pled guilty to any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Prior revocation or suspension: If the applicant, any officer, director, stockholder, or partner or any other person directly or indirectly interested in the application for a taxicab medallion license was the former holder, was an officer, director, partner or stockholder in a corporation or a partnership which was the former holder of a taxicab medallion license which had been revoked or suspended. 
(7)  Unfit applicant or licensee: If the applicant, in the opinion of the Commissioner of Public Safety, is not fit to be a licensee, based upon the requirements enumerated in this chapter; or if in the opinion of the Commissioner, approval of the application is not in the best interest of the general public welfare and safety. 
B.  Cancellation of medallion license for nonuse. A taxicab medallion license may be canceled by the Commissioner for failure of the owner of the license to operate the licensed vehicle in the city for at least thirty-five (35) hours per week, taken over a calendar quarter. For such periods of operation where the owner operates the vehicle pursuant to this chapter, both inside and outside the city, the time used for paid trips outside the city shall be credited as operating time under this chapter, provided the trip originated or terminated within the city. The failure of a taxicab licensee to produce the manifest records required to be maintained at a hearing provided hereunder, shall be prima facie proof of a charge of inadequate use of the license, subject to rebuttal by other evidence to be produced by the licensee at the hearing provided in this section. 
C.  Hearings. 
(1)  Notice to licensee: Notice of an order of suspension or revocation of a license or refusal to renew a license shall be given personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee, directed to the address appearing on the records of the Department of Public Safety for the licensee. Said notice shall include a statement that the applicant or licensee is entitled to request a hearing provided such request is made in writing to the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(2)  Request for hearing: Any request for a hearing must be made in writing and given personally or by certified mail directed to the Commissioner of Public Safety. Such request shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date of personal service or service by mail of the order. 
(3)  Scheduling of hearing: A hearing shall be conducted by the Commissioner or his designee within two (2) business days after the written request is received if such suspension or cancellation of a license was imposed with less than (7) days notice. Where notice of at least seven (7) days has been given with respect to a suspension or cancellation of a license, a hearing shall be held within seven (7) days after receipt of written request. 
(4)  Surrender of license: In the event of a suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a license, the holder shall deliver the license and any badge issued in conjunction therewith to the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-9. - Substitution of vehicle without transfer of ownership. 
If during a calendar year, an owner licensee desires to substitute a vehicle for the one that has been licensed, he shall make application on a form provided by the Commissioner of Public Safety and pay the required inspection fee as set forth in Section 4-15-14. The vehicle may be substituted, provided there is furnished proof that said vehicle has within the last thirty (30) days successfully passed a NY State inspection by an authorized inspection station regardless of the time within which the vehicle would ordinarily require the inspection. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-10. - Transfer of taxicab medallion license ownership. 
A taxicab medallion license may be sold, but may not be rented or leased. The purchaser of a taxicab medallion license must present the Bill of Sale signed by both parties to the transaction as well as proof showing the source of funds to the Commissioner of Public Safety. The purchaser must then apply for a license in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter, and pay the required fee as set forth in Section 4-15-14 to the Department of Public Safety for the cost and expense of the processing and investigation thereof. If the purchaser shall qualify for a license, a license may be issued to such new owner provided that the prior owner of such license shall consent to the cancellation of his license so that the total number of licenses authorized to be issued under this chapter shall remain the same. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-11. - Form of license and badge. 
A.  Form of license: The license shall be in a form to be prescribed by the Department of Public Safety and shall contain thereon, as a minimum adequate identification of the driver, a photograph of the driver and the signature of the driver. 
B.  Form of badge: Concurrent with the issuance of a taxicab operator's license there shall be issued to such approved applicant a driver's badge of such material, form and style as the Department of Public Safety may prescribe with the license number imprinted thereon which shall be the same number as on the driver's license issued hereunder. 
C.  Defaced licenses and badges: Taxicab operator licenses and badges shall not be defaced, altered or obliterated in any way. Defaced, altered or obliterated licenses and badges shall be rendered invalid if any entry is made thereon by other than the Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-12. - Replacement of lost license, badge, medallion sticker or decal. 
In the event that an operator's license or badge or medallion sticker or decal has been lost, destroyed, stolen, or otherwise requires physical replacement, the licensee shall complete the appropriate replacement form and pay the required replacement fee to the Department of Public Safety. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-13. - Records. 
All records pertaining to the issuance of licenses, under this chapter and the records of all hearings conducted herein shall be maintained by the Department of Public Safety. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-14. - Fees. 
The following fees shall be in effect as of the date of this ordinance: 
Taxicab Operator's License and Annual Renewals 	$100.00 
Taxicab Medallion License Renewals 	$ 300.00 
Taxicab Vehicle Change or Company Change 	$ 50.00 
Taxicab Driver Fingerprinting (includes New York State processing fee) 	$100.00 
Taxi Ordinance Books 	$10.00 
Replacement of Lost Badge/License/Medallion/Decal 	$ 25.00 
Taxicab Medallion License Transfer of Ownership 	$1,000.00 
 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-15. - Type of vehicles/equipment authorized. 
A.  Vehicle type: All taxicabs shall be of a four door sedan, station wagon or minivan type. 
B.  Seatbelts: Every taxicab must be equipped with seatbelts for both front seat positions and all rear seat positions. All seatbelts must be clearly visible, accessible and in good working order. 
C.  Interior lighting: All taxicabs must be equipped with operable interior lights which are set to illuminate automatically upon the opening of any of the vehicle doors. 
D.  Roof light: A roof light is required on all taxicabs to clearly indicate to the public when a taxicab is available for hire and when the taxicab is off duty; and to provide the public with a simplified method of identification of taxicabs during all hours of expected operation. 
E.  Climate control: All taxicabs must be equipped with operable air conditioning and heating systems. 
F.  Taximeter: All taxicabs must be equipped with a taximeter which has been approved by the Department of Public Safety, and installed, tested, and certified by an approved and licensed New York State taximeter business. A taximeter shall not be operated from any wheel to which the power is applied but shall be geared to the transmission or main drive shaft of the taxicab by a cable in a tamperproof or sealed casing. The taximeter of each taxicab shall be so arranged and lighted that the meter will be at all times discernible and capable of being read by any passenger in the taxicab. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-16. - Accessible taxicabs. 
A.  An accessible taxicab is a vehicle that complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 and all regulations promulgated thereunder, and meets the minimum requirements of an accessible vehicle as specified by the Department of Public Safety. 
B.  Owners of accessible taxicab medallions must provide an original letter from an approved vehicle manufacturer or vehicle modifier indicating that the vehicle, or the modifications made to the vehicle, have been done so in accordance with ADA regulations and specifications and the minimum requirements of an accessible vehicle, as specified by the Department of Public Safety. 
C.  Taxicab drivers that will operate accessible taxicabs shall complete a passenger assistance training course from a vendor that has been approved by the Department of Public Safety and maintain certification for as long as the driver operates such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-17. - Inspections generally. 
The Commissioner of Public Safety or his designee is authorized to inspect all licensed White Plains taxicabs in order to protect the public health and safety, and all such vehicles shall be made readily available to him for such inspection upon demand. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-18. - Color, emblem and identification. 
A.  All licensed White Plains taxicabs shall be painted white. 
B.  All lettering and numbers are to be of an approved color which contrasts with white and which shall be applied with self-stick, permanent adhesive markings. 
C.  The taxicab business name or emblem and telephone number shall be applied on both the driver and front passenger doors in such a manner which shall be prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
D.  The words "White Plains, NY" shall be affixed to the driver and front passenger doors and to the rear and front of the taxicab in such a manner which shall be prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
E.  White Plains taxi decals shall be affixed to both the rear driver and passenger side doors in a manner which shall be prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
F.  The taxicab medallion number shall be affixed to the driver and front passenger doors and to the rear, front and roof of each taxicab licensed hereunder in such a manner as shall be prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The size of the taxicab medallion number shall not be less than three (3) inches in height on the rear and front of the taxicab and not less than (10) ten inches in height on the roof of the taxicab. 
G.  The Commissioner of Public Safety may conduct a hearing for the purpose of resolving any dispute as to the use of a taxicab business name or emblem where such use might cause confusion as to the identity of the vehicle, the identity of the owner of the vehicle, or where the use of such business name or emblem potentially could create an unfair competition or unfair or inappropriate business practice. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-19. - Taxicab rate schedule. 
A.  All White Plains medallion taxicabs shall be equipped with a certified taximeter that is in good working condition. Until such date, the Taxicab Zone and Rate Schedule put in to effect February 1, 2002 shall remain in effect. 
B.  For transporting passengers the first 2/8 of a mile or less: $4.00. 
C.  For transporting passengers any distance exceeding 2/8 of a mile, there shall be a charge of $0.25 per each additional 1/8th of a mile. There shall be a charge of two dollars ($2.00) for every 5 minutes of waiting time. 
D.  For an out-of-town trip originating or terminating within the City of White Plains, an agreed upon flat rate shall be charged inclusive of any tolls required. 
E.  There shall be a surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) for each additional passenger in the same party traveling to the same destination. 
F.  For purposes of payment of fare, one child five (5) years of age or under will ride free if accompanied by an adult passenger. 
G.  There shall be a surcharge of a dollar ($1.00) per trip for trips occurring between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. and on the following holidays: New Year's Day (January 1), Memorial Day (last Monday in May), Independence Day (July 4), Labor Day (first Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November), and Christmas Day (December 25). 
H.  The taxicab medallion license owner and taxicab drivers shall display the rates of fare on a rate card provided by the Department of Public Safety as outlined in subsections A, B and C of this section. It shall be displayed in the interior portion of the vehicle in such a manner as to be visible at all times to all passengers and shall not obstruct the driver's view of the windshield. 
I.  The taxicab driver who demands a greater price or rate, than determined by the meter, or as outlined in subsections A, B and C of this section shall not be entitled to receive any pay for the transportation of any passenger. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-20. - Taxicab stands. 
A.  Permitted vehicles: Only taxicabs with a White Plains Taxicab medallion may use taxi stands in the city. Any other vehicle occupying a space at a designated taxicab stand shall be in violation of this section. 
B.  Location: The Commissioner of Public Safety, in consultation with the Transportation Commission, is hereby authorized to locate and designate taxicab stands. 
C.  Number of taxicabs at stand: The Transportation Commission shall designate the number of such taxicabs that shall be allowed at any designated taxicab stand. 
D.  Signs: The Parking and Traffic Department shall post suitable signs at each stand designating the number of vehicles allowed and indicating that the taxi stand is to be used solely by White Plains taxicab medallion holders. 
E.  Standing in non-designated areas: No taxicab, while awaiting employment, shall stand on any public street or public place other than at or upon a taxicab stand designated or established in accordance with this chapter. 
F.  Placement and selection of taxicabs at taxicab stands: Only the number of taxicabs as set forth on the official sign posted for such taxicab stand may remain at the stand while waiting for employment and then shall stand in single file only. A passenger may select any taxicab in a taxicab line without regard to the order in which the taxicabs are standing at said taxicab stand or line. As the taxicab leaves the taxicab stand, those behind the taxicab so leaving shall move forward so as to stop as near as possible to the front of the taxicab stand. No taxicab shall stand within ten (10) feet of any crosswalk, nor shall any taxicab remain unattended at any taxicab stand. 
G.  Unattended taxicabs: A driver shall not leave his taxicab unattended while parked at an official taxicab stand. 
H.  Special Patrol Officer: Taxicab drivers shall follow any lawful order of a Special Patrol Officer performing his or her official duties while assigned to a taxicab stand, the White Plains Transcenter, or any other location designated by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-21. - Violations. 
A.  A taxicab medallion owner or taxicab driver, while licensed hereunder, who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon a guilty plea or a conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or imprisonment not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or by both for the first violation, and by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or imprisonment not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both for a second or any subsequent violation. Each and every day such violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
B.  Any person who violates Section 4-15-3 shall upon a guilty plea or conviction be punished by a fine of up to twenty five hundred dollars ($2500) or imprisonment not exceeding (15) days or by both. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-15-22. - Effective date. 
This act shall take effect immediately, except that the provisions of Sec. 4-15-4 (B)(5) shall take effect one hundred eighty days from enactment, and the provisions of Section 4-15-18 (A) shall take effect upon the next annual medallion renewal after enactment, and the provisions of Section 4-15-19 shall take effect ninety days from enactment. The Taxicab Zone and Rate Schedule put in to effect February 1, 2002 shall remain in effect until such time as the provisions of Section 4-15-19 become effective. 
(Ord. of 4-4-16 , § 1)  
Chapter 4-16 - TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Hawkers, peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 4-9. 
 
Sec. 4-16-1. - Definition. 
(a)  A transient retail business within the meaning of this chapter is one conducted in a store, hotel, house, building or structure for the sale at retail of goods, wares or merchandise, excepting food products, and which is intended to be conducted for a temporary period of time and not permanently. If the place in which a business is conducted is rented or leased for a period of six (6) months or less such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the business carried on therein is a transient business. If the place in which a business is conducted is rented or leased under a lease or rental agreement granting an option or options to either party thereto to cancel the said agreement or lease within a period of six (6) months or less following the inception of said lease or rental agreement such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the business carried on therein is a transient business. 
(b)  When a transient retail business is to be conducted in a store, hotel, house, building or structure, the owner, operator or other person responsible for the management of the premises on which the transient retail business is to be conducted shall be responsible for giving notice in writing to the city clerk of the dates for which the premises have been reserved for said transient retail business. Said notice must be received in the office of the city clerk at least seven (7) business days prior to the commencement of the transient retail business. Any violation of this requirement may be construed as a violation of this ordinance pursuant to section 4-16-7. 
(Ord. of 12-3-23, § 6; Ord. of 11-1-48, § 1; Ord. of 5-6-85, § 1)  
Sec. 4-16-2. - Tax. 
A tax is hereby levied upon all persons conducting a transient retail business in the city. Such tax shall be based upon the gross amount of sales and shall be at the same rate as other property is taxed for the year in the city. If at the time such tax becomes due and payable the tax rate for the current year of the city has not been fixed the same shall be estimated by the assessor thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-3-23, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Taxation of transient businesses, General Municipal Law, § 85-a.  
Sec. 4-16-3. - Bond. 
Before any person shall commence a transient retail business in the city he shall file with the city clerk a surety company bond in favor of the city in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), conditioned that such person or corporation will make a full and complete verified report of the gross amount of sales made in such transient retail business in the city, shall file with the city clerk such reports as may be required, will faithfully comply with the General Municipal Law in relation to taxation of transient merchants and with the provisions of this chapter and will pay the amount of the tax levied in this chapter, said bond to be approved by the corporation counsel as to form, manner of execution and sufficiency. 
(Ord. of 12-3-23, § 3; Ord. of 11-4-63, § 1)  
Sec. 4-16-4. - Permit. 
Before any person shall commence a transient retail business in the city, he shall obtain a permit from the city clerk stating the place where such business is to be conducted and the date of expiration of the term. 
(Ord. of 12-3-23, § 3; Ord. of 11-4-63, § 1)  
Sec. 4-16-5. - Petition to carry on business. 
Any person or corporation desiring to conduct a transient retail business in the city shall present to the city clerk a verified petition stating: 
(a)  The name and permanent address of the person or corporation desiring to conduct such business. 
(b)  The place where, and the time during which, said business is to be conducted. 
(c)  The name and local address of the person to be in immediate charge of said business. 
(d)  The character of the merchandise to be dealt in. 
(e)  The estimated amount of the gross sales which will be made. 
(Ord. of 12-3-23, § 4)  
Sec. 4-16-6. - Reports. 
The person receiving a permit pursuant to this chapter before the beginning of his business, shall file with the city clerk a verified report of the stock on hand, the aggregate value thereof with which it is intended to conduct this business. Such person, within two (2) days after the receipt of new stock, shall file a verified report with the city clerk of such added stock and of the aggregate value thereof and shall on Monday of each week file a verified report of the stock sold during the preceding week and the amount for which the same was sold, and at the completion of said transient business shall file a verified report setting forth the total amount of stock sold and the total amount for which it was sold. 
(Ord. of 12-3-23, § 5)  
Sec. 4-16-7. - Penalty. 
Any person failing to pay the tax herein provided or failing to obey the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to a fine which shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in amount or imprisonment not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such failure continues shall be considered as a separate violation and punishable as such. 
(Ord. of 12-3-23, § 7; Ord. of 4-19-52, § 1) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 4-17 - WINDOW CLEANERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Window cleaning, § 9-5-515.0. 
State Law reference— Power of city to license and regulate occupations and businesses, General City Law, § 20(13). 
 
Sec. 4-17-1. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of window cleaning, within the limits of the City of White Plains, without a license issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-2. - Application for license. 
(a)  A person desiring the license required by this division shall file with the city clerk an application which shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, his full name; if a co-partnership, the full names of each partner and the name under which the partnership does business; if a corporation, the full names of the officers, together with the offices held by them and also the correct corporate name of the corporation. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual, each place of residence during the period of five (5) years previous to the date of the application; if a co-partnership, similar information as to each partner; if a corporation, similar information as to each officer. 
(3)  If the applicant is an individual, each business or occupation engaged in by him with the address thereof during the period of five (5) years previous to the date of application; if a co-partnership, similar information as to each partner; if a corporation, similar information as to each officer. 
(4)  If the applicant is an individual, his photograph, in triplicate, in such position as the city clerk may direct, taken within thirty (30) days preceding the filing of the application; similar photographs shall be required of each partner of a co-partnership and each officer of a corporation. 
(5)  If applicant is an individual, a statement as to whether at any time an indictment or other criminal charge has been preferred against applicant and, if so, full particulars with reference thereto; if a co-partnership, similar information as to each partner; if a corporation, similar information as to each officer. 
(b)  If the applicant is an individual, his fingerprints shall be taken under the supervision of the city police department; if a co-partnership, the fingerprints of each partner shall be so taken; if a corporation, the fingerprints of each officer shall be so taken. 
(c)  The applicant shall furnish for each employee the information required of the applicant, as hereinabove specified, and similar photographs shall be furnished and fingerprints taken for each such employee. 
(d)  More than one set of fingerprints may be required in the discretion of the commissioner of public safety or the police department. At least one set of fingerprints shall be kept on file at police headquarters as a permanent record. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 2; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-3. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The city clerk shall not issue a license, or renewals of such license except with the approval of the commissioner of public safety. 
(b)  Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements of this division and upon payment of the prescribed fee, there shall be issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as may be determined by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 4; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-4. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall expire at the end of each calendar year. 
The city clerk may renew a license by appropriate endorsement thereon. Application for such renewal shall be made not less than thirty (30) days preceding its expiration. Photographs shall be required for each renewal as for an original license. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 8; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-5. - License. 
Each person engaged in the work of window cleaning shall carry a license obtained from the city clerk. No license shall be issued to any person except to an individual so issued pursuant to this chapter, to the partners of a co-partnership, duly licensed, to the officers of a corporation, duly licensed, and to the employees of the foregoing, who comply with the requirements of section 4-17-2 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 5; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-6. - Fee for license. 
The fee for the issuance or of a license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) of which shall be payable directly to the department of public safety for cost of criminal background check and fingerprinting. This license can be renewed for two (2) consecutive annual renewals for a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Such fee shall accompany the license application. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 9; Ord. of 9-6-60, § 1; Ord. of 6-6-83, § 1; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-7. - Assignment, transfer or allowing another to use license. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or transferred to anyone other than the person to whom it was originally issued. No licensee or any person to whom a license has been issued shall permit the license to be used by any other person. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 10; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-8. - Replacement of lost, stolen, etc., licenses. 
If a license issued pursuant to this chapter is lost, stolen or destroyed without fault on the part of the holder, a duplicate in lieu thereof under the original application may be issued by the city clerk upon the filing of an affidavit satisfactorily explaining the facts of such loss or theft and upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 10; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-9. - Insurance. 
Any person, co-partnership, or corporation holding a window cleaner's license shall maintain, during the period in which the license is in force, a commercial general liability insurance policy in the name of such person, co-partnership or corporation and naming the City of White Plains as additional insured. The minimum limits of such insurance coverage shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Additionally, all licenses shall maintain New York State Disability and Worker's Compensation insurance as required by statute. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 6; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-10. - Return of license upon abandoning business. 
Upon abandoning or discontinuing the window cleaning business a person to whom a license has been issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall return his license to the city clerk unless such license has been lost or for any other valid reason cannot be so returned. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 10; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-11. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may at any time be suspended or revoked by the commissioner of public safety or a designee in writing for cause after a hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 7; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1)  
Sec. 4-17-12. - Penalty. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable for each offense by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by both such fine or imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 4-4-49, § 11; Ord. of 1-3-95, § 1; Ord. of 2-4-08, § 1) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 4-18 - ALARM SYSTEMS AND BUSINESSES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-18-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and regulations applicable to automated alarm systems which announce the occurrence of a police, fire or medical emergency condition, alarm businesses, alarm agents, and alarm users as defined in this article. The provisions of other ordinances of the city pertaining to building construction and fire prevention are not superseded, but are in addition to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 2(a))  
Sec. 4-18-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm agent is any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the selling, installing, maintaining, repairing, altering, moving, replacing, or servicing of alarm devices or systems. 
Alarm business is any business operated by a person for a profit and which engages in the activity of selling, leasing, installing, maintaining, repairing, altering, moving, replacing, or servicing of alarm devices or systems. 
Alarm system is an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a condition requiring urgent attention by the police or fire departments. Any automatic alarm device or group of devices which when activated signals the existence of a condition which requires a response by public safety department personnel shall be deemed to be covered by this chapter. 
Alarm user is any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city, except for a proprietary system or an alarm system on motor vehicles. 
Answering service is an agency which provides, among other things, the service of receiving emergency signals from alarm systems through its employees and immediately relaying the appropriate message by live voice to the police or fire department of the jurisdiction in which the alarm signal originated. 
Automatic alarm communication device is an apparatus which automatically sends a digitally encoded tone sequence, line polarity reversal, or other electrical or electronic signal which indicates the existence of the emergency situation that an alarm system is designed to detect and report over the airwaves, telephone lines, or other communication cables or facilities. 
Central station means an office to which remote alarms and supervisory signaling devices are connected to receiving equipment monitored by police officers, private guards, or other personnel, and which provides persons to respond to protected premises when an alarm is received. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of public safety of the city and his deputy. 
Department of public safety means the department of public safety of the city. 
False alarm means the activation of the signaling portion of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, loss of externally supplied electrical power for less than four (4) hours, improper installation, improper usage, or an error or negligence on the part of the owner or lessee of the premises wherein the system is installed, or through the error or negligence of employees, guests, or agents of the owner or lessee of the premises. The term shall include all alarm signal activation incidents in which investigation by public safety department personnel reveals no evidence of the existence of an emergency condition. Those alarm signals which investigation reveals were triggered by physical damage to the protected premises as a result of a hurricane, tornado, earthquake, or other violent natural phenomena and line trouble signals received via dedicated telephone lines are excluded from the definition of false alarms. 
Local alarm system refers to an alarm signaling system which when triggered causes an audible or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises within or upon which the system is installed. 
Primary emergency number means a telephone line leading directly into a designated office of the department of public safety for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, and which is identified as such by a specific number included among the emergency numbers in the telephone directory issued by the New York Telephone Company covering the service area within the jurisdiction of the department of public safety. 
Proprietary system is an alarm system which transmits its signals to a location within the protected premises and is monitored by the proprietor of the premises or his agents. When such a system monitors conditions which may require a response by public safety personnel, then it becomes an alarm system as defined in this chapter. 
Remote signaling system means an alarm signaling system which when triggered activates a device which transmits a signal to a central location where action is taken to respond to and investigate the cause of the signal. 
Special emergency number means a telephone line leading into a designated office of the department of public safety having the primary purpose of handling emergency signals transmitted by automatic alarm communication devices. 
Subscriber or user is a person who buys or otherwise obtains and uses an alarm system, whether or not he thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to monitor or service the system. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 2(b); Ord. of 1-6-86, § 1)  
Sec. 4-18-3. - False alarms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to cause or to permit the activation of a false alarm signal. The alarm user shall be held accountable for all false alarms originating from the alarm user's system and shall be fully liable for all charges and penalties arising therefrom. 
(b)  The commissioner of public safety shall be empowered to take whatever emergency action is reasonably necessary to prevent an activated alarm signaling device from interfering with the department's ability to receive additional emergency signals, or from interfering unnecessarily with the tranquility of the surrounding community. 
(c)  Any owner or lessee of property having an alarm device or system of devices on his or its premises, and any user of services or equipment furnished by a licensee under this chapter shall pay to the city a fee for each and every false alarm to which the police or fire department responds during any calendar year as follows: 
(1) 	First false alarm ..... 	$25.00 
(2) 	Second and third false alarm ..... 	50.00 
(3) 	Fourth and fifth false alarms ..... 	75.00 
(4) 	Sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth false alarms ..... 	100.00 
(5) 	Each false alarm after the eleventh ..... 	250.00 
 
Any alarm owner, lessee or user charged with a false alarm penalty may appeal such charge in writing to the commissioner of public safety within fifteen (15) days after the issuance of the notice of penalty, and may appear before the commissioner of public safety at a time and place to be determined by the commissioner of public safety. The commissioner, or his designee, will then rule on the appeal. 
(d)  After the commissioner has directed that an alarm permit be revoked or suspended, the alarm user can still maintain and operate the alarm system. If, however, the department receives a false alarm signal from an alarm system for which the alarm user permit has been revoked or suspended, the alarm system shall be deemed a public nuisance constituting a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 15; Ord. of 5-16-83, § 1; Ord. of 1-6-86, § 7; Ord. of 5-28-03, § 1; Ord. of 5-22-08, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-11, § 1)  
Sec. 4-18-4. - Inspection of alarm devices and businesses. 
(a)  Failure to allow inspection of equipment after false alarm shall be grounds for termination of an alarm user permit or of authorization to permit an automatically initiated alarm signal to be relayed to the facilities of the department of public safety. 
(b)  If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this chapter, a written report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to the owner, lessee, or other person responsible for the alarm system in violation of this chapter. Such report shall require the correction within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of the violation discovered, and shall state that a failure to comply may result in the revocation of the alarm user's permit, in accordance with provisions of this chapter relating to revocation of licenses and permits. The alarm user shall be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such violation upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 12)  
Sec. 4-18-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4-18-5, relating to testing of alarm equipment, derived from § 13 of an ordinance adopted June 2, 1980, was repealed by § 5 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 6, 1986.  
Sec. 4-18-6. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The owner of any building, structure or part thereof, where any violation of this chapter shall exist and any architect, civil engineer, builder, plumber, carpenter, mason, contractor, sub-contractor, foreman, or any other person who may be employed or assist in the commission of any such violation, and any and all persons who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or any requirements thereof, or who shall knowingly violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, shall be severally liable for each and every such violation and noncompliance. 
(b)  Where there is a violation of this chapter, the city may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with, or to restrain by injunction, the violation of this article notwithstanding that this chapter may provide a penalty for such violation. 
(c)  The following schedule of fines shall be penalties for the offense of a violation of provisions of this chapter subject to the provisions of Section 37 of the charter. 
(1)  For failure of an alarm business to provide the alarm user with the information described in section 4-18-41, subsection (a), a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each day such violation continues. 
(2)  For failure of an alarm agent to return his identification card to the commissioner upon termination of employment, as required by section 4-18-22, subsection (g), a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each day such violation continues. 
(3)  For operation or maintenance of an alarm system without the standby power or automatic cutoff provisions required by section 4-18-36 or 4-18-37, a fine of up to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day such offense continues; for maintaining an alarm device programmed to use a department of public safety telephone number in violation of section 4-18-39, a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each time a signal is received from such device. 
(4)  For failure of any person to: 
a.  Obtain an alarm business license as required by section 4-18-21; or 
b.  Obtain an alarm agent identification card as required by section 4-18-22; or 
c.  Obtain an alarm user permit as required by section 4-18-23; or 
d.  Make corrections in alarm systems as required in section 4-18-4, subsection (b); or 
e.  Pay any false alarm fee within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice of the fee in accord with the schedule in section 4-18-23(c); or 
f.  Obey any order of the commissioner of public safety pertaining to suspension or revocation of an alarm business license, an alarm agent identification card, or an alarm user permit after such person has exhausted his rights to an administrative hearing; or 
g.  Maintains a public nuisance in violation of section 4-18-3, subsection (b); 
by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, §§ 17, 19; Ord. of 1-6-86, § 9)  
Secs. 4-18-7—4-18-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES, PERMITS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 4-18-21. - Licensing procedures and notification of new installations. 
(a)  Westchester County License. In lieu of complying with the licensing provisions of subsection (b) of this section relating to the issuance of alarm business licenses, any person engaged in an alarm business in the city may present to the commissioner a license obtained from the county pursuant to the county's Local Law Intro. No. 13-1985, which law becomes effective January 1, 1986, and expires December 31, 1987, and which law amends chapter 863 of the Laws of Westchester to add a new article XV entitled, "Licensing of Persons Engaged in the Alarm System Business." Should this county local law expire, or be repealed, or be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, inoperative or unconstitutional as to any of the licensing provisions, then those persons engaged in an alarm business must comply with the provisions of subsection (b). 
(b)  Application for License by Alarm Business. Any person prior to engaging in an alarm business in the city shall apply to the commissioner for a license to operate on a form to be furnished by the commissioner. The application shall be completed and signed by the individual proprietor or by a partner or by the proper corporate official as is appropriate for the form of the business receiving the license and shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  The name of the alarm business, including any trade names used by the business. If an assumed name is used, a certified copy of the certificate filed with the secretary of state or county clerk shall be annexed. 
(2)  The address of the alarm business, including all locations from which sales, installation, or service personnel are dispatched to installations within the city. 
(3)  The telephone number of the alarm business. This shall include a manually attended number which can be reached at all times for emergency service. 
(4)  The type of business (individual, partnership, corporation, etc.). 
(5)  The full name, date of birth and home telephone number of the business' three (3) highest ranking management officials who are responsible for the conduct of the alarm business in the city. 
(6)  The state in which the business is incorporated. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, proof of authority to do business in the state shall be annexed. 
(7)  Any other information the commissioner may reasonably require. 
(8)  A list of all other county jurisdictions wherein the alarm business is licensed to operate at the time of the original application. Subsequent licenses shall not be required to be reported. 
(9)  A complete list of criminal convictions of each partner, officer or manager, who is directly involved in conducting the business of the company in the city. 
(c)  License applications will be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the city. The fee for renewals will be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  All licenses will be for a period of one year to expire on November 3 of each year. Renewal applications must be submitted no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. Renewal licenses shall be issued prior to the expiration date and shall be valid for one (1) year. 
(e)  Any person engaging in an alarm business in the city, whether licensed under the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, shall give notice to the commissioner of any new installation within ten (10) days of the completion of the installation. 
(f)  The commissioner shall cause a background investigation to be made on the applicant company. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of the application, he shall either approve or deny such application. 
(g)  In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation of certain provisions of this chapter, the commissioner may revoke or deny the license of an alarm business on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement made in the application for a license or in the conduct of the alarm business. 
(2)  Failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment, procedures, or operation within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of same from the department of public safety, or within such time as shall be determined as responsible by the commissioner if said deficiencies cannot be corrected within thirty (30) days. 
(3)  Failure to comply with any order or notice issued by the commissioner after the rights to appeal have been exhausted. 
(4)  The conviction of a partner, officer, or manager of a crime, subject to the applicable provisions of Articles 23 and 23A of the Correction Law. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, §§ 4—6; Ord. of 1-6-86, § 2)  
Sec. 4-18-22. - Alarm identification cards. 
(a)  In lieu of complying with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section relating to the issuance of identification cards, any alarm business personnel who engage in selling, installing, servicing or maintaining alarm systems within the city may obtain an identification card from the county pursuant to the aforementioned county Local Law Intro. No. 13-1985. Should the county local law expire, or be repealed, or be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, inoperative or unconstitutional as to any of the provisions relating to identification cards, then the alarm business personnel must comply with the provisions of subsection (b). 
(b)  Any alarm business personnel who engage in selling, installing, servicing, or maintaining alarm systems within the city shall be required to obtain identification cards from the commissioner. Said card shall show the name of the agent, his home address, the name and address of the alarm business, the date employment commenced, the expiration date of the card, a recent photograph of the holder, and the applicant's signature. All persons required to have ID cards shall submit applications to the commissioner. Said applications shall include the following: 
(1)  Applicant's full name (including any aliases), date of birth, residence and business addresses, and home and business telephone numbers. 
(2)  A record of previous employment covering the past five (5) years. 
(3)  A list of all felony and misdemeanor convictions. 
(4)  A set of classifiable fingerprints. 
(5)  Two (2) recent color photographs of the applicant (passport size). 
(6)  Name and address of the alarm business where the applicant will be employed. 
(7)  A statement that the applicant will inform the commissioner of any criminal arrests or other changes in the above information within ten (10) days of such arrest or change and will surrender the ID card upon termination of employment or upon notice of suspension or revocation of the ID card. 
(c)  The card holder must carry this card when engaged in the business covered by the license and must exhibit it on demand of any peace officer of the city or on demand of any uniformed member of the fire department. 
(d)  Application of an ID card shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(e)  Identification cards provided for in this section shall be valid for a period of two (2) years. Renewal applications must be submitted to the commissioner at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date. Such applications for renewal shall be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(f)  The commissioner shall cause a background check to be conducted on each applicant. No identification card shall be issued if: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony, subject to applicable provisions of Article 23 and Article 23A of the Correction Law; 
(2)  If the application contains false statements made willfully and knowingly; 
(3)  The applicant is not employed as an alarm agent at the time of application, and has not submitted a written letter of intent from a license alarm business to hire him pending approval of his ID application. 
(g)  If the application is approved, the commissioner shall cause an identification card to be issued to the applicant. 
(h)  Failure of the cardholder to turn the card to the commissioner within ten (10) days of the termination of his employment as an alarm agent, or upon notification of suspension or revocation of the card, shall be a misdemeanor. The alarm business shall be responsible for notifying the commissioner of the termination of employment of any of its alarm agents in writing within ten (10) days of the effective date of the termination. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation. 
(i)  In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation of this chapter, the commissioner may revoke the identification card of an alarm agent on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud of willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement made in an application for an identification card. 
(2)  Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement made while employed as an alarm agent. 
(3)  Conviction of a felony or of a misdemeanor which reflects unfavorably upon the cardholder's fitness to function as an alarm agent, subject to the provisions of Article 23 and Article 23A of the Correction Law. 
(4)  Failure to comply with any order or notice of the commissioner after the rights of appeal have been exhausted. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, §§ 7—10; Ord. of 1-6-86, § 3; Ord. of 5-22-08, § 2)  
Sec. 4-18-23. - Alarm user permits. 
(a)  Every alarm user shall, before operating an alarm system, apply to the commissioner on a form to be furnished by the commissioner, for a permit to operate an alarm system. The application shall be completed and signed by the individual who owns, leases, or otherwise uses the alarm system and shall include, but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  The name or names of the person or persons residing in the protected premises or, if a business establishment, the name of that business establishment; 
(2)  The address of the protected premises, including apartment or other customary identifier for multiple occupancies at an address; 
(3)  The name and mailing address of the individual who applies for the permit; 
(4)  The home and business phone numbers of the permittee; 
(5)  The type of system installed, including: 
a.  Type of emergency the system is equipped to detect and report; 
b.  The method or methods used to annunciate the alarm device or devices. 
(6)  The name, address, and business phone number, including an after-hours emergency number of the monitoring service, if any; 
(7)  Whether or not the system is equipped to automatically rearm itself, and if so, after what period of time; 
(8)  Cutoff time for audible signals; 
(9)  The name, address, and telephone number of the installing company or individual; 
(10)  The name, address, and telephone number of the servicing company, if different than installing company; 
(11)  The name, home address and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified in the event of an alarm. 
(b)  The alarm user shall be responsible for notifying the commissioner in writing of any changes in the above information at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such change. 
(c)  Any person who wishes to install, have installed, or reactivate an alarm system shall obtain an alarm user permit before the installation or reactivation is begun. 
(d)  Permit application for residential premises will be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to the city. Permit applications for commercial premises will be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the city. The permit will expire on December 31 of the year of issue. Renewal applications with a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential premises and two hundred dollars ($200.00) for commercial premises shall be submitted annually no later than November 30 of each year. Renewal permits shall be issued during the month of December and become effective January 1 of the following year for a renewal period of one (1) year. 
(e)  The issuance of an alarm user permit does not create any special relationship or obligation on the part of the city to respond to any alarm. 
(f)  Upon receipt of the application and the appropriate fee, the commissioner may issue an alarm user permit if the requirements of this chapter are met. An alarm user shall not operate an alarm system until a permit for the system has been issued. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the violation of certain provisions of this chapter, the commissioner may deny, suspend or revoke an alarm user permit, or renewal thereof for any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statement made in the application for an alarm user permit or in the operation of the licensed system; 
(2)  Deliberate activation of a false alarm; 
(3)  Use of an alarm system to summon public safety personnel for a condition other than what the system was designed to detect and report as authorized in the permit; 
(4)  Failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment, procedures, or operation within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of same from the department of public safety, or within such time as shall be determined as reasonable by the commissioner if said deficiencies cannot be corrected within thirty (30) days; 
(5)  Failure to comply with any order or notice issued by the commissioner after the rights to appeal have been exhausted. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 14; Ord. of 1-6-86, § 6; Ord. No, 5-28-03, § 2; Ord. of 5-22-08, § 3; Ord. of 4-7-11, § 2; Ord. of > 5-17-16 , § 8)  
Sec. 4-18-24. - Hearing procedure for suspensions, cancellations, revocations and refusal to review. 
(a)  Whenever any permit, license or identification card required by this article is to be administratively suspended, cancelled, revoked, or issuance denied, the commissioner of public safety shall mail a notice to the address of record of the applicant or licensee stating the reasons for such proposed action. Such notice shall establish a hearing date at which time the commissioner of public safety or his designee shall conduct a hearing. Should the applicant or licensee fail to appear for the scheduled hearing, the commissioner may conduct an inquiry on the issue of the mailing of the notice, may order additional notice in the form of a second mailing and may thereafter suspend the permit, license or identification card should he again fail to appear. 
(b)  The commissioner of public safety is authorized to appoint a designee as a hearing officer who shall be duly authorized to act as the presiding officer at any hearing authorized pursuant to this chapter. Such designee shall prepare proposed findings and recommendations based on such findings for the determination to be made by the commissioner of public safety. 
(c)  When a licensee or permittee under this article has made timely and sufficient application for the renewal of a license or a permit to be issued pursuant to this article, the existing license will not expire until the application has been finally determined by the commissioner of public safety and, in case the application is denied or the new license or permit limited, until the last day for seeking review of the determination of the commissioner of public safety or a later date fixed by order of a reviewing court provided however, that this subdivision shall not affect any valid action taken by the commissioner of public safety to summarily suspend a license or permit. 
(d)  If the commissioner of public safety finds that the public health, safety or welfare imperatively requires emergency action, and incorporates a finding to that effect in an order, summary suspension of a license, permit or identification card may be ordered, effective on the date specified in such order or upon service of a certified copy of such order on the licensee, or permittee whichever shall be later, pending proceedings for revocation, or cancellation or other action these proceedings shall be promptly instituted and determined. 
(e)  Any person compelled to appear in person or who voluntarily appears before the commissioner of public safety or representative of the commissioner shall be accorded the right to be accompanied, represented and advised by counsel in a proceeding before the department of public safety on any of the matters referred to in this chapter. Every party or person shall be accorded the right to appear in person or by or with counsel. Nothing herein shall be construed either to grant or deny to any person who is not a lawyer the right to appear for or represent others before any municipal officer. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 16; Ord. of 1-6-86, § 8)  
Secs. 4-18-25—4-18-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 4-18-36. - Standby power supply system. 
Every alarm system maintained within the city shall be equipped with a standby power supply system sufficient to maintain the system in a state of readiness to detect the conditions it was installed to monitor for a period of at least four (4) hours in the event of a loss of power supplied by either the public utility power system or the customary power system provided for the premises. Such standby power supply must also retain sufficient power at the end of the four-hour period to successfully transmit a clear signal through an attached automatic alarm communication device if present, or to power local audible or visible signaling devices at rated volume or intensity for a period of at least ten (10) minutes. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 3(a))  
Sec. 4-18-37. - Externally audible local signaling device. 
Every alarm system equipped with an externally audible local signaling device shall be provided with an automatic cutoff to silence the audible external signal at the end of a period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes from the time the signaling device is activated in residential systems, and thirty (30) minutes in commercial systems. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 3(b))  
Sec. 4-18-38. - Method of transmission, message content, etc., to comply with standards. 
The method of transmission, message content and message format of any automatic alarm communication device programmed to transmit a signal to the department of public safety's facilities must conform to standards established by the commissioner to maintain compatibility with the department's equipment and procedures, and to promote the expeditious processing of incoming emergency signals. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 3(c))  
Sec. 4-18-39. - Connection to department of public safety phone number. 
It shall be unlawful to maintain any automatic alarm communication device programmed to access any department of public safety telephone number. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 11(a); Ord. of 1-6-86, § 4)  
Sec. 4-18-40. - Connections to central stations, answering services, etc. 
(a)  Persons owning or leasing an automatic alarm communication device may program the device to transmit its signal to: 
(1)  A central station, or 
(2)  An answering service, or 
(3)  Any other consenting party. 
(b)  The department of public safety shall not be required to respond to any alarm signal transmitted in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 11(b); Ord. of 1-6-86, § 4)  
Sec. 4-18-41. - Operating instructions and services. 
(a)  Every alarm business selling or leasing an alarm system shall, upon completion of the installation, without extra charge, furnish the user with instructions to enable the user to operate it properly. Further, the alarm business shall provide the user with written information stating how service may be obtained and the telephone number to use to obtain such service. 
(b)  In the case of systems installed prior to November 3, 1980: Within ten (10) days of receipt of a written request for complete operating instructions for an alarm system from an alarm user, an alarm business must furnish a copy of the instructions to the user. The alarm business shall be entitled to a reasonable charge for this service. 
(Ord. of 6-2-80, § 11(c)—(e); Ord. of 1-6-86, § 4)  
Chapter 4-19 - FAIR HOUSING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-19-1. - General declaration of policy. 
(a)  The common council hereby finds and declares it to be the public policy of the city to promote fair dealing in real estate transactions, to maintain community stability and security and to foster racial and social harmony, that no person which receives or expects to receive pecuniary gain from the sale or rental of real property shall: 
(1)  Refuse to sell, lease, rent, furnish services, or otherwise deny or withhold any housing accommodation constructed or to be constructed in the city to any person, or refuse to negotiate for the sale, lease or rental of housing accommodation, or otherwise make unavailable to any person, by reason of the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of such person. 
(2)  Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(3)  Discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodation. 
(4)  Discriminate in the furnishing of information, services or facilities to any person in connection with the sale or rental of real property because of the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of such person. 
(5)  Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or use any form or application, for the purchase, lease or rental of any housing accommodation, or make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, lease or rental of any housing accommodation which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination. 
(6)  Display listings or show prospective purchasers or renters units for sale or lease on the basis of race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status, or display listings or show prospects units for sale or lease in areas of the city based on race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status. 
(7)  Influence or attempt to influence any other person who purports or represents himself to be a prospective purchaser, seller, occupant or tenant or landlord of real property to purchase, sell or rent or to refrain from purchasing or renting or selling real property by referring to the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of occupants or prospective occupants of other real property in the area. 
(8)  Induce a real estate transaction from which such person may benefit financially, by representing that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition of the area with respect to the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located. 
(b)  This policy shall not be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two (2) families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his family reside in one of such housing accommodations. 
(2)  The restriction of the rental of all rooms in a housing accommodation to individuals of the same sex. 
(3)  The rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, if such rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the owner of the housing accommodation and he or members of his family reside in such housing accommodation. 
(Res. of 4-7-80)  
Secs. 4-19-2—4-19-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 4-19-21. - Policy. 
The common council hereby finds and declares it to be the public policy of the city to promote fair dealing in real estate transactions, to maintain community stability and security, and to foster racial and social harmony. This article is adopted in order to reinforce this policy and to supplement the federal and state laws pertaining to fair housing. 
(Ord. of 4-7-80, § 1)  
Sec. 4-19-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the city commission on human rights. 
Discriminate means to extend differential treatment on the basis of race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status, and including discrimination because of the race, color, creed, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of friends and associates. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Handicap includes a bodily or mental disablement which may be the result of injury, illness or congenital condition for which reasonable accommodation can be made. 
Housing accommodations includes any building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the home residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings. 
Human rights director means the executive director of the commission. 
Lease includes sub-lease, assignment, and rental and includes any contract to do any of the foregoing. 
Lending institution means any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association, other person in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured by title to or a security interest in real property, but shall not include any religious institution or organization nor any charitable or educational organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization. 
Marital status includes the state of being married, single, divorced, separated or widowed and the usual conditions associated therewith, including pregnancy or parenthood. 
Owner includes any person, or any one of a number of persons, in whom is vested all or any part of the legal or equitable ownership, dominion, or title to any real property. 
(Ord. of 4-7-80, § 2)  
Sec. 4-19-23. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person which receives or expects to receive pecuniary gain from the sale or rental of real property shall: 
(1)  Refuse to sell, lease, rent, furnish services, or otherwise deny or withhold any housing accommodations constructed or to be constructed in the city to any person, or refuse to negotiate for the said lease or rental of housing accommodations or otherwise make unavailable to any person, by reason of the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of such person. 
(2)  Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(3)  Discriminate against any person because of his race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status in the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodations constructed or to be constructed. 
(4)  Discriminate in the furnishing of information, services or facilities to any person in connection with the sale or rental of real property because of the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of such person. 
(5)  Print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or use any form or application for the purchase, lease or rental of any housing accommodation, or make any record or inquiry in connection with the prospective purchase, lease or rental of any housing accommodations which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification or discrimination. 
(6)  Display listings or show prospective purchasers or renters units for sale or lease on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status, or display listings or show prospects units for sale or lease in areas of the city based on race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status. 
(7)  Induce a real estate transaction from which any such person may benefit financially, by representing that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition of the block, neighborhood or area with respect to the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located, and to represent, directly or indirectly, that this change will or may result in undesirable consequences in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located, including but not limited to the physical deterioration of dwellings, the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or anti-social behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools or other facilities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker or dealer or any agent or employee of a real estate broker or dealer to influence or attempt to influence any other person who purports or represents himself to be a prospective purchaser, seller, occupant or tenant or landlord of real property to purchase, sell or rent or to refrain from purchasing or renting or selling real property by referring to the race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status of occupants or prospective occupants of other real property in the area. 
(c)  No bank, trust company, savings bank, savings and loan association or other lending institution, insurance company, finance company or financial services company, to whom application is made for financial assistance for the purchase, acquisition, construction, improvement, repair or maintenance of housing on behalf of such person shall discriminate against any applicant because of race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status in the granting, withholding, extending or renewing or in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of any such financial assistance; nor shall any such institution refuse financial assistance because such housing accommodation lies in a particular area of the city, if real property is located within the geographic area ordinarily served by such bank or within the community within which the principal or any branch office of such bank is located. For the purpose of this section, discrimination shall include refusal to make loans, differentiating in the type or terms of loans, including interest rates, charges to buyer or seller, duration and amount of loans, influencing appraisals in connection with loans or delaying of loan applications. 
(d)  No person shall aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the acts forbidden under this article, or attempt to do so. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil actions. 
(e)  No person engaged in any of the prohibited acts as hereinabove defined shall retaliate or discriminate against any person because such person has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any proceeding under this article. 
(Ord. of 4-7-80, § 3)  
Sec. 4-19-24. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two (2) families living independently of each other, if the owner or members of his family reside in one of such housing accommodations. 
(2)  The restriction of the rental of all rooms in a housing accommodation to individuals of the same sex. 
(3)  The rental of a room or rooms in a housing accommodation, if such rental is by the occupant of the housing accommodation or by the owner of the housing accommodation and he or members of his family reside in such housing accommodation. 
(b)  This article shall in no manner prevent the requirement for additional structural, emergency alarm and/or fire prevention precautions as may be required by any ordinance, nor shall it be interpreted to prevent enforcement of local building code and zoning requirements and use limitations for special residence facilities, as defined by local law, nor shall this article be interpreted to allow for any unilateral change in occupancy or creation of special occupancy uses licensed or regulated by the state, without first obtaining all required permits and certificates of occupancy to ascertain full compliance with local laws and building codes. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall require an owner to offer for sale or lease real property to the public at large, nor shall this article be deemed to prohibit discrimination for any reason other than race, creed, color, national origin, sex, handicap or marital status and not otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. of 4-7-80, § 4)  
Sec. 4-19-25. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any provision of this article may file a written complaint with the human rights director. The complaint shall be addressed to the human rights director and shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the complainant; 
(2)  The name and address of the person or persons against whom the complaint is brought, if known to the complainant; 
(3)  The address of the property involved; 
(4)  The name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge concerning the alleged violation; 
(5)  The facts surrounding the alleged violation of this article; and 
(6)  Such other information as may be required by the human rights director. 
(b)  Any complaint shall be barred from consideration unless it is filed with the human rights director within six (6) months after the alleged discriminatory practice has occurred. The human rights director may extend the time for filing the complaint for an additional sixty (60) days when conciliation efforts are pending. 
(c)  The human rights director shall serve a copy of the complaint upon the person against whom the complaint is brought personally or by certified mail within ten (10) business days of the filing of the complaint. 
(d)  The person or persons against whom the complaint is brought shall have ten (10) business days from receipt of the complaint, to respond to director's charges, in person at the commission office, by mail or telephone. 
(e)  The human rights director shall investigate the complaint and determine whether or not, in his opinion, probable cause exists for believing that the allegations made in the complaint are true. 
(f)  If after such investigation, the human rights director determines that probable cause does not exist to believe that the allegations made in the complaint are true, he shall dismiss the complaint and shall so notify the complainant and all other parties interested. 
(g)  If, after such investigation, the human rights director determines that probable cause does exist to believe that the allegations made in the complaint are true, he shall set a date for a conference and notify the parties of the time and place thereof. At such conference, the human rights director shall interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by conciliation. 
(h)  The human rights director is authorized to hold closed meetings for conciliation of complaints of discrimination brought pursuant to this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such meetings shall be made public by the human rights director, the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(i)  If the human rights director is unable to secure voluntary compliance or effect conciliation and if he has made a determination of the probable occurrence of one or more of the prohibited acts as hereinabove defined, the human rights director, with the concurrence of the corporation counsel, may elect any of the following procedures: 
(1)  Assist the complainant in the preparation and submission of a housing discrimination complaint (HUD Form 903) with the appropriate division of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
(2)  Assist the complainant in the preparation and submission of a complaint to the state division of human rights under Article 15 of the New York Executive Law; or 
(3)  Submit the complaint to the corporation counsel who, on behalf of the city may institute and maintain an action in the city court of the city to impose any fine or to enter judgment for any penalty provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-7-80, § 5)  
Sec. 4-19-26. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person engaging in any of the acts prohibited by this article shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine, or a penalty payable to the city which shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in amount for each such prohibited act. 
(Ord. of 4-7-80, § 6)  
Sec. 4-19-27. - Prevention of multiplicity of proceedings. 
In order to prevent multiplicity of proceedings, the provisions of this article shall not be operative when there is pending, or where there has been a determination in, any other proceeding or action authorized under the laws or ordinances of another governmental body based upon the identical act or acts complained of. 
(Ord. of 4-7-80, § 7)  
Chapter 4-20 - FARM PRODUCE MARKETS 
 
Sec. 4-20-1. - Purposes. 
The farm produce market regulations as established in this chapter are designed to authorize farm produce markets on privately-owned property, publicly-owned property or in the public right-of-way, but only in those locations determined by the commissioner of public works or the commissioner of building to be appropriate for the establishment and maintenance of such markets, and to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. The general goals embodied in this chapter include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide farmers, in cooperation with the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets, with an outlet for the sale and display of their home-grown farm products in the city; 
(2)  To provide the citizens of and visitors to the city with an opportunity to purchase home-grown farm products directly from the farmers; 
(3)  To encourage the sale and consumption of home-grown farm products in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-6-82, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-89, § 1)  
Sec. 4-20-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of building of the city whenever the site for a proposed farm produce market is located on privately-owned land; or the commissioner of public works of the city whenever the site for a proposed farm produce market is located on publicly-owned property or in a public right-of-way. 
Farm produce market shall mean any area duly licensed by the commissioner under section 4-20-3 which area contains stalls or booths for the sale or display of farm products. 
Farm products shall mean any item, food, fruit, field grown flower or vegetable grown by a farmer and such similar items such as eggs, bread, baked goods, jellies, jams, preserves and honey, provided such items have been manufactured or prepared by the farmer on property owned or occupied by the farmer, and have not been purchased for resale. 
Farmer shall mean any person who grows or prepares any "farm products" as defined above, or any person who is employed by or related by blood or marriage to a person who grows such farm products. 
Sponsor shall mean any person who submits to the commissioner an application for a license pursuant to section 4-20-3 to conduct a farm produce market, except that the City of White Plains may also act as a sponsor without filing an application for said license. Where the City of White Plains acts as a sponsor, it will be exempt from the licensing requirements of section 4-20-3 and section 4-20-6; the operating restrictions of section 4-20-5; and the penalty provisions of section 4-20-7. Where the city acts as sponsor, the specific site to be used as a farm produce market shall be on publicly-owned property or public right-of-way and said site shall be approved by resolution of the common council with the site plan to be approved by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 7-6-82, § 2; Ord. of 12-6-82, § 1; Ord. of 5-16-83, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-89, § 2; Ord. of 6-6-94, § 1)  
Sec. 4-20-3. - License. 
(a)  The commissioner is hereby authorized to issue a seasonal license to operate a farm produce market on privately-owned property, publicly-owned property or in a public right-of-way subject to the sponsor's compliance with section 4-20-4. 
(b)  Any license issued pursuant to this section shall permit the operation of a farm produce market only on the dates specified therein. 
(c)  Any application for a license to conduct a farm produce market shall be submitted to the commissioner in ten (10) copies and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the sponsor; 
(2)  The date or dates for the proposed farm produce market; 
(3)  The site selected by the sponsor for the proposed farm product market; 
(4)  The names and addresses of the farmers who will sell or display for sale any farm products; 
(5)  The types of farm products to be sold; 
(6)  The fee charged to each farmer. 
(d)  Any application for a license to conduct a farm produce market shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A nonrefundable license and administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00); 
(2)  An agreement that, in the event a license to conduct a farm produce market on publicly-owned property or in a public right-of-way is issued, the sponsor agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers and employees against any loss, liability or damage, including, but not limited to, expenses for bodily injury and property damage sustained by any person as a result of the sponsor's operation of a farm produce market; 
(3)  Whenever publicly-owned property or a public right-of-way is the site proposed to a farm produce market, a certificate of insurance to demonstrate that the sponsor has a satisfactory amount of public liability and property damage insurance, and naming the city and the commissioner as co-insured for the insurance covering the operation of a farm produce market; 
(4)  An informal site plan to be submitted in ten (10) copies, which shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the sponsor, 
b.  Name and address of the person who prepared the site plan, 
c.  The site for the proposed farm produce market including the dimensions of the site, 
d.  The name of any properties and streets adjoining the site and their location to the site, 
e.  Number and location of the stalls and booths proposed to be placed on the site, 
f.  The zoning district in which the site is located. 
(e)  Copies of the application and the site plan shall be submitted to the mayor, who shall refer the application to the following departments: 
(1)  The departments of planning, parking, public safety, public works and law whenever the commissioner of building issues the license; 
(2)  The departments of planning, parking, public safety and building whenever the commissioner of public works issues the license. 
The above departments shall have ten (10) days to respond to the mayor. 
(f)  Based upon the above review and comments, provided the common council has by resolution expressed its approval of the site, the commissioner may approve the site plan and issue the license subject to conditions or modifications as he deems necessary to implement the intent of this chapter. 
(g)  If the commissioner disapproves the site plan or decides not to issue the license, he shall inform the sponsor in writing of the reasons for his decision. 
(h)  The sponsor may appeal a decision of the commissioner which imposes conditions on the license or the site plan, or disapproves a site plan and refuses to issue a license. Such an appeal must be filed with the common council within twenty (20) days from the date of the letter informing the sponsor of the commissioner's decision. 
(i)  Upon approval of the site plan and prior to the issuance of a license to conduct a farm produce market on publicly owned land or in a public right-of-way, the sponsor shall pay to the city a deposit in the amount of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per square foot based upon the area to be used for the farm produce market, or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), whichever is greater. 
(1)  The deposit shall be retained by the city until the expiration of the license, as security for the faithful performance by the sponsor of all terms, conditions, covenants and agreements of the license to be done or performed by the sponsor. 
(2)  Upon failure or default by the sponsor of any of the terms, conditions, covenants and agreements of the license to be done or performed by the sponsor, said deposit may be used by the city for any expense incurred by the city by reason of such failure or default by the sponsor, without prior notice to the sponsor of such use by the city. 
(3)  Any balance remaining after such failure or default, as determined and certified by the commissioner which has been paid and deducted from the amount of the deposit, shall be refunded to the sponsor. 
(Ord. of 7-6-82, §§ 3, 6; Ord. of 12-6-82, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 4-3-89, § 3; Ord of 12-3-12, § 1)  
Sec. 4-20-4. - Standards. 
(a)  No farm produce market may be permitted on any site which is within three hundred fifty (350) feet from another approved farm produce market. 
(b)  Each farmer who sells or displays for sale farm products shall do so in accordance with an approved site plan. 
(c)  Each staff or both shall be operated by the farmer. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the sponsor to ascertain and verify that no person other than a bona fide farmer maintains a stall or booth for the sale or display of farm products, and that only farm products are sold or displayed for sale in the farm produce market. 
(e)  A farm produce market is to be operated for the benefit of the farmers and the public in accordance with the purposes set forth in section 4-20-1. It is not to be operated for the benefit of the sponsor. Therefore, the sponsor shall charge to the farmers only such fees as are necessary to recoup operating costs incurred by the sponsor in promoting and conducting the farm produce market. 
(Ord. of 7-6-82, § 4; Ord. of 7-12-82, § 1; Ord. of 5-16-83, § 2; Ord. of 4-3-89, § 4)  
Sec. 4-20-5. - Operating restrictions. 
(a)  Annually, for a period commencing June 1 to the day before Thanksgiving, parking lots accessory to permitted commercial, religious and educational uses in RM-0.35, B-1, B-2 (only within the Central Parking Area), B-3, B-4 and UR-2 districts in the city may be used as farmer's markets subject to the sponsor having secured a license certifying fitness for the operation of the same. 
(b)  A farm produce market may be operated only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during the period prescribed in paragraph (a). 
(c)  After the close of the farm produce market, the sponsor must collect all waste, garbage and refuse, and shall transport and dispose of such waste, garbage and refuse away from the licensed area. 
(Ord. of 7-6-82, § 5; Ord. of 12-6-82, §§ 4, 5; Ord. of 5-16-83, § 3; Ord. of 4-3-89, § 5)  
Sec. 4-20-6. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  Any license granted under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the commissioner for cause, upon the recommendation of any of the city departments that participated in the license review process or on his own initiative. The licensee may request a hearing before the commissioner within five (5) days after receipt of notice of such suspension or revocation. Any such hearing shall be held after reasonable written notice by the commissioner to the licensee of the violations; and the licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, present evidence in his behalf and confront the evidence against him. 
(b)  Cause for the revocation or suspension of a license shall be any violation that may endanger the health and safety of the public or any series of violations that may have been prosecuted separately, pursuant to section 4-20-7, or any violation that may not have been timely resolved, or any series of violations. 
(Ord. of 4-3-89, § 6)  
Sec. 4-20-7. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to prosecution in the city court and shall upon conviction thereof be liable to a fine that shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 7-6-82, § 7; Ord. of 4-3-89, § 7) 
Note— Formerly, § 4-30-6.  
Chapter 4-21 - MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 1A-1993 did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1—126 as ch. 4-21, §§ 4-21-1—4-21-126, was at the discretion of the editor. The term "local law" has been changed to chapter. 
Additionally, it should be noted that a resolution adopted Oct. 4, 1993, authorized the New York State Commission on Cable Television to undertake basic service tier cable television rate regulation on behalf of the City of White Plains. 
 
Sec. 4-21-1. - Title. 
This chapter may be known and cited as the Multi-Channel Service Providers Regulatory Chapter for the City of White Plains, New York. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 1)  
Sec. 4-21-2. - Construction. 
This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the applicable federal and state laws governing multi-channel service practices which specifically includes the operation and provision of a cable television system. Moreover, with respect to the operation and provision of a cable television system, this chapter shall be construed in accordance with any applicable rules and regulations of the NYSCCT. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 2)  
Sec. 4-21-3. - Scope. 
This chapter shall apply within the geographical limits of the city, including any areas subsequently annexed by the city, unless state law prescribes otherwise, or in some fashion restricts or alters the effect of this chapter to a subsequently annexed area of the city. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 3)  
Sec. 4-21-4. - Severability. 
If any word phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this chapter, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable, and the remaining provisions of this chapter, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 4)  
Sec. 4-21-5. - Definitions. 
(1)  A/B switch or Input selector switch means any device that enables a viewer to select between any video source (including any type of multi-channel service) or any ancillary equipment. Such a device may be more sophisticated than a mere two-sided switch, may utilize other multi-channel system interface equipment, and may be built into television receivers. 
(2)  Access channel means a government, education, or public channel which is carried on a multi-channel system, but which is not part of any institutional network. 
(3)  Activated channel means a channel engineered at the headend of the multi-channel system for the provision of services generally available to residential subscribers of the multi-channel system, regardless of whether such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for governmental, educational, or public use. 
(4)  Abandoned calls means those telephone calls that are connected to an MCS provider's customer service telephone system, without being answered by a representative of the MCS provider, or by a call response system within thirty (30) seconds of the receipt of the call (e.g. placing a service request, placing a work order, directing calls to the appropriate personnel, or the like). 
(5)  Affiliate when used in relation to any person means another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with such person. 
(6)  Alternative user charge means a charge used in place of a franchise fee that the council requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, easements, public ways, or rights-of-way of the city in order to construct, maintain, and operate a multi-channel system. An alternative user fee is not based on an MCS provider's gross annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise fee), but rather is based on the value of the city property that an MCS provider uses to construct, maintain, and operate its multi-channel system. 
(7)  Gross revenue for any period means any and all revenues received by the franchisee or other MCS provider for that period which are derived from the operation of the MCS system within the city under the authority of the franchise granted to it by the City. For purposes of the calculation of franchise fees pursuant to section 107 of this local law, the gross revenues of the franchisee shall include any and all compensation actually derived from such franchisee's operation of its cable system under the authority of its franchise whether received directly or indirectly by such franchisee in the form of payment to such franchisee or to a controlling owner or affiliate of such franchisee, and shall include the value of goods or services (including, but not limited to, such nonsubscriber revenues as transmission or advertising services) provided by such franchisee under the authority of such franchise to a controlling owner or affiliate of such franchisee to the extent not otherwise compensated to such franchisee by such owner or affiliate in a manner consistent with established practice or available to non-affiliated parties. However, "gross revenue" does not include, any revenues billed but not collected or credited, or revenues refunded back to customers, or any taxes imposed and/or assessed by law on subscribers which an MCS provider collects and pays in full to the applicable authorities, nor any revenues received by any person other than such franchisee or MCS provider with respect to cable service or other service provided by such person over the franchisee's or MCS provider's cable system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but not received by such franchisee or MCS provider. 
(8)  Applicant means a person submitting an application or proposal to the city for a license or franchise (where required) to operate a multi-channel system under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, and any state regulations (including where applicable, those of the NYSCCT). 
(9)  Application or Proposal are synonymous for the purposes of this chapter. An application or proposal means the process by which the applicant submits a request and, indicates a desire to be granted a license or franchise (where required) for all, or a part, of the city. An "application" or "proposal" includes all written documentation, and verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the council/franchising authority concerning the construction, rendering of services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed multi-channel system. 
(10)  Assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise means any transfer of a franchise, in whole or in part, whether by sale, assignment, lease or other form of alienation or change in operational or managerial control. 
(11)  Auxiliary equipment means equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such as a converter, remote control unit or device, digital tuner, or input selector switch), to enhance or assist in the reception or provision of multi-channel service. 
(12)  Basic cable television service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. In the event that the definition of "basic cable television service" is amended by either Congress or the FCC, then this chapter's definition of "basic cable television service" shall be likewise amended to conform thereto and consistent therewith. 
(13)  Cable Act or CCPA means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and as otherwise amended, which in large part is codified at 47 USC 521 et seq. 
(14)  Cable channel or cable television channel or data channel or informational channel means a portion of the electromagnetic or light frequency spectrum used in cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel (as "television channel" is defined by the FCC regulation). 
(15)  Cable operator means any person or group of persons who: 
(a)  Provides cable television service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
(b)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
(16)  Cable service means: 
(a)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and 
(b)  Subscriber interaction, if any, or other programming which is required for the selection of such video programming service. 
(17)  Cable system or Cable television system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video, voice or data programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. However, such terms do not include the following: 
(a)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more broadcast stations; or 
(b)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; or 
(c)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of section 621(c) of the Cable Act—codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or service directly to subscribers or; 
(d)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility. 
(18)  Charge means a one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the subscriber, and which is associated with the installation, maintenance, service, or repair of the multi-channel service. Specifically, a "charge" includes but is not limited to: address change charges for subscribers; disconnection fees; downgrade charges; costs for closed-captioned devices and equipment, remote control devices and equipment for hearing-impaired customers; installation charges for video camera recorders and players; installation charges for digital radio; and trip or service call charges. 
(19)  City means the City of White Plains, New York. 
(20)—(24) Reserved. 
(25)  Collection charge means a charge or fee imposed on a customer by an MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting, or attempting to collect, a past-due account. 
(26)  Commercially impracticable means with respect to any requirement applicable to an MCS provider, that it is commercially impracticable for such an MCS provider to comply with such requirement as a result of a change in conditions which is beyond the control of such an MCS provider, and the nonoccurrence of which, was the basic assumption on which the requirement was based. 
(27)  Converter means any electric, electronic, or other device, separate and apart from the subscriber's receiver that is capable of converting or changing signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference within the television, video, or data receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to view or otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations, or such other reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the practical use of the signal. 
(28)  Council or council/franchising authority means the Common Council of the City of White Plains, New York. 
(29)  Customer means a lawful subscriber, or user of the services and/or facilities of the multi-channel system provided by an MCS provider. 
(30)  Decoder or Descrambler means a device which enables a subscriber to convert a scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise useable signal. 
(31)  Disaster emergency or emergency means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city is threatened. A "disaster emergency" (by illustration) may include a sudden or expected insect infestation (such as with locusts, grasshoppers, or bees), snowstorm, flood, hailstorm, tornado, severe thunderstorm, hazardous waste infiltration, fire, petroleum, munitions, or nuclear explosion, or aircraft crash. 
(32)  Downgrade means a change in the level of a subscriber's multi-channel service from a more comprehensive level of multi-channel service (in terms of services or channels provided), to a less comprehensive level of multi-channel service (in terms of services or channels provided). Though not mandatory, a "downgrade" in the level of service normally results in the decrease in the periodic rate for the provision of such multi-channel services to the subscriber. 
(33)  Drop means a small branch of cable, or other transmitting medium which connects the terminals on the back of the subscriber's receiver to the trunk or feeder cable or future technical equivalent. 
(34)  Easement means and shall include any public or private easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television, or any multi-channel service. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of cable service or any other multi-channel service. 
(35)  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and/or such other federal regulatory agency as now or in the future may have jurisdiction to oversee. 
(36)  Fiber cable or fiber optic cable means very thin and pliable cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future developed technical equivalent, used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies. 
(37)  Franchise means the initial authorization or subsequent renewal granted by the council/franchising authority in order for a person to construct, operate, and/or maintain a franchised MCS system in all, or part, of the city. 
(38)  Franchise agreement means the separate contract by which the council/franchising authority grants an MCS provider the right to operate a franchised multi-channel system within all, or a part, of the city. 
(39)  Franchise expiration or franchise agreement expiration means the date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchised MCS provider, as noted under a franchise agreement, or any lawful extension thereof. 
(40)  Franchise fee means a fee or charge that the city requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and easements of the city in order to construct, maintain, and operate a franchised multi-channel system. 
(41)  Franchised MCS provider or franchisee means a person that is awarded a franchise by the council/franchising authority to construct or operate a franchised multi-channel system, within all, or part, of the city. 
(42)  Franchising authority or council/franchising authority means the Common Council of the City of White Plains, New York. 
(43)  Functional equivalent or functionally equivalent with respect to a specifically named piece of multi-channel system equipment, means another piece of multi-channel system equipment that has one of the following: 
(a)  The same or substantially similar characteristics, qualities, operational capabilities, design functions as the original, specifically named piece of multi-channel system equipment; or 
(b)  Operates in substantially the same form and fashion as the original, specifically named piece of multi-channel equipment; or 
(c)  Operates in a technologically superior manner to the original, specifically named piece of multi-channel equipment. 
(44)  Headend means the electronic control center, where incoming signals, including those of television broadcast stations, are amplified, modulated, filtered, converted, or in any way processed or converted for redistribution to subscribers. 
(45)  Holiday means a day in which a substantial portion of the area's workers are exempt from work even though paid, including, but not limited to, all holidays recognized by either the state or federal government. 
(46)  Hypothecation means providing security or a loan or indebtedness of an MCS provider in a manner and method that does not specifically include the assignment or transfer of possession or sale of the multi-channel system or franchise. 
(47)  Input selector switch is intended to perform the same functions as an A/B switch. 
(48)  Late charge means a charge which is added to a customer's account or bill for non-payment of a previously due and delinquent account. 
(49)  Local law [chapter] means the multi-channel Service Providers Regulatory Chapter for the City of White Plains, New York. 
(50)-(54) Reserved. 
(55)  Mayor means the Mayor for the City of White Plains, New York, or the mayor's authorized designee. 
(56)  MCS means multi-channel service. 
(57)  MCS provider or multi-channel service provider means any person or group of persons who: 
(a)  Provides multi-channel communications service over a multi-channel system and directly or indirectly owns a significant interest in such multi-channel system; or 
(b)  Otherwise controls or is responsible through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a multi-channel system. 
The term "MCS provider" or "multi-channel service provider" specifically includes the terms "cable operator," "MDS provider" or "multi-point distribution system provider," "MMDS provider," "personal communications network system provider" (where applicable and permitted under State rule or regulation, including that of the NYSCCT), and "SMATV operator," provided, however, that when used in reference to a "franchised MCS provider" such use shall mean only the "franchisee." 
(58)  "MDS" means multi-point distribution system. 
(59)  " MDS provider " or " multi-point distribution system provider " means any person or group of persons authorized by the FCC to transmit specialized multi-channel programming to subscriber-selected locations. 
(60)  " Menu-driven " or " menu-driven cable " or " menu-driven program/service " means the process whereby the MCS provider offers multi-channel services via the multi-channel system in a format that allows the subscriber to select and be charged for multi-channel services on either a per-channel, per-program, or per-event basis. Menu-driven cable allows the subscriber to create his or her own service tier(s) or cluster(s), and the opportunity to change the composition of his or her tier(s) or cluster(s) on a periodic basis. 
(61)  Multi-channel programming service or multi-channel service means: 
(a)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and 
(b)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
(61A)  Multi-channel service provider means the same as MCS provider. 
(62)  Multi-channel system means 
(a)  A facility consisting of a closed transmission path and associated signal generation reception, and control equipment; or 
(b)  A facility consisting of infra-red transmission or point-to-point transmission (as permitted by law); or 
(c)  Any functional equivalent that is designed to provide multi-channel service which includes video, voice, or data programming to multiple subscribers within the City. However, such term does not include the following: 
(d)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more broadcast stations; or 
(e)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multi-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless such facility or facilities uses any public-rights-of-way; or 
(f)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provision of title II of the Communication Act of 1934 except that such facility shall be considered a multi-channel system (other than for purposes of section 621 (c) of the Cable Act—codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or service directly to subscriber; or 
(g)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility. 
(63)  NYSCCT means the New York State Commission on Cable Television. 
(64)  Normal business hours means those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, "normal business hours" shall include at least three (3) evening hours at least one (1) night per week and at least five (5) weekend hours. 
(65)  Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of the franchisee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
(66)  Other programming service means information that an MCS provider (specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers generally. 
(67)-(70) Reserved. 
(71)  Pay-per-view or premium channel means the delivery over the multi-channel system of audio and/or video signals for a rate or amount (over and above the rate for basic service) on a per-event, or per-program, or per-channel basis. 
(72)  PEG means public, educational, and governmental. 
(73)  Person means any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, association of two (2) or more persons having a joint common interest, joint stock company, or governmental entity. 
(74)  Private communications network or PCN or private communications system means any ancillary or aligned component of an MCS provider's system consisting of communications lines, cables, equipment or facilities which are used to provide telecommunications service that in any manner uses or occupies the streets, easements, public ways, or rights-of-way within the city (as annexed). However, "private communications network" does not include any part of a state- or FCC-licensed local government local exchange telephone company, or any part of a federal, state, county, or local government owned telecommunications system. 
(75)  Proposed abandonment of multi-channel service or proposed withdrawal of multi-channel service or proposed cessation of multi-channel service means the imminent, or expected (either voluntary or involuntary) disruption, discontinuance, desertion, or removal of an MCS provider's operation and provision of multi-channel service from all, or part, of the city for a projected period exceeding four (4) months in duration. 
(76)  Public, educational or governmental access facilities means: 
(a)  Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and 
(b)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
(77)  Public way means any public street, public way, public place, compatible use public easement, or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below it, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the area served by the MCS provider. 
(78)  Rate means the periodic price paid by a subscriber for the receipt of any multi-channel service provided for by an MCS provider. 
(79)  Revocation, termination, or non-renewal means an official act by the city whereby the council/franchising authority removes, repeals, or rescinds previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised MCS provider to conduct the running of a multi-channel system within the city. 
(80)-(84) Reserved. 
(85)  Service cluster means the grouping, aligning, or packaging of one (1) or more multi-channel programming services by category (such as sports and/or news), or by rate, or by some other identifiable method, and charging a separate price or rate for each service cluster. 
(86)  Service outage for purposes of credit means the loss of picture or sound on all basic subscriber channels, or one (1) or more auxiliary programming channels (including tiers and clusters). For purposes of response to a service call, a "service outage" means a loss of picture or sound or other service provided by an MCS provider which is not caused by the failure or malfunction of a subscriber's television receiver or monitor, or by the misfeasance or malfeasance of the subscriber. 
(87)  Service tier means a category of multi-channel service or other programming service provided by an MCS provider, and for which a separate rate is charged by an MCS provider. 
(88)  SMATV means satellite master antenna television. 
(89)  SMATV operator or satellite master antenna television operator means any person or group of persons who: 
(a)  Provides multi-channel service over an SMATV system; or 
(b)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management of an SMATV system. 
(90)  SMATV system means a private multi-channel system not crossing any public rights-of-way and which is located on private property, and serving private dwellings located within a multiple occupancy building or buildings that are co-owned or managed, provided that such a system is exempt from municipal franchise requirements by applicable provisions of federal or state law. 
(91)  State means the State of New York. 
(92)  Street means the surface of, and the space above and below, a public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the city (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now or hereafter held by the city (including any easements or rights-of-way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and MCS provider to use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting multi-channel system transmissions over poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinent to a multi-channel system. 
(93)  Subscriber means a person lawfully receiving multi-channel service delivered by an MCS provider. 
(94)  USC means United States Code. 
(95)  User means a person or organization utilizing a multi-channel system and/or its equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(96)  Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 5; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 1)  
Sec. 4-21-6. - Statement of Intent. 
(A)  The council recognizes the United States Congress' intent in approving the Cable Act (expressed in section 601—codified at 47 USC 521). As such, the council reaffirms and adopts those principles and ideals as part of the city's intent with respect to cable television and expands its intent (where applicable) to cover all MCS providers. 
(B)  As expressed by congress, and adopted by the council, its intent is as follows: 
(1)  Establish a local policy concerning communications and technologies; 
(2)  Establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the growth and development of cable systems which assure that cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the city; 
(3)  Establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable systems; 
(4)  Assure that cable communications provide, and are encouraged to provide, the widest diversity of information and services to the public; 
(5)  Establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects franchisees against unfair denials of renewal where franchisee's past performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set by the Cable Act, and this local law; and 
(6)  Promote competition in cable communications and minimize unnecessary regulation that would impose an undue economic burden on cable systems. 
(C)  In addition to principles and ideals listed in subsection (B), the council also expresses that its intent covers the following: 
(1)  To create a set of regulations, standards, and procedures for MCS providers; 
(2)  To create a comprehensive customer service and consumer protection policy for MCS providers; 
(3)  To provide for access and inspection of an MCS provider's books and records in order to monitor compliance of local, state, and federal laws, and any franchise agreement (if one has been granted); 
(4)  To create a thorough construction and installation policy for an MCS provider's system; 
(5)  To provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city in light of the MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance; 
(6)  To provide for the periodic inspection of an MCS provider's facilities and equipment by the city or its designated agents; 
(7)  To provide for emergency override capability, so that citizens of the city may be warned of a potential, imminent, actual disaster or emergency situation that exists in the area; 
(8)  To provide for the introduction and installation of safety alert technology in order to notify both subscribers and non-subscribers of imminent disaster emergencies; 
(9)  To create a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring franchise fees and alternative user charges; 
(10)  To create a viable alternative to franchise fees in case such fees, or their collection, are ruled invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional; 
(11)  To create a thorough default and revocation procedure for licensed and franchised MCS providers; 
(12)  To provide for continuity of services in the event of city acquisition, abandonment, withdrawal, cessation of service, revocation, termination, non-renewal, or expiration of an MCS provider; and 
(13)  To create a performance review procedure in order to assist the city in its periodic evaluation of a franchised MCS provider's performance. 
(D)  Further, the council recognizes that with respect to MCS providers classified as cable operators, the council's power to adopt regulations is, in part, authorized under sections 632, 634, and 636 of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 552, 554, and 556 respectively), as well as the council's police powers, due to the potential for physical scarcity and public disruption when cable either occupies or uses the public rights-of-way. 
(E)  With respect to the rules and regulations of the NYSCCT, it is expressly understood that such rules and regulations establish threshold requirements that are to be met in order to operate a multi-channel system classified as a cable system within the city. Consequently, such threshold rules and regulations of the NYSCCT may be supplemented, and/or exceeded, unless specifically preempted by the NYSCCT, or unless the extent of the city's authority is determined otherwise by way of formal NYSCCT action. 
(F)  However, unless determined otherwise by the state or a court of competent jurisdiction, the rules and regulations of the NYSCCT are applicable only to MCS providers classified as cable operators. For all such other MCS providers, the council/franchising authority may develop and implement its own set of rules and regulations, to the extent permitted by both state and federal law. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 6; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 2)  
Sec. 4-21-7. - Administration; delegation of powers and authority. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority is hereby designated the officer of the city which is responsible for the continuing administration of this chapter. 
(B)  Unless prohibited by federal or state law (including the NYSCCT), the council/franchising authority may delegate its powers and authority with respect to administering this chapter with regard to a franchise agreement, to a duly authorized officer or employee of the city. 
(C)  However, the council/franchising authority may never delegate its franchising or revocation power to another person or representative. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 7; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 3)  
Sec. 4-21-8. - Applicability of this chapter to an MCS provider. 
(A)  Unless exempted entirely from this chapter, or exempted under one (1) or more provisions of this chapter, or granted relief (by either the NYSCCT [if permitted], or the council/franchising authority) from one (1) or more provisions and/or requirements of this chapter, then this chapter shall be applicable to an MCS provider, and this chapter shall have full effect, and be enforceable in its entirety. Moreover, a MCS provider shall be expected to comply with this chapter no later than twelve (12) months after this chapter becomes effective, except where a different compliance date is given or noted (including a different date noted in an applicable franchise agreement). 
(B)  Subsection (A) of this section is not intended to repeal, and does not have the effect of repealing, any current franchise agreement that presently exists between the council/franchising authority, and a franchised MCS provider. 
(C)  As a result of subsection (B) of this section, the provisions of this chapter shall have no effect on an existing franchise agreement until the expiration of the existing franchise agreement, or until the following occurs: 
(1)  Prior to the expiration of the franchise agreement, the council/franchising authority and the affected franchised MCS provider either execute an amended franchise or renewal franchise agreement in which both parties agree to be bound by the terms of this chapter (except as specifically granted relief, exemption, clarification, or comparable policy), or both parties agree to a specific date for expiration of said existing franchise, which in fact is prior to the present expiration date. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 8)  
Sec. 4-21-9. - Exemption from this chapter for certain MCS providers. 
(A)  MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of an applicable FCC, or NYSCCT ruling; or 
(2)  An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of an applicable judicial ruling, from which no subsequent appeal can be taken. 
(B)  It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains exempted only as long as it meets one (1) or more of the specifications of this particular section. 
(C)  It also is expressly noted that the extent of the exemption for a qualified MCS provider is only for this chapter. Consequently, such an exempted MCS provider is expected to abide by, and comply with, any other applicable city, state (including applicable NYSCCT), or federal laws and regulations, including any applicable federal, or state consumer protection, or customer service laws and regulations. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 9)  
Sec. 4-21-10. - MCS providers seeking relief from this chapter. 
(A)  Any MCS provider affected by this chapter may file a written petition, at any time, with the council/franchising authority seeking relief from one (1) or more provisions of this chapter. The relief requested may specifically include the exemption from or delay in implementation (as to the petitioning MCS provider only) of one (1) or more provisions of this chapter, or that a specific provision be required for only part of any franchise term. The position shall set forth the relief requested and the basis thereof with such supporting information and material as may be applicable. 
(B)  In order to receive any relief from one (1) or more of the provisions of this chapter, a MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the council/franchising authority that at least one (1) of the following facts exist: 
(1)  The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal law, the FCC, or state law, (or where applicable) NYSCCT rule or regulation; or 
(2)  Where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects, and is in conflict with, an expressed right that is specifically noted in an existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise)—(this provision covers situations where an MCS provider classified as a cable operator seeks, and is granted, modification of an existing franchise agreement under section 625 of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 545)); or 
(3)  That compliance with a particular provision and/or requirement will be commercially impracticable for an MCS provider; or 
(4)  That one (1) or more time frames listed in this chapter are either impossible to meet, or impractical to meet in light of the MCS provider's operational policy; or 
(5)  That the MCS provider has its own construction, maintenance, operation, or customer service policy, which the council/franchising authority deems comparable to, or exceeding, any provision and/or requirement from which the MCS provider seeks relief; or 
(6)  That the health, safety, and welfare interests of the city otherwise warrant the granting of such relief. 
(C)  Unless delegated to another authorized representative of the city, the council/franchising authority shall have the responsibility of determining whether an MCS provider's construction, maintenance, operation, or customer service policy, is comparable to, or exceeds, a similar provision in this chapter. 
(D)  As an alternative to seeking an exemption, or requesting relief, an MCS provider may petition for clarification on the precise intent and effect that one (1) or more provisions or sections of this chapter has on the petitioning MCS provider. 
(E)  In accordance with this chapter, the council/franchising authority may charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for processing such a petition, including any costs incurred by outside consultants who are retained by the city to review an MCS provider's petition. 
(F)  In those instances where the council/franchising authority grants an exemption or relief to a franchised MCS provider, or deems a franchised MCS provider's operational policy to be comparable to a local law provision, the franchise agreement (initial, existing, or renewal) shall be deemed amended to reflect the exact extent of such exemption and/or relief. It should be specifically noted that the benefit of such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy extends only to the MCS provider granted such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 10; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 4)  
Sec. 4-21-11. - Failure of the council/franchising authority to enforce this chapter. 
An MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter, or any subsequently adopted amendments to this chapter, by any failure of the council/franchising authority on any one (1) or more occasions to seek, or insist upon, compliance with such requirements or provisions. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 11)  
Sec. 4-21-12. - MCS providers or their assignees subject to present and future local laws. 
(A)  Any MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee or buyer, shall be subject to, and expected to comply with, all local laws now or hereafter adopted and in lawful effect within the city, including this chapter, to the extent that said MCS provider or its predecessor in interest has not received an exemption or relief from said local law(s). 
(B)  Any MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee, shall be subject to, and expected to comply with, all federal and state Laws, and with all rules and regulations issued by all applicable regulatory agencies (including where applicable, the FCC and NYSCCT) now or hereafter in existence. 
(C)  Any MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the city's police power. 
(D)  With respect to future local laws noted in this section, nothing contained herein prevents an MCS provider from exercising any and all of its administrative and legal rights in order to challenge the constitutionality, applicability, and enforceability of said future local laws. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 12; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 5)  
Sec. 4-21-13. - Repeal of prior inconsistent resolutions, local laws. 
(A)  Except as noted in subsection (B) of this section, then to the extent that there is any prior resolution, ordinance, or local law, which in part, or in whole, is directly inconsistent with this chapter, such part, or such whole, of the prior resolution or local law shall be repealed to the extent of the inconsistency. 
(B)  Subsection (A) of this section is not intended to repeal, and does not have the effect of repealing, any current franchising ordinance or franchise agreement that presently exists between the council/franchising authority and a franchised MCS provider. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 13)  
Sec. 4-21-14. - Resolution of inconsistencies with federal or state rules, regulations or laws. 
(A)  In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section of this chapter, and any provision or section of a federal or state rule, regulation, or law, then the federal or state rule, regulation, or law shall not only supersede the effect of the chapter, but also control in any local application. 
(B)  The above subsection (A) specifically includes any situation wherein an applicable federal or state judicial decision creates an actual inconsistency with any provision or section of this chapter. In such a situation, the federal or state judicial decision shall not only supersede the effect of this chapter, but also control in any local application. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 14)  
Sec. 4-21-15. - Resolution of conflicts between this chapter and an existing franchise agreement. 
(A)  Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this chapter and an existing and applicable franchise agreement, this chapter shall control, and prevail, unless administratively or judicially determined invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, or unless the provisions of subsection (B) of this section apply to the MCS provider and its franchise agreement. 
(B)  In the case where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption, relief, or clarification from one (1) or more provisions or sections of this chapter, or has one (1) or more of its policies deemed comparable to a provision contained in this chapter, the said franchisee's franchise agreement shall be deemed amended to reflect the same such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy; to whatever extent may be necessary, and to the extent that such an exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy is inconsistent with a provision contained in this chapter, said exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy language contained in the franchise agreement shall control. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 15; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 6)  
Sec. 4-21-16. - Arbitration. 
If the council/franchising authority and a franchised MCS provider agree to such, and the federal or state law does not expressly prohibit such, then arbitration or settlement mediation may be used to resolve any dispute that arises out of this chapter or franchise agreement. The terms and conditions relating to the arbitration or settlement mediation process (including possible cap on costs expended by both parties, composition of the hearing panel, and liability, if any for costs expended) shall be stated with specificity in the franchise agreement; provided however, that the parties may agree in writing to such terms and conditions of the process prior to the arbitration or settlement mediation. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 16)  
Sec. 4-21-17. - Penalties; assessed charges or liquidated damages for breach of franchise agreement. 
(A)  Any franchisee or other MCS provider willfully violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this local law shall be guilty of a violation and punished and subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or other penalty as provided for by state law. 
(B)  Each subsequent day upon which there exists a violation of this local law, or a failure to abide by, or comply with, any provision or requirement of this law, after notice, shall constitute a separate offense, and may subject the MCS provider to separate penalties. 
(C)  In instances where a franchise agreement provides for assessed charges, fines, penalties or liquidated damages for the breach or violation of that franchise agreement, then such assessed charges or liquidated damages shall, at the sole discretion and election of the city, operate as an alternative remedy for the city to pursue in lieu of the penalties applicable pursuant to this section. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 17; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 7)  
Sec. 4-21-18. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 18)  
Sec. 4-21-19. - The council/franchising authority's retained rights and authorities. 
(A)  Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or any other federal or state governmental entity or agency (including where applicable, the NYSCCT), and to the extent permitted by any applicable law, the council/franchising authority retains the authority to provide for: 
(1)  The regulation and control of any multi-channel system within the geographical limits of the city; 
(2)  The award and grant of an MCS franchise (where required) subsequent to review of an application or proposal by the council/franchising authority; 
(3)  The periodic review and/or amendment or repeal of all, or part, of this chapter; except as it may not unilaterally impose substantial capital requirements not anticipated in the franchise agreement; and 
(4)  If mutually agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic review and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement. 
(B)  The council/franchising authority, to the extent permitted by section 623 or other provisions of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 543), retains the power to approve the rates or charges associated with the providing of multi-channel service classified as cable service by an MCS provider classified as a cable operator. 
(C)  Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC, or any other federal or state governmental entity or agency (including in certain instances the NYSCCT), the council/franchising authority retains the jurisdiction to enforce all laws and regulations relating to multi-channel customer service practices and consumer protection. 
(D)  If the FCC, Congress, the state, NYSCCT, or other governmental agency with authority over cable or any other MCS provider ever abrogates, deletes, removes, or otherwise disposes of rules or standards that are referenced in this chapter, or relied upon by the council/franchising authority for purposes of MCS provider compliance with this chapter, then the council/franchising authority may, to the extent not preempted by, or inconsistent with, later adopted law or regulations, reinstate such rules or standards. In such case, the reinstated rules will have the same weight (as allowed under prevailing law) as they had prior to their initial deletion. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 19; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 8)  
Sec. 4-21-20. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 20)  
Sec. 4-21-21. - Notices. 
(A)  Both the council/franchising authority and each MCS provider shall provide the other party with the name and address of the contact designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence. All notices affecting the rights of such parties shall be delivered to each party's contact by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with a signed receipt of delivery, or overnight with receipt verification. All other filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence may be delivered by any permissible means, including, but not limited to: facsimile transmission ("faxing"); personal service; overnight mail or package delivery; or delivery via cable. The delivery of all notices, reports, records, and other correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at the time of receipt (unless otherwise designated by state law, or NYSCCT rule or regulation). 
(B)  If the MCS provider is required to maintain a franchise, then the designation of such contact person for notice purposes, may be contained within a franchise agreement. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 21; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 9)  
Secs. 4-21-22—4-21-25. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 22—25)  
Sec. 4-21-26. - Indemnity. 
(A)  To the extent permitted by law, an MCS provider shall, as a condition of the exercise of its rights to use the city's streets or ways, be required to at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless, and exempt the city, the mayor, the council/franchising authority, their officers, agents, servants, and employees, from any and all penalty, damage, or charges arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future, which may arise out of, or be caused by, the construction, erection, location, products performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of the multi-channel system within the city by a negligent act or omission of an MCS provider, its agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or implied or authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included as those costs which may be recovered by the council/franchising authority. 
(B)  The city, mayor, and the council/franchising authority specifically reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own expense. 
(C)  If an MCS provider obtains counsel for the city, the mayor, or the council/franchising authority, then any one (1) of them shall have the right to approve counsel, provided, however, that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be presumed unless notice of objection is given to the franchisee in a timely manner and in no event later than thirty (30) days after receiving notice of designation of counsel. 
(D)  Neither the city, the mayor, nor the council/franchising authority shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel. 
(E)  With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions noted in this section, it is understood that such MCS provider reserves the right to select and retain, without the council/franchising authority's approval, counsel of the MCS provider's choice, at such MCS provider's expense. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 26; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 10)  
Sec. 4-21-27. - Liability insurance. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides multi-channel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts: 
(1)  Public liability: $2 million per person/per occurrence; 
(2)  Property damage: $2 million per any one (1) claim; 
(3)  Umbrella liability: $10 million with up to a $50,000.00 deductible and/or base insurance. 
(B)  An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall specifically include the city, the mayor, the council/franchising authority as named insureds, or as additional insureds. 
(C)  The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, and which has one (1) of the three (3) highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company. 
(D)  Should the council/franchising authority make a formal determination that due to the financial, operational, technical, or legal status (or lack thereof) or condition of the MCS provider, the above-referenced requirements for minimal insurance are inadequate, then the council/franchising authority may require the MCS provider to obtain and maintain insurance for greater minimal amounts (up to, but not exceeding, five million for public liability, five million for property damage, and fifteen million for umbrella liability). 
(E)  The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the council/franchising authority with at least thirty (30) days' written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(F)  Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the council/franchising authority at least fifteen (15) days before the expiration of the insurance which such policies are to renew or replace. 
(G)  Before a multi-channel system provides multi-channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the council/franchising authority, and each policy or certificate delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of the full premium thereon. 
(H)  If the council, state or NYSCCT permits an MCS provider to self-insure, then the MCS provider may exercise its right to self-insure, or to provide other evidence of adequate security of its obligations, so as long as the minimal amounts of insurance coverage outlined in this section, or similar levels of security, are met and maintained for the entire period that the affected MCS provider is self-insured. However, for the reasons listed in subsection (D) of this section, the council/franchising authority (unless preempted by either the state or NYSCCT) may make a formal determination and require an increase in the minimal amounts of insurance coverage. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 27; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 11)  
Sec. 4-21-28. - Performance and construction/completion bond. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall furnish to the council/franchising authority, in an amount totalling at least one million, a performance bond or security bond executed by a surety licensed to do business in this state. The purpose of the performance bond is to ensure performance of any requirements imposed by this chapter on an MCS provider. Further, the purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any obligations imposed by this chapter (or where applicable a franchise agreement), then the surety will make whole (to the extent of the policy) any monetary losses incurred by the city. 
(B)  An MCS provider shall furnish to the council/franchising authority, a construction/completion bond prior to the time it commences a construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance project that has a capital construction cost or outlay exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in value. The amount of the bond shall equal one hundred (100) percent of the projected capital construction cost or outlay. The construction/completion bond shall remain in force at all times, unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement between the council/franchising authority and the MCS provider. 
(C)  The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by any construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule provided for by contract or permit for the multi-channel system and/or any timetable for technical and service improvements or additions to the multi-channel system as may be committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time, by the council/franchising authority and MCS provider. 
(D)  If the city draws on a performance or completion bond or cash deposit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely discharge its obligations, or failure to construct and activate the multi-channel system, or failure to complete a multi-channel system upgrade or rebuild or repair/maintenance, then the MCS provider shall be required, within thirty (30) days to replenish the completion and performance bond or security bond to the minimal level required by the council/franchising authority. 
(E)  Should the council/franchising authority make a formal determination that due to the MCS provider's past performance (such as a documented history of repeated or multiple franchise violations), or increased cost (greater than fifty (50) percent of the original estimated cost), the council/franchising authority (unless preempted by either the state or NYSCCT) may raise the required amount of either the performance or the construction/completion bond. 
(F)  The performance bond or security bond shall be in force at all times unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an separate agreement, executed between the MCS provider and the council/franchising authority. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 28)  
Sec. 4-21-29. - The council/franchising authority's policy with respect to reports and records. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority recognizes that advances in technology, and the adoption and application of multi-channel laws, rules, regulations, and court decisions may have a profound effect and impact on an MCS provider in any given year. 
(B)  Consequently, it is incumbent that the council/franchising authority take measures to reduce the risk that multi-channel service or the multi-channel system will be adversely affected in any given year. 
(C)  Therefore, the evaluation of legal, technical, financial, and character qualifications of an MCS provider is viewed as a continuing undertaking on the part of the city. Each MCS provider shall maintain and retain all records and reports necessary for the council/franchising authority to determine compliance with the obligations imposed on it by this chapter, and to determine the MCS provider's (legal, technical, financial, and character) qualifications. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 29)  
Sec. 4-21-30. - Furnishing of reports. 
(A)  Within ninety (90) days after this chapter becomes effective, and thereafter, at least once every twelve (12) months, an MCS provider shall submit a list to the council/franchising authority, or designee, of files, reports, records, data, or other information that the MCS provider periodically files with the FCC, or another federal or state agency. If the MCS franchise agreement, periodic or non-regular report with the FCC, or another federal or state agency (including the NYSCCT), then the MCS provider shall (within sixty (60) days of that filing), notify the council/franchising authority of such federal or state filing. As part of a performance evaluation, or for any legitimate matter related to the administration of an MCS provider agreement, the council/franchising authority may specifically request that it be provided with any, or all listed reports, records, data, or other information, that were originally filed with the FCC, or another federal or state agency (including the NYSCCT). However, unless specifically authorized by the state, an MCS provider shall not be required to provide to the council/franchising authority, any state or federal tax returns, or any documents (inclusive of all above-referenced categories) exempted under state or federal privacy laws, including section 631 of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 551). 
(B)  In addition to the requirements noted in subsection (A) of this section, an MCS provider shall timely submit those reports, statements, and logs required by this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this chapter; 
(2)  A periodic certification that answering of phones is meeting the specifications listed in this chapter; 
(3)  Preventive maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Any other reports or information required by another section of this chapter, or by the council/franchising authority which are necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city; and 
(5)  If required, an annual registration and compliance statement. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 30)  
Sec. 4-21-31. - Books and records. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts, and records of the business and operations under, and in connection with, the MCS system, as may be needed for the administration of the franchise. 
(B)  The council/franchising authority shall have the right to review (either by mail or at the MCS provider's local office) all records (needed for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and/or franchise agreement) on seven (7) days' written notice, unless specifically exempted by the council/franchising authority. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon, or judicially ordered, should occur within the MCS provider's regular office hours. 
(C)  The council/franchising authority shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to review the books and records of an MCS provider. If after a financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has underpaid amounts owed to the city by any amount, then the city may require the MCS provider to reimburse the city for the actual cost of the audit. Absent fraud, any audit shall be binding on all parties concerned. 
(D)  A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by an MCS provider, of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a material violation of this chapter. However, an erroneous entry, made in good faith, shall not constitute a material violation of this chapter. 
(E)  An MCS provider, at the local office, shall keep complete and accurate books and records of the key aspects of the multi-channel system's operation for at least the preceding three (3) years in such a manner that all matters pertaining to the city can be easily produced and/or verified at the city's request. Also, the MCS provider shall keep, at its local office, and shall make available and provide upon request, any other applicable records and information that may be required by any other federal or state agency (including NYSCCT) having jurisdiction over one (1) or more classes of MCS providers. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 31; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 13)  
Secs. 4-21-32—4-21-35. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 32—35)  
Sec. 4-21-36. - Annual registration and compliance statement for certain classes of MCS providers. 
(A)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that this chapter becomes effective, the city shall develop a registration and compliance statement for any MCS provider or class of MCS provider that is not a franchisee and is not subject to the periodic performance evaluation detailed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(B)  The council/franchising authority declares as its purpose that the registration and compliance statement is intended to furnish the council/franchising authority with periodic operational, and compliance information concerning MCS providers operating within all, or part, of the city, who are not otherwise subject to a periodic performance evaluation, and are not franchisees. 
(C)  Prior to January 15 of each calendar year, the council/franchising authority shall furnish each such affected MCS provider a registration and compliance statement. 
(D)  Prior to March 1 of each calendar year, the affected non-franchised MCS provider shall return to the council/franchising authority a completed and executed compliance statement. 
(E)  There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual registration and compliance statement. However, if the MCS provider supplies incomplete information which requires independent verification by the city (including a consultant hired by the city), then the MCS provider may be required to reimburse the city for all costs associated with the independent verification. Moreover, failure to submit a statement by the deadline, or the submission of false information (of a material nature) within the statement, may subject the affected MCS provider to any, and all, penalties listed in this chapter. However, before subjecting an MCS provider to potential penalties, the council/franchising authority must first allow the affected MCS provider the opportunity to cure and/or correct the incorrect nature of the submission, or cure item of alleged noncompliance. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 36; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 14)  
Sec. 4-21-37. - Applicability of state consumer sales practices laws. 
In addition to any, and all, requirements of this chapter, each and every MCS provider shall comply with, and abide by, all applicable provisions of any state law concerning consumer sales practices (and including, where applicable, consumer protection rules and regulations of the NYSCCT). 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 37)  
Sec. 4-21-38. - Notification of customers and MCS providers' rights and responsibilities; general policy. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority recognizes that it is critical that a customer of an MCS provider fully understands and realizes the rights and responsibilities of both the customer and MCS provider with respect to the provision, maintenance, and repair of multi-channel service. 
(B)  Further, the council/franchising authority believes that if sufficient information is provided to a customer on certain customer service practices such as rates, billing periods, number and types of services provided, and rules concerning equipment use and return, then that customer will have the information necessary to make an informed decision on what, if any, multi-channel services to subscribe to and receive. 
(C)  In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed to make an informed decision, and to ensure that customers are notified of their and the MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the multi-channel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer with a written "Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service." 
(D)  The "Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service" shall be provided at the time of initial installation. Thereafter, a subscriber shall be provided with a written "Notice" at least once every twelve (12) months. If however, an MCS provider amends, repeals, adds, deletes, modifies, or makes other changes to any customer service practice that is required in this chapter, then said MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with such written notification at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such amendment, repeal, addition, deletion, modification, or other change. 
(E)  Unless expressly prohibited by the state or NYSCCT, an MCS provider may comply with the "Notice" requirements by providing said "Notice" over the MCS system, on a channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such information (such a channel need not be solely designated for dissemination of such information, and may, in fact, be used at other times for any lawful purpose). 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 38)  
Sec. 4-21-39. - Notice of customer's and MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the provision of multi-channel service; minimum contents. 
(A)  At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or annual "Notice" [see § 4-19-38(C)], such "Notice" shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  An up-to-date listing of the specific multi-channel services provided, clearly indicating and isolating the basic, premium, and informational services offered, as well as the service tiers or service clusters offered; 
(2)  Notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease, from the MCS provider, a lock box, parental control mechanism, or other device which will prohibit the viewing of a particular multi-channel service during a period selected by the subscriber; 
(3)  Pursuant to FCC regulations, a subscriber's ability of purchasing or using an A/B or input selector switch; 
(4)  A comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges (including rates for basic and premium channels/services, particular service tiers or service clusters, current discount or promotional fees, installation charges, and security deposits, if any); 
(5)  If service clustering is available, then a description and explanation of any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming (within sixty (60) days of the "Notice") service clustering changes or differing alignments, or other pertinent information; 
(6)  A comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options available (such as monthly, quarterly, or yearly, and/or discounts for prepayments); 
(7)  The customer service office hours and telephone number(s) in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(8)  The billing practices of an MCS provider in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(9)  The specific customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is adopted and followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent with the parameters set forth in this chapter; 
(10)  The method of securing a voluntary disconnection in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(11)  Rules relating to both connections, and involuntary disconnections; 
(12)  The extent of the credit/refund policy in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(13)  The equipment use and return policy together with any required security deposits in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; and 
(14)  The additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory-impaired customers in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter. 
(B)  The "Notice" shall be written in plain, simple-to-understand English. The "Notice" shall contain no print smaller than eight (8) point type; and any exclusions, limitations, or caveats shall be clearly indicated as such in the "Notice." 
(C)  The "Notice" may be delivered to a subscriber via an insert in the subscriber's periodic invoice, or through a special mailing, or over an MCS channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such information. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 39)  
Sec. 4-21-40. - Billing practices. 
(A)  Within the "Notice" that is required by this chapter, subscribers shall be informed of at least the following billing practices of an MCS provider: 
(1)  Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid discontinuance of service); 
(2)  Payment due and delinquent dates; 
(3)  Amount or percentage of late charges, if any; 
(4)  Advance billing options; 
(5)  Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and inquiries; 
(6)  Refund/credit policy for service interruptions, or uncontracted service; 
(7)  Current service rates in a detailed and understandable format; 
(8)  Procedure and amount of charges for installation or relocation of an MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment; 
(9)  Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other nonregularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers; and 
(10)  Any lower-income or fixed-income rates together with any qualifications to obtain such rates. 
(B)  Any information concerning billing practices which is contained in the "Notice" shall be consistent with, and include any matter specified by, NYSCCT rules and regulations. 
(C)  All subscribers shall be afforded an opportunity to be billed for periodic service on a monthly basis, and each bill shall clearly describe the date by which payment shall be due, which shall in no event be earlier than fifteen (15) days following the date of expected receipt of the bill, and no late charge or penalty shall be imposed upon any subscriber if payments are made within permitted periods; notice of such billing arrangements shall be provided to subscribers with the required annual subscriber notices. 
(D)  Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in subsection (A)(1) of this section at least once every twelve (12) months. 
(E)  Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at least thirty (30) days before such billing practices or payment requirements become effective if within the control of the MCS provider, unless otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law or rules. 
(F)  Pursuant to NYSCCT regulations, in any case where a subscriber be requests a cancellation or reduction of service within thirty (30) days after the notification of a scheduled rate or charge adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for such service received during the thirty (30) days following the date of notification of such changes until the cancellation or reduction of service shall be determined in accordance with the rates or charges in effect prior to such change. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 40; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 15)  
Sec. 4-21-41. - Billing credit or refunds for service outages, interruptions; substandard signal or picture quality or unsolicited service. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall adhere to, and comply with, applicable state laws and regulations, including those of the NYSCCT, with respect to service outages or interruptions. 
(B)  Consistent with subsection (A) of this section, and to the extent permitted by either state law or NYSCCT rule and regulation, the council/franchising authority requires that an MCS provider (not covered by state law or NYSCCT rules and regulations) provide a subscriber with credit for a service outage or interruption exceeding four (4) hours in length. For a service outage or interruption of a pay-per-view event that exceeds more than one-quarter (¼) of the scheduled or projected length of the pay-per-view event, or two (2) hours (whichever is shorter), then the MCS provider must provide a subscriber with a credit for the full amount of the pay-per-view event, provided, however, that, notwithstanding the foregoing, in the instance of a pay-per-view event or program purchase option that exceeds one (1) day in length, the subscriber credit required hereby shall not exceed the cost to the subscriber of one (1) day's pay-per-view charges if the outage or interruption lasted less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(C)  Where not expressly prohibited by the state or NYSCCT, the council/franchising authority may prescribe rules for giving credit to a subscriber in cases where a substandard signal or substandard picture quality is furnished by the MCS provider. 
(D)  In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, an MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 41; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 16)  
Sec. 4-21-42. - Prohibition against "negative option" promotional packages. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority both recognizes and determines that as a matter of consumer protection, a subscriber should be charged only for those services that such subscriber has affirmatively requested. Therefore, an MCS provider may not bill or invoice any subscriber for any multi-channel service that is not affirmatively requested by the subscriber. 
(B)  For purposes of this section, a subscriber's affirmative request need not be in writing; but an MCS provider relying on an oral request must keep an accurate, precise, and exact record of the date, and time at which—and the CSR, or service technician to whom—the request was made. 
(C)  For purposes of this section, a subscriber shall be deemed to have affirmatively requested a multi-channel service if: 
(1)  The subscriber voluntarily makes payment for the multi-channel service after an initial free trial period; and 
(2)  There was included, in the notice or advertising material describing the service, as well as, on the first periodic invoice after the service was instituted, a statement clearly advising the subscriber that such subscriber has incurred no obligation to pay for such service, and that such subscriber need not take any action to avoid incurring any such obligation. 
(D)  Moreover, an MCS provider may not automatically enroll a subscriber into a different class or tier of multi-channel service without first informing (at least thirty (30) days in advance) such subscriber of any and all costs associated with such a different class or tier of multi-channel service. 
(E)  Additionally, an MCS provider may not invoice a subscriber for disconnecting or downgrading from a "negatively promoted" or automatically enrolled class or tier of multi-channel service. 
(F)  Should a subscriber be charged for a multi-channel service in violation of this section, then the MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement. Moreover, in such case, an MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for a non-affirmatively requested multi-channel service. 
(G)  If the NYSCCT adopts rules and regulations concerning this practice, then those rules and regulations should control and be operative with respect to an MCS provider classified as a cable operator. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 42)  
Sec. 4-21-43. - Special rules for menu-driven systems, service clusters, and packaging of service tiers. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority recognizes that the concept of menu-driven program/service selection has both positive and negative aspects. On the one hand, menu-driven program/service selection allows the greatest flexibility for a subscriber in that it permits the subscriber to essentially create a program/service package tailored to the subscriber's budget, viewing habits, and informational needs. On the other hand, menu-driven program/service selection is susceptible to unauthorized or unknowing purchases, and uninformed program choices if certain procedural and operational safeguards are not maintained. 
(B)  Should an MCS provider implement and/or offer menu-driven program/service selection for all, or the majority, of the MCS provider's multi-channel services, then the council/franchising authority reserves the power to adopt (consistent with any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations) additional rules and regulations (subject to the conditions listed in subsection (C) of this section) concerning the following potential problem areas: 
(1)  Notification to the subscriber on a periodic (at least annually) basis of the exact costs for each menu-driven program/service, including any installation or equipment rental charges; 
(2)  Notification of what constitutes, or what is required for selection or subscription to a particular program/service; 
(3)  Limitations on negative option marketing plans when done in connection with a menu-driven system unless the subscriber is initially informed, consents (in writing), and periodically (at least semi-annually) renews the consent to be included on a list of potential subscribers; and 
(4)  Restricting access to menu-driven program/service selection by subscribers (through the use of individual, non-duplicative access codes or some other means), in order to limit unauthorized purchases, or purchases above a certain pre-set amount (without additional written approval). 
(C)  If, at the time an MCS provider implements and/or offers menu-driven program/service selection, such MCS provider also adopts an operational policy which protects subscribers from those potential problem areas listed in subsection (B) of this section, then the council/franchising authority shall not exercise its additional regulatory authority on this subject, unless there is documentation that the adopted policy of the MCS provider is not being enforced, or is ineffective in safeguarding subscribers from the potential abuses listed above. 
(D)  As for service clusters, and the packaging of service tiers, and to provide both a disincentive for "bait and switch tactics," and to promote cluster and tier stability, an MCS provider may not switch any particular multi-channel service from one tier or cluster to another without furnishing sixty (60) days' notice to the subscribers (with a courtesy notice also being furnished to the council/franchising authority); provided however, that upon sixty (60) days' prior notice, an MCS provider may rearrange, retier, recluster, or otherwise offer its multi-channel service. 
(E)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as mandating any particular programming choice being provided to a subscriber. Nor should this section be construed as requiring any particular program, service, cluster, or tier. Rather, this section is designed to promote cluster and tier stability, so that a subscriber may choose a program, service, cluster, or tier that best suits the subscriber's individual programming and informational needs. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 43; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 17)  
Sec. 4-21-44. - Customer service hours; capabilities of customer service office; and telephones. 
(A)  In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, an MCS provider shall maintain a customer service office which is both within the city and easily accessible to customers. 
(B)  The customer service office shall be open at least forty (40) hours per week (exclusive of holidays). 
(C)  Within the forty (40) hours per week that a customer service office must be open, an MCS provider must provide office hours either on at least two (2) evenings (after 5:00 p.m.), or on Saturdays and/or Sundays (if not prohibited by state law, including NYSCCT rules and regulations). 
(D)  The customer service office should have an adequate and knowledgeable staff in order to handle the vast majority of customer service inquiries, specifically including, but not limited to: billing inquiries, refunds, credits, service outages, equipment service and repair, payment of bills and other charges, and inquiries from disabled or physically-impaired customers. 
(E)  An MCS provider may install (at its customer service office) an after-hours depository in order to collect invoice payments, and receive requests for service appointments (including connections, and disconnections) after scheduled office hours. 
(F)  An MCS provider may install an automated (audio, or video) customer assistance device or machine which can handle various types of customer inquiries. 
(G)  Where not prohibited by the state (including NYSCCT rules and regulations), an MCS provider may install an interactive customer assistance service over one (1) or more multi-channels which can handle various types of customer inquiries. 
(H)  Neither the presence of an after-hours depository, nor automated customer service device, nor interactive customer service channel, relieves an MCS provider from maintaining the minimal required number of office hours, or adequate CSR staff to handle the majority of service inquiries (unless the MCS provider can demonstrate to the council/franchising authority's satisfaction that the efficiency of such devices or service channel(s) reduces the need for customer service hours or CSR personnel). 
(I)  At least annually, any MCS provider shall certify to the council/franchising authority that each customer service representative (CSR), has taken and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train CSRs to handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner. 
(J)  An MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) toll-free and/or local telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries. 
(K)  An MCS provider shall maintain a separate twenty-four-hour toll-free and/or local telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of equipment and extended interruption of service. During any hours that the customer service office is open, the MCS provider must have, or make available, in-house personnel to address a customer's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be manned by an automatic answering device, provided that the use of an answering device or answering service still results in an initial phone call by the MCS provider within sixty (60) minutes, in order to at least determine the extent of the outage. The MCS provider shall not be required to make in-person telephone contacts to subscribers at a rate which exceeds sixty (60) calls per hour, and shall not be required to make such calls between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(L)  An MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension lines (except during special marketing promotion periods, peak billing cycles, and service outages) in order to handle calls and inquiries directed to the general information number, so that the following standards may be met: 
(1)  Eighty-five (85) percent of all customer calls received in a year shall be attended within three (3) minutes by a representative of the MCS provider, or by a device that is capable of complaint/inquiry resolution; and 
(2)  The rate of abandoned calls shall be less than five (5) percent over a year's period of time. "Abandoned calls" shall in no event be deemed to include calls in which the caller hangs up within forty-five (45) seconds of making the call. 
(M)  With respect to the standards listed in subsection (L) of this section, it shall be the MCS provider's responsibility to be able, upon request, to certify to the council/franchising authority that the affected MCS provider is meeting the minimal standards. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 44; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 18)  
Sec. 4-21-45. - Special service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired customers. 
In addition to any other requirements mandated by this chapter, or by federal or state law (including NYSCCT rules and regulations), an MCS provider shall comply with the following special service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired customers: 
(1)  Provide wheelchair accessibility to an MCS provider's customer service office; 
(2)  For any customer declared legally blind by the state, an MCS provider must provide, if requested by such customer, large type, braille, voice synthesized or functionally equivalent notices, bills, and other pertinent multi-channel system information; 
(3)  Provide at a non-discriminatory cost, a special closed-captioned converter for the hearing-impaired; 
(4)  For which it may impose a non-discriminatory charge, a remote control device and/or converter for wheelchair subscribers or subscribers with a permanent medical or physical ambulatory impairment; 
(5)  Where applicable, provide modified or special instructions for use of equipment by individuals who have physical impairments; 
(6)  In times of a disaster emergency or other instances requiring an emergency alert, mandating an all-channel video blanking capability, so that all-channels will be blanked simultaneously with the audio alert signal, in order to increase the likelihood that hearing and sight-impaired customers will be alerted; and 
(7)  If permitted by the NYSCCT, and approved by the council/franchising authority, to allow the inclusion within broad programming services offered, one (1) or more services designed specifically or primarily for sightimpaired, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired subscribers. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 45)  
Sec. 4-21-46. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges, provision of service, or use of a provider's facilities and equipment, make, allow, or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious affiliation or location of residence. 
(B)  Consistent with section 621(a)(3) of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 541(a)(3)), MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not deny cable service, or the extension of cable service, to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
(C)  Subsection (A) of this section, however, does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge. This subsection does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering special incentive rates such as one (1) month basic service free, if twelve (12) months of basic service are paid in one (1) payment, or within a certain time frame, or similar types of pre-payment discounts (as long as such is not prohibited by the NYSCCT). 
(D)  Subsection (A) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from denying service based on location of residence, if that residence is outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise agreement (if applicable). 
(E)  Subsection (A) of this section, also does not prohibit an MCS provider from denying service to a subscriber who is more than thirty (30) days delinquent in the payment of any periodic service, or special service bill, so long as the requirements for disconnection (as outlined in this chapter) have been satisfied. 
(F)  Subsection (A) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from implementing a carefully designed no-frills service tier or service cluster for lower-income, and/or fixed-income individuals. 
(G)  Subsection (A) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from making agreements or entering into multi-channel service agreements with multiple-dwelling-unit owners (including hotel, motel, and mobile park owners) to provide multi-channel service under a bulk billing or other type of arrangement. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 46; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 19)  
Sec. 4-21-47. - Use of equipment, return of equipment, security deposits, and their return. 
(A)  Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including auxiliary equipment to a customer, an MCS provider shall have tested a representative sample (at least one (1) percent) of such equipment to make sure that it is in proper working order, unless, upon request, the MCS provider can show that such equipment has been pretested already or such equipment is tested at the time of installation. 
(B)  If needed for proper operation, or requested by a customer, an MCS provider shall deliver to a customer handwritten or typed instructions detailing the proper use of rented, loaned, or purchased equipment. Unless required by another section of this chapter, an MCS provider may comply with this section by delivering the manufacturer's instructions to a customer. 
(C)  An MCS provider is not required to seek a security deposit from a customer for use or rental of the MCS provider's equipment. 
(D)  An MCS provider shall comply with any and all applicable state rules (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations), concerning the imposition, retention, and return of security deposits. 
(E)  If the state and/or NYSCCT is silent on the security deposit for a particular piece of equipment, then the MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for equipment which exceeds the replacement cost to the MCS provider. 
(F)  As a matter of consumer protection, an MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for multi-channel service which exceeds twice the basic monthly rate. 
(G)  An MCS provider may charge an appropriate security deposit (consistent with subsection (F) of this section) in those instances where a customer is reconnected after an involuntary disconnection for nonpayment or prior history of unsatisfactory payment. 
(H)  An MCS provider shall return a security deposit held to secure equipment return (together with any interest earned) after the equipment is satisfactorily returned, and a deposit held to secure service payment shall be returned when the subscriber maintains a satisfactory payment history (which is determined as no payment delinquencies within the preceding twelve-month period). 
(I)  A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from an MCS provider in good working order, and operate such equipment only in the manner specified by the MCS provider or manufacturer of the equipment. 
(J)  A customer shall totally and fully reimburse an MCS provider for any damage or loss to an MCS provider's equipment that is due to the customer's failure to properly maintain and operate such equipment. 
(K)  A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing an MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate due to a hidden or latent defect in the equipment, or for equipment which fails to operate, or improperly operates due to natural occurrences conditioned by the normal wear and tear of such equipment. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 47; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 20)  
Sec. 4-21-48. - Service inquiry logs. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall be required to keep and maintain service inquiry logs, subject to any limitations imposed by the NYSCCT, or by state or federal law, including (for MCS providers classified as cable operators) any subscriber privacy limitations imposed by the Cable Act. 
(B)  The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the city in assessing (in the aggregate) the type, degree, and resolution of customer service requests, inquiries, and complaints. 
(C)  At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following: 
(1)  The time and date of initial receipt of any service request, inquiry, or complaint, relating to service outage, transmission problems, unsafe conditions, or any other circumstances requiring further response, together with the time and date of initial response to that service request, inquiry or complaint; 
(2)  The nature of the service request, inquiry, or complaint; 
(3)  The precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the service inquiry, request, or complaint; 
(4)  Whether the service request, inquiry, or complaint was resolved by allowing a credit or refund of some sort; and 
(5)  The area, location, or quadrant of the city where the service request, inquiry, or request was generated. 
(D)  In addition to any other right of inspection that the council/franchising authority may possess, it shall have the right to review and inspect a compilation of such logs. However, the council/franchising authority shall not have the right of access, review, or inspection for any service inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs that are otherwise protected from access, review, or inspection by federal or state law (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations). 
(E)  This section does not require MCS providers to maintain service inquiry logs on scheduled installations. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 48; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 21)  
Secs. 4-21-49—4-21-55. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 49—55)  
Sec. 4-21-56. - Restoration of a subscriber's property. 
(A)  At any time an MCS provider (in furtherance of its right to construct, operate, and maintain a multi-channel system), disturbs the yard, residence, or other real or personal property of a subscriber, such MCS provider shall ensure that the subscriber's yard, residence, or other personal property is returned, replaced, and/or restored to a condition that is sufficiently comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work. 
(B)  The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return, replacement, and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider, unless the disturbance was made at the request of the subscriber or private property owner. This subsection also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a subscriber or private property owner, for any actual physical damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a subscriber or private property owner's property. 
(C)  The types of acts specifically included in this section are the following, subject to existing easement rights: 
(1)  Removal of a property owner's sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveway, or fence to install, trench, repair, replace, remove, or locate cable or other equipment of an MCS provider; 
(2)  Installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS provider within a residence which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the MCS provider; 
(3)  Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture of a subscriber (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning or heating unit, or the like), in order to perform some sort of construction, maintenance, or repair on the multi-channel system; or 
(4)  Permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due to either the revocation, termination, or non-renewal of a franchise (if applicable), or the abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation, of multi-channel service to any portion of the city. 
(D)  The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider might employ to perform the tasks outlined in this section. 
(E)  In light of the foregoing, an MCS provider has the responsibility to diligently take all reasonable steps to protect the system and its component from conflicts (contact) with tree limbs (e.g. employing the accepted practice of installing tree guards). 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 56; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 22)  
Sec. 4-21-57. - Service inquiries, requests, complaints, and response times. 
(A)  Except in times of a natural or man-made emergency, or an appointment scheduled with the mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider shall, under normal operating conditions, respond to the service inquiries, requests, and complaints of subscribers, within such MCS provider's normal business or service hours, and within the time schedules detailed in subsections (B) through (G) of this section. The MCS provider shall be considered in compliance by the council/franchising authority if the standards of service outlined in subsections (B) through (G) are met or exceeded at least ninety-five (95) percent of the time over any calendar quarter. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall inform the customer that there is a choice as to whether the service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon, or evening hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rearranged by the MCS provider, then the MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the customer as soon as possible, and shall reschedule the service call for a time within twenty-four (24) hours of the cancellation or the next available time convenient to the subscriber. 
(B)  In the case of a signal or service interruption, an MCS provider shall respond to, and begin working on the problem and shall, if reasonably possible, make repairs as are necessary to resume the signal or service to the subscriber, within twenty-four hours (24) from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the signal or service interruption, and shall resolve the problem as expeditiously as possible. 
(C)  In the case of a "blank" or "no-picture" situation of any given level of billing or service (except for pay-per-view events), an MCS provider shall respond to and begin working on the problem, and shall, if reasonably possible, make repairs as are necessary to return the multi-channel service, within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the "blank" or "no-picture" situation, and shall resolve the problem as expeditiously as possible. 
(D)  In the case of a defective, improperly operating, or non-operating piece of equipment affecting the transmission of cable television or MCS service, an MCS provider shall use its best efforts to respond to and begin working on the problem the same day, but in no case shall the response be later than twenty-four (24) hours or one (1) working day, and such MCS provider shall make the repairs necessary to correct the problem, if reasonably possible, within such time period. 
(E)  In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry relating to an area service outage affecting three (3) or more subscribers go unresponded or unattended to for more than twelve (12) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the service inquiry or request. If a cancellation of a service call occurs, then the MCS provider shall reschedule the call in a manner consistent with subsection (A) of this section. 
(F)  [Reserved.] 
(G)  In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider received notification, or the precise circumstances surrounding the MCS provider receiving the notification, or whether notification was received at all, the council/franchising authority reserves the right and authority to settle such a dispute. However, for MCS providers classified as cable operators, such MCS providers have the option of choosing the NYSCCT for the resolution of the timing dispute. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 57; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 23)  
Sec. 4-21-58. - MCS providers required to maintain sufficient repair parts and sufficient repair personnel. 
(A)  Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall, at all times, have access to, and be able to secure, sufficient maintenance and repair parts and equipment for the MCS system, so that the MCS provider can respond to, and correct, all subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this chapter. 
(B)  Having access to and being able to secure sufficient maintenance and repair parts and equipment is necessary to promptly restore a subscriber's multi-channel service, and avoid delays caused by having to obtain needed parts and equipment. 
(C)  Except in times of natural or man-made emergency, or strike by the employees of the MCS provider, an MCS provider shall have sufficient maintenance and repair personnel, so that the MCS provider can respond to, and correct, subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this chapter. 
(D)  An MCS provider shall be able to certify to the council/franchising authority that each service technician has taken and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train service technicians to handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner. Also, the course should be designed to provide continuing education to service technicians in changes in technology, repair/maintenance procedures and related matters. 
(E)  Notwithstanding the other requirements and provisions contained in this section, an MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) service technician on call twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 58; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 24)  
Sec. 4-21-59. - New installations; connections—regular, promotional, seasonal, short-term, pay-per-view, and menu-driven; reconnections. 
(A)  Under normal operating conditions, new installations, promotional, short-term, or seasonal connections, re-connections, and upgrades of multi-channel service by an MCS provider shall be performed and completed within seven (7) days (excluding holidays) of a customer requesting such. This standard shall be met no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time as measured on basis of a calendar quarter. 
(B)  The provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall not apply to pay-per-view or menu-driven connections. 
(C)  While an MCS provider may charge a customer for installing, connecting, or reconnecting multi-channel service, such charge must be explained to and approved by the customer prior to the installation, connection, or reconnection. 
(D)  In the case of a promotional or seasonal connection, any limitations or restrictions must be explained to the subscriber prior to the promotional or seasonal connection. 
(E)  An MCS provider may charge an appropriate reconnection charge, as permitted be applicable federal or state law. It may also require a security deposit, in those instances where a customer is reconnected after an involuntary disconnection for nonpayment or a prior history of unsatisfactory payment. However, such security deposit must be based on the prior unsatisfactory payment history or involuntary disconnection of the customer, and not the location or address of the residence or structure. 
(F)  To the extent provided by applicable federal and state law, downgrading a particular service level, or service cluster to a lower-priced or less comprehensive service or cluster level shall not be considered an installation or connection to the lower-priced or less comprehensive level of service; provided, however, that in no event shall there be a charge for complete discontinuance of service by a subscriber. 
(G)  An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall comply with any and all rules and regulations of the NYSCCT concerning downgrading. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 59; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 25)  
Sec. 4-21-60. - Disconnection for nonpayment. 
(A)  A subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at least forty-five (45) days after the posting of the bill to the subscriber, and payment has not been received by an MCS provider. 
(B)  Before disconnection of a subscriber's multi-channel service (either physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur: 
(1)  The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment of multi-channel service; and 
(2)  At least five (5) days have elapsed after a separate written notice of impending disconnection has been personally served upon the subscriber; or 
(3)  At least eight (8) days have elapsed after mailing a separate written notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber; or 
(4)  At least five (5) days have elapsed after the subscriber has either signed for or refused to accept a separate written notice of impending disconnection. 
(C)  The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state the amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the minimum amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection, and the date and place where such payment must be made. 
(D)  Disconnection of service must occur both on a normal service day, and within normal business hours of an MCS provider, unless the subscriber is given the opportunity to pay the full amount of the past-due account. 
(E)  An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment (including converter, remote control unit, or digital audio tuner), from a subscriber must do so within both a normal service day and normal service hours of an MCS provider, unless otherwise agreed to by the subscriber. 
(F)  Receipt of a "bad check" from a subscriber, in response to a written notice of disconnection, does not constitute payment; and the affected MCS provider need not give the subscriber further notice prior to disconnecting multi-channel service. 
(G)  An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this chapter, and any applicable state regulations (including those of the NYSCCT), are followed. 
(H)  Any refund due a subscriber after such a disconnection shall be made within sixty (60) days of the disconnection for nonpayment, unless no forwarding address is available. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 60; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 26)  
Sec. 4-21-61. - Voluntary disconnections and downgrades. 
(A)  At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service tier, service cluster, menu-driven program/service, premium channel, informational service, or the entire multi-channel service be disconnected. 
(B)  Where provided by an MCS provider, a subscriber may request a downgrade from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive level of service, or a less expensive level of service. 
(C)  From the date that such a subscriber makes such a request for either a disconnection or downgrade, then the MCS provider shall have seventy-two (72) hours or three (3) service days, whichever is longer, to disconnect or downgrade the service tier, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or entire multi-channel service. In the event that an MCS provider does not disconnect or downgrade service within seventy-two (72) hours, a subscriber's obligation to pay for such service shall cease, or in the case of a downgrade, a subscriber's obligation to pay for the more comprehensive and/or higher priced service shall cease. 
(D)  For a service tier, service cluster, menu-driven service, premium channel or informational service which is voluntarily disconnected, a subscriber shall pay a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such service tier, service cluster, menu-driven service, premium channel or informational service. 
(E)  Once a valid connection to a menu-driven program, or a pay-per-view event occurs, then the MCS provider may collect the full advertised or quoted rate, should the customer then attempt to disconnect the menu-driven program, or pay-per-view event. 
(F)  For MCS providers classified as cable operators, any charge or billing imposed on a subscriber as a result of a downgrade by such MCS providers, shall be no more than the maximum permitted by NYSCCT rules and regulations. For other MCS providers, the council/franchising authority reserves the right to approve any charge or billing that would be imposed on a subscriber as a result of a downgrade in service. 
(G)  If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is, or has been lost, appropriated, or damaged by a subscriber, prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may charge the subscriber with the entire cost for such loss or damage, provided that the MCS provider notify the subscriber within thirty (30) days of the disconnection. A subscriber shall not be required to pay for equipment failure or normal wear and tear. 
(H)  Any refund due a subscriber after voluntary disconnection and/or downgrade shall be made within sixty (60) days after such disconnection, unless no forwarding address is provided. 
(I)  In no event will this section be viewed as abridging the rights and remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry resolution process outlined in this chapter. 
(J)  The provisions contained in this section concerning downgrades shall be considered supplemental to any applicable rules and regulations of the NYSCCT. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 61; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 27)  
Sec. 4-21-62. - The council/franchising authority's policy regarding the provision of seamless or "see-through" technology. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority recognizes the fact that it is in the public's interest to be able to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber receiving equipment, without having to incur additional costs to obtain the same functions. Consequently, the council/franchising authority may require that: 
(1)  Unless an MCS provider can demonstrate to the city that it is technically or economically unfeasible, or commercially impracticable, then such MCS provider shall provide the ability to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber equipment in a seamless or "see-through" manner which allows: 
(a)  The use of any built-in remote control capability of a subscriber's television receiver/monitor for the control of any and all television channels provided by the MCS provider without the use or necessity of additional on-premises equipment; and 
(b)  The ability to record video programming on any channel provided by the MCS provider while watching video programming on any different channel, without the use or necessity of any additional in-home equipment other than the television receiver/monitor and a video-recorder. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 62)  
Secs. 4-21-63—4-21-65. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 63—65)  
Sec. 4-21-66. - Protection of subscriber privacy. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall abide by any and all subscriber privacy rules or regulations of the federal or state governments (including any applicable rules and regulations of the NYSCCT). 
(B)  For MCS providers classified as cable operators, such operators shall also abide by and comply with any subscriber privacy protection requirements and procedures listed in section 631 of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 551). 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 66)  
Sec. 4-21-67. - Resolution of complaints/inquiries. 
(A)  An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules and regulations outlined in this chapter. 
(B)  An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced to writing, and such policy shall be available upon request, to any person. In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in the manner that is prescribed by this chapter, and any state rules and regulations (including those of the NYSCCT). Further, nothing in this section shall prohibit a customer, from seeking relief from the NYSCCT for any matter within its jurisdiction. 
(C)  An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at least the following minimal standards: 
(1)  The initial response to a complaint/inquiry involving a service interruption shall occur no later than twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry; 
(2)  Every attempt will be made to resolve the complaint/inquiry relating to service problems within seventy-two (72) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry; 
(3)  Complaints/inquiries that fall into the category of service inquiries shall abide by the procedure set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Informing subscribers of the credit/refund policy which is consistent with this chapter, and any applicable state regulations (including those of the NYSCCT); and 
(5)  Informing subscribers of the billing disputes policy which is consistent with this chapter and any applicable state regulations (including those of the NYSCCT). 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 67; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 28)  
Sec. 4-21-68. - Policy with respect to continuity of multi-channel service provisions. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority declares that as part of its right to establish multi-channel customer service guidelines, it is in the public interest to ensure continuity of multi-channel service for all subscribers. In that light, the council/franchising authority also determines that it may take appropriate measures in order to ensure that no portion of the city is threatened or faced with a disruption, interruption, or discontinuance of multi-channel service due to the actions of any MCS provider. 
(B)  In addition to the principles and ideals enumerated in subsection (A), the council/franchising authority also expresses that its policy covers the following: 
(1)  To provide for continuity of multi-channel service in the event of acquisition by the city; 
(2)  To provide for continuity of service in the event of a proposed abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multi-channel service by an MCS provider; 
(3)  To provide for continuity of service in the event of revocation, termination, or nonrenewal of a franchised MCS provider's franchise; 
(4)  To provide for continuity of service in the event that a transaction occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider, such as an assignment, sale, transfer, or merger; 
(5)  To provide for continuity of service in the event of an expiration of a franchise; 
(6)  To prevent disruption of multi-channel service which would provide a hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multi-channel system as their primary or secondary source for information; and 
(7)  To prevent the interruption or cessation of multi-channel service which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming choices enjoyed by subscribers of a multi-channel system, and thereby restricting their ability to receive information. 
(C)  In any situation (including any of those mentioned above), which threatens the city and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service, then the MCS provider shall to the extent that it has adequate advance knowledge, provide the council/franchising authority with at least forty-five (45) days' notice (except in extreme circumstances) prior to the effective date of any action which would cause a loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service. The purpose of the notice is to apprise the council/franchising authority of the possibility of such loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service, so that it might explore its options and take appropriate measures. 
(D)  Whenever any situation occurs (including those mentioned above) which threatens the city and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service, then the council/franchising authority may direct the MCS provider for a period of up to twenty-four (24) months to do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s) regardless of the circumstances. 
(E)  During the interim period, the council/franchising authority shall work with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multi-channel system owner, or rectify the problem, so that the threat of loss of continuity is removed at the earliest possible instance. 
(F)  During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to provide multi-channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is entitled to all revenues collected, except any sums owed (including franchise fees, alternative user charges, and taxes) to the city or to other persons. 
(G)  In the event that the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved within twenty-four (24) months, then the council/franchising authority may extend the interim period on a month-to-month basis until the situation is satisfactorily resolved. Also, in such a circumstance, the council/franchising authority may adopt any emergency rules or procedures which will ensure that the subscribers will receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s). 
(H)  Nothing in this section should be construed as requiring an MCS provider to operate a multi-channel system at a continued financial loss (due to bankruptcy or insolvency) for an extended period of time. In such case, while the council/franchising authority may require continuity of service, it must lift such requirement as soon as the threat of loss of service is removed. Consequently, the council/franchising authority must take appropriate steps to ensure the continuity of service. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 68; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 29)  
Sec. 4-21-69. - Continued use of individual antennas protected. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority does not intend to prohibit the erection or continued use of individual television antennas within the city so long as the individual television antennas conform to any and all applicable zoning and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person shall be required to receive multi-channel service, or to physically connect to a multi-channel system. 
(B)  It is also noted that no person shall be penalized or fined (through either a home sales contract, deed of restrictive covenants, or other type of agreement) for failing or refusing to receive multi-channel service, or physically connecting to a multi-channel system.  
Secs. 4-21-70—4-21-75. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 70—75)  
Sec. 4-21-76. - Construction schedule and construction-related requirements. 
In order to establish minimum uniform standards, the council/franchising authority requires any MCS provider to adopt the following minimal construction schedule and construction-related requirements: 
(1)  Construct, install, maintain, and repair the multi-channel system in accordance with the requirements noted in this chapter; 
(2)  Use streets and public ways, as set forth in this chapter; 
(3)  Where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets, as set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Adopt the construction standards, as set forth in this chapter; 
(5)  Adopt the system expansion standards, as set forth in this chapter; 
(6)  Adopt the construction schedule as referred to in this chapter; 
(7)  Abide by, and act in strict accordance with, all current technical codes adopted by the city, or the state, or the United States, as noted in this chapter; and 
(8)  Maintain all permits and licenses, as noted in this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 76)  
Sec. 4-21-77. - Construction of good quality. 
During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of the multi-channel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and durable quality; and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable manner. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 77)  
Sec. 4-21-78. - Conditions on use of streets and public ways. 
(A)  All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) and other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located, constructed installed, and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city. To prevent the unnecessary disruption of the flow of traffic during peak traffic hours, any MCS provider shall make reasonable efforts to minimize work associated with construction, installation (other than in subscriber homes) activities that involve working on or within the street system between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on regular business weekdays. 
(B)  In the event an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, then at its own expense such MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the council/franchising authority, remove that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition from the subject property. 
(C)  An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures, or with water hydrants or mains, or with wastewater lift stations, the City of White Plains computerized traffic-control system or any other service or facility that benefits the city's or its residents' health, safety, or welfare. 
(D)  An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private contractor, shall protect rights-of-way, easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of: 
(1)  Traffic conditions; 
(2)  Public safety; 
(3)  A street closing; 
(4)  Street construction or resurfacing; 
(5)  A change or establishment of street grade; 
(6)  Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines, the City of White Plains computerized traffic-control system; or 
(7)  Any improvement, construction or repair related to the city's or its residents, health safety, or welfare. 
(E)  It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider (acting alone or in conjunction with another person), upon reasonable request and without charge, to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) before employees, agents, or independent contractors of any entity install cable in the marked-off area. 
(F)  An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the person requesting it, and such MCS provider may require payment in advance. The affected MCS provider shall be given not less than twenty-one (21) days notice of a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire changes. 
(G)  For any new installations occurring after the effective date of this chapter, and at the time that an MCS provider rebuilds or upgrades the multi-channel system, all trunk or feeder cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) shall be placed underground, when, and if, other utilities are placed underground. Further, where both power and utilities are presently underground, multi-channel system cable shall also be placed underground. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 78; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 30)  
Sec. 4-21-79. - Franchised MCS provider's duty to remove franchised properties from the public streets. 
(A)  This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate within the city. 
(B)  Whenever the following occurs: 
(1)  A franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all or part of the multi-channel system for a continuous period of six (6) months; 
(2)  A franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the multi-channel system outlined in the application, or proposal for renewal, or renewal franchise agreement; 
(3)  The council/franchising authority elects not to renew the franchise pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter; or 
(4)  The franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter; 
Then, unless the city or another MCS provider uses such multi-channel system, under the continuity provisions outlined in this chapter, the affected franchised MCS provider shall promptly remove its multi-channel system property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the city. 
(C)  If not removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, then the council/franchising authority may notify such franchised MCS provider that if removal of the property is not accommodated within two hundred seventy (270) days, or substantial progress towards removal is not made within two hundred ten (210) days, then the council/franchising authority may direct officials or representatives of the city to remove such franchised MCS provider's system property at that franchised MCS provider's expense. The performance and/or construction bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or full faith and credit guarantee required as set forth in this chapter shall be available to pay for such work. 
(D)  If officials or representatives of the city remove a franchised MCS provider's system property, and such franchised MCS provider does not claim the property within ninety (90) days of its removal, then the council/franchising authority may take whatever steps are available under state law to declare the property surplus, and sell it, with the proceeds of such sale (if permitted by state law) going to the city. 
(E)  When such franchised MCS provider removes its multi-channel system property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the city, the franchised MCS provider shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the council/franchising authority, replace and restore such public or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing the disturbance was done. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 79)  
Sec. 4-21-80. - Construction standards. 
(A)  Methods of construction, installation, maintenance repair of any multi-channel system shall comply with the most current editions of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the National Electrical Code, as affects the construction, installation, and maintenance of electrical supply and communication lines and attachments and supports. To the extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise, or state or local law, then the state law shall apply unless the state allows the local law to control. 
(B)  All construction, installation, maintenance, and repair shall treat the aesthetics of the property as a priority, shall not substantially affect the appearance of the structure, and shall not be installed underground on the bias across the property or diagonally across the side of a residence or other structure without the property owner's permission. 
(C)  All underground drops shall follow (to the greatest extent possible) property lines, and cross property only at right angles, unless otherwise permitted by the property owner, required due to the physical characteristics of the subsurface, or required under city, state, or federal rules. Underground installations shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications and requirements of the City of White Plains and the National Electrical Safety Code and must be designed to minimize disruption to the city's underground facilities associated with the computerized traffic control system network. 
(D)  For existing multi-channel system construction, installation, and repair, the provisions of subsection (C) of this section shall apply only at the time a scheduled upgrade or rebuild of the MCS provider's multi-channel system is actually commenced. For newly served areas, then the provisions of subsection (C) of this section shall apply at the time of initial construction and/or installation. 
(E)  In instances where either electrical or telephone utilities wire or cable aerially, then the MCS provider may construct its multi-channel system aerially, unless otherwise required by state law (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations). 
(F)  In instances where both electrical or telephone utilities wire or cable are underground, then the MCS provider shall construct its multi-channel system underground, unless otherwise permitted by state law (including applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations). However, where existing aerial electrical or telephone utilities convert to underground facilities, an existing aerial MCS provider shall have the option to continue remaining aerial for as long as it does not provide a safety hazard, and is permitted by state law (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations). 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 80; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 31)  
Sec. 4-21-81. - System construction schedule for franchised MCS providers. 
(A)  This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate within the city. 
(B)  A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the multi-channel system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a form and format determined by the council/franchising authority. 
(C)  A franchised MCS provider who does not abide by the system construction schedule shall be handled in the manner allowed under either this chapter or, where applicable, a franchise agreement. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 81)  
Sec. 4-21-82. - System expansion for MCS providers. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority recognizes that one of its primary purposes in the franchising process is to ensure that the widest diversity of programming sources be available to the greatest number of city residents. The council/franchising authority is also cognizant that an MCS provider may have some constitutionally protected rights with respect to when and what areas of the city are provided service. 
(B)  In order to balance those interests, the council/franchising authority sets the minimum guidelines for any system expansion on the part of a franchised MCS provider. 
(C)  A franchised MCS provider shall submit, within six (6) months of the effective date of this chapter, a detailed plan for multi-channel system expansion to any area in which the public streets are not presently served within the city. Such plan should not be construed as a requirement for universal service, but rather as a means for achieving the council/franchising authority's goals, mentioned in subsection (A). However, at a minimum, a franchised MCS provider shall extend multi-channel service to any area within the city that has a density of twenty (20) home or building passings per mile, or fractional equivalent thereof, as measured from the extremity of the system nearest the unserved area. Also, in such a case, a newly installed subscriber shall not be assessed or apportioned the cost for installation, except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by subscribers, and except for the costs of custom service arrangements or exceptional distance from public streets or ways, so long as the system expansion is technically feasible. 
(D)  The detailed plan must include criteria for extending the provision of service to isolated subscribers. For purposes of this section, "isolated subscribers" means any potential customer of a franchised MCS provider who dwells in a house more than one-half mile from the nearest franchised MCS provider connection. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 82; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 32)  
Sec. 4-21-83. - Permits and licenses. 
An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by chapter, rule, regulation, or ordinance, and maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 83)  
Sec. 4-21-84. - Technical and performance standards. 
(A)  It shall be the responsibility of any MCS provider to comply with the most current FCC technical standards. 
(B)  The MCS provider shall comply with, and abide by, any and all applicable rules and regulations of the NYSCCT concerning the performance and integrity of the multi-channel system. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 84)  
Sec. 4-21-85. - Proof-of-performance tests. 
The MCS provider shall design and conduct any and all tests necessary to verify the performance and technical integrity of the multi-channel system. Such tests shall be performed at least annually, and shall be in accordance (where applicable) with any and all rules and regulations of the NYSCCT concerning proof-of-performance. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 85)  
Sec. 4-21-86. - Reservation of right to inspect construction, documents related to construction, and tests related to performance, technical integrity, preventive maintenance, and safety. 
(A)  In order to verify that an MCS provider constructed and maintained the multi-channel system in the manner required by this chapter, and conducted the various performance, technical integrity (including cumulative leakage (CLI), preventive maintenance, and safety tests required by federal, state (including NYSCCT), and chapters required by this chapter, the council/franchising authority reserves the right to inspect all facets of an MCS provider's construction, as well as, inspect documents related to construction, and inspect tests related to performance, technical integrity, preventive maintenance, and safety. 
(B)  The council/franchising authority shall pay for all its costs associated with such an inspection, except for those circumstances precipitated by an MCS provider's refusal to provide necessary information (such as, strand maps or other similar documentation), or occasioned by the repeated failure to construct, install, maintain, repair, rebuild, or upgrade, in the manner specified and required by this chapter, or where applicable, a franchise agreement. In such instances, the MCS provider shall pay for such costs incurred by the city caused by the MCS provider's refusal to supply necessary information, or repeated failure to abide by the rules. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 86; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 33)  
Secs. 4-21-87—4-21-89. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 87—89)  
Sec. 4-21-90. - Council/franchising authority's policy with respect to safety requirements. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance of the multi-channel system meet certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the public and lessen the likelihood of interruption of multi-channel service. 
(B)  Consequently, the council/franchising authority requires any MCS provider to adopt the following safety requirements: 
(1)  Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this chapter; 
(2)  Minimum standby power as noted in this chapter; 
(3)  Implementing a periodic preventative maintenance program, as set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Follow all FCC rules and regulations concerning maximum cumulative leakage index (CLI) limits; and 
(5)  Comply with, and abide by, any construction, safety or fire codes, as noted in this chapter. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 90; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 34)  
Sec. 4-21-91. - Provisions to alert subscribers in the event of an emergency; standby power. 
(A)  In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending, imminent or actual natural or man-made emergency, then all MCS providers shall ensure that the multi-channel system providing multi-channel service to all or part of the city is designed so as to permit an authorized official of the city to override the audio portion of all channels, by touch-tone phone (or functional equivalent) from any location. 
(B)  In addition to any other requirements listed in this section, an MCS provider shall: 
(1)  Designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video (this channel need not be solely used for emergency broadcasts, and may in fact be used for any lawful purpose); 
(2)  Inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel on a periodic basis; 
(3)  Maintain all channel video blanking capability to facilitate the needs of hearing and sight-impaired customers; 
(4)  Test the emergency override system quarterly, and remedy any problems on operational deficiencies immediately; 
(5)  Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency alert override system; and 
(6)  Develop a plan (with the city's concurrence) in order to provide continuity of multi-channel service, and response to service calls in the event of a natural or man-made emergency. 
(C)  As one method of providing continuity of multi-channel services in the event of a natural or man-made emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless exempted by the council/franchising authority, have the capacity for three (3) hour automatically activated standby power on all trunk and feeder cable, and at the system headend and at all sub-headends, hubs, fiber optic distribution nodes and receive sites associated with the distribution of cable service to, and throughout the city. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 91; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 35)  
Sec. 4-21-92. - Provisions concerning safety alert technology. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority may require an MCS provider, as a means of protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and as a means of notifying the citizens of the city, to furnish a technology or service that: 
(1)  Provides effectively instantaneous access into potentially every home, regardless of whether or not one subscribes to basic multi-channel service; 
(2)  Does not require the television or monitor to be turned on, or the volume to be turned up in order to receive the notification; 
(3)  Does not require the city citizen to be home at the time of transmission of the notification in order to receive the notification; 
(4)  Covers the entire range of human hearing; 
(5)  Stores the notification in case no one is home at the time; 
(6)  Has an emergency audio alert which is intended to awaken a sleeping individual; 
(7)  Can notify any one individual, or discreet segments of the city citizenry, without unnecessarily alarming the rest of the populace; 
(8)  Provides a different alert notification for emergency and nonemergency situations; and 
(9)  Directly tied into the local office of the National Weather Service's Site Select weather warning service and standard weather radio service. 
(B)  In the event the council/franchising authority chooses not to require the provision of the technology or service by the MCS provider, the MCS provider nonetheless shall reserve the bandwidth necessary for the provision of the service for use by any other party designated or approved by the council/franchising authority. 
(C)  It is expressly noted that the council/franchising authority designates the necessary bandwidth as a form of governmental access, and as such, may require the provision of the necessary bandwidth at no charge to the council/franchising authority. 
(D)  The council/franchising authority requires the MCS provider to cooperate with the city, the council/franchising authority, and/or any other party designated or approved to provide such technology or service, in all matters related to the provision of technology or service, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Making the public aware of the availability of the technology or service; 
(2)  Educating the public as to the benefits, value, and use of the service; 
(3)  The distribution and installation of any in-home device(s) needed for the reception and use of the technology or service; and 
(4)  The provision of the technology and/or service to the public. 
(E)  The council/franchising authority may allow the operator to propose an alternative, or functionally equivalent technology or service that meets, to the greatest extent possible, the capabilities set forth in subsection (A) of this section. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 92)  
Sec. 4-21-93. - Implementation of a preventive maintenance program. 
(A)  It shall be the duty of an MCS provider to devise and implement a periodic preventative maintenance program for the multi-channel system in order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the multi-channel system that would affect the citizens' health, safety, and welfare, or negatively affect the quality of multi-channel services being provided. 
(B)  Such a program may, at the discretion of the city, be reviewed and approved by the council/franchising authority. Such approval by the council/franchising authority shall not be unreasonably withheld for an MCS provider designed preventive maintenance plan that meets the objectives of the council/franchising authority. 
(C)  Within forty-five (45) days after the completion of any preventive maintenance component test, the MCS provider shall be prepared to make available for inspection a written report (except for daily or weekly components, and tests which may be submitted once a quarter) to the council/franchising authority detailing the results of the tests conducted, and all items performed or addressed during the periodic preventive maintenance program. Although not exhaustive, the following areas should be included in a preventive maintenance program, and subsequent report: 
(1)  Inspection and repair, if needed, of the headend; 
(2)  Inspection and repair, if needed, of the antenna tower; 
(3)  Requiring weather-proofing and protection of the antenna lead connectors, and on any other exposed fittings; 
(4)  Requiring the conducting of signal leakage tests that are in accord with FCC requirements; 
(5)  Removal of tree roots, limbs, and branches that interfere with, or come in contact with, the MCS provider's cable; 
(6)  Requiring the periodic servicing, testing, and calibration of the MCS provider's equipment including service vehicles, and field test equipment; 
(7)  Employing a status monitoring system or other adequate practices to identify problems or situations in which the multi-channel system electronics are operating outside pre-programmed parameters; 
(8)  Testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will function properly during an emergency situation; 
(9)  Testing of the safety alert system or technology; 
(10)  Testing, and the recording of test data, for all signals (audio and video) at the headend, and all system extremity points; 
(11)  Testing as required or allowed by federal or state law (including any applicable or required NYSCCT testing); and 
(12)  Meeting or exceeding all operating parameters as set or allowed by the FCC, and as such may be revised or amended from time to time. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 93; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 36)  
Sec. 4-21-94. - Construction, fire, and safety codes. 
(A)  An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove, replace, or restore the multi-channel system in strict compliance with all current technical codes adopted by the council/franchising authority, the state (including any applicable codes of the NYSCCT), or the United States. 
(B)  The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to, construction, fire and safety, and zoning codes. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 94)  
Secs. 4-21-95—4-21-99. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 95—99)  
Sec. 4-21-100. - Alternative user charge. 
(A)  This section is applicable to any licensed, but otherwise authorized MCS provider and to any MCS provider who has had its franchise ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid. For all franchised MCS providers the provisions concerning franchise fees shall be applicable. 
(B)  Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law, and as an alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this chapter, the council/franchising authority may impose, extract, and collect, a charge from an affected MCS provider for the use by such provider of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city. 
(C)  Such an alternative user charge shall be based on the value of the public rights-of-way being used by the affected MCS provider. However, in no event, shall the alternative user charge exceed five (5) percent of the affected MCS provider's gross revenue for the reporting period. 
(D)  The council/franchising authority adopts such an alternative user charge, in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS provider's use of the public streets and public ways if such compensation cannot be obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on such MCS provider's annual gross revenue. However, an affected MCS provider may agree to an alternative charge that is based on a flat percentage of gross revenue, as long as that charge does not exceed five (5) percent of an affected MCS provider's annual gross revenue. 
(E)  Also, recognizing that an alternative user charge may affect a franchised MCS provider, please note that the franchise agreement may contain express language which details a different method or manner to handle a situation in which franchise fees as historically calculated (as a percentage of gross revenue) are ruled unconstitutional, or unenforceable, in order to protect and preserve the city's source of revenue and compensation for the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(F)  It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time, for the same period. 
(G)  An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to pay an alternative user charge that exceeds five (5) percent of such provider's gross revenue (as defined by this chapter) for any particular reporting period. In the event that the alternative user charge does exceed five (5) percent of gross revenue, then such alternative user charge shall be reduced to reflect an amount not greater than the five (5) percent cap. 
(H)  An affected MCS provider shall pay twenty-five (25) percent of the alternative user charge at the end of every three (3) months. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 100)  
Sec. 4-21-101. - Franchise required; exception. 
(A)  Except as provided in subsections (B) and (C), and (D) of this section, no person, or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a multi-channel system which requires the laying or positioning or use of cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of the city, without having first obtained from the city a MCS franchise which is then in effect. 
(B)  Pursuant to the Cable Act, a local government may own and operate a multi-channel system classified as a cable system. No franchise shall be required for the city, or any local or municipal authority affiliated with it from operating as a MCS provider in the franchised area. 
(C)  In the case of a person or MCS provider lawfully providing multi-channel service without a franchise on July 1, 1984, then such person or MCS provider shall not be required to obtain a franchise unless the council/franchising authority expressly gives written notification that the person or MCS provider is required to do so. 
(D)  If, as a result of annexation (either previous to, or subsequent to, the effective date of this chapter), a previously unfranchised MCS provider comes under the jurisdiction of the city, then such MCS provider shall not be required to obtain a franchise and enter into a franchise agreement unless the council/franchising authority expressly gives written notification to the MCS provider that it is required to do so. 
(E)  Where a person or MCS provider is required by the council/franchising authority to obtain a franchise, then the council/franchising authority shall notify the person or MCS provider, in writing, within thirty (30) days' of the council/franchising authority's formal action. 
(F)  After receipt of notification, the affected person or MCS provider shall have ninety (90) days in which to submit an application or proposal in substantially the same form and format as required by the council/franchising authority. Then, the affected person or MCS provider's application will be handled, as set forth by either state or local law. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 101)  
Sec. 4-21-102. - Authority to grant nonexclusive franchises. 
(A)  Consistent with section 621(a)(1) of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 541), the council/franchising authority may award one (1) or more nonexclusive multi-channel service franchises within its geographical limits. 
(B)  A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the city and the applicant, and in accordance with the procedure set forth by the federal, state (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations) and chapters and regulations. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 102)  
Sec. 4-21-103. - Franchise agreement; minimal requirements. 
(A)  An MCS provider may not lay or use any cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) until the franchise agreement is executed by both the MCS provider and the council/franchising authority and is then in effect. 
(B)  A franchise agreement shall be in sufficient detail in order to clearly delineate the rights and duties of both the franchised MCS provider and the council/franchising authority. 
(C)  At a minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the following: 
(1)  A detailed definition of "gross revenue" or "gross revenue" which specifically includes an explanation of what constitutes the revenue base for determining what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or alternative user charge; 
(2)  The term or duration of the franchise; 
(3)  Indemnity and hold-harmless clauses; 
(4)  Insurance; 
(5)  Performance and completion bonds or security deposits; 
(6)  Construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule; 
(7)  Compensation, including franchise fees; 
(8)  Continuity of multi-channel programming service; 
(9)  Assignment, or hypothecation of an existing franchise; 
(10)  Repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements; 
(11)  A severability clause; 
(12)  The law that governs the franchise agreement; and 
(13)  Any exemptions or relief from this chapter granted, or any chapter clarifications noted with respect to the MCS provider's operation of a franchised multi-channel system. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 103)  
Sec. 4-21-104. - Extent of grant of franchise. 
(A)  Upon an award of a franchise, in accordance with the terms of such franchise agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain a franchise may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or restore a multi-channel system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(B)  The franchised multi-channel system may be located in, upon, along, across, over, and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city. 
(C)  If necessary, and except to the extent that easement rights are conveyed by the grant of a municipal franchise pursuant to the provisions of federal law, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private property (including privately owned utility or street light poles) shall be that of a franchised MCS provider. 
(D)  A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multi-channel system on, or within the property of such utility company. This provision specifically includes MCS providers classified as cable operators. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 104; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 37)  
Sec. 4-21-105. - Term of franchise. 
(A)  The term of an initial MCS franchise may be for a period not to exceed ten (10) years from the date that a franchise agreement is both approved and executed by the council/franchising authority (and where applicable, the NYSCCT). 
(B)  The term of a renewal franchise may be for a period not less than five (5) years, nor more than ten (10) years from the date that a franchise renewal agreement is both approved and executed by the council/franchising authority (and where applicable, the NYSCCT). 
(C)  If an initial franchise or renewal franchise is for a period of six (6) years or less, then the city shall detail the reasons for granting the shorter franchise, in the franchise agreement or elsewhere. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 105)  
Sec. 4-21-106. - Application for franchise; application fee. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority may develop rules and regulations with respect to the submission and processing of applications for a franchise. Such rules shall be consistent with, and/or subordinate to, any applicable rules and regulations of the state (including where applicable, those of the NYSCCT). Further, such rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial, technical, and character qualifications of the applicant for a franchise. 
(B)  Unless prohibited by any state agency (including the NYSCCT), and unless prohibited by applicable federal law, an applicant shall pay an application fee which shall be no greater than the administrative and consulting costs associated with processing an application for a franchise. The total application fee must be paid, unless waived (totally or partially), regardless of whether the applicant receives, or does not receive, a franchise. The total application fee must be paid (or waived) prior to the council/franchising authority's formal action on the applicant's request for a franchise. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 106; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 38)  
Sec. 4-21-107. - Franchise fees. 
(A)  Any franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS provider classified as a cable operator) awarded a franchise or renewal franchise after the date this chapter becomes effective, shall pay to the city for the privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways, and other facilities of the city in the operation of the multi-channel system, and for the city's supervision thereof during the term of the franchise, a sum equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenue of such franchised MCS provider, provided that such fee shall be reduced to the extent necessary to comply with applicable federal and state law. 
(B)  If the FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over multi-channel service ever allows a governmental entity or council/franchising authority to increase the franchise fee beyond five (5) percent, then the council/franchising authority shall have the authority to increase the franchise fee to the maximum percentage allowable, provided that no increase in fee may be imposed upon a franchisee during the term of the franchise agreement without the consent of the franchisee unless authorized by federal or state law. 
(C)  For franchised MCS providers classified as cable operators, such franchised MCS providers (consistent with the cable act) may pass through to subscribers the amount of any increase in a franchise fee, unless the council/franchising authority demonstrates that the rate structure specified in the franchise agreement reflects all costs of franchise fees and so notifies the franchised MCS provider classified as a cable operator in writing. For franchised MCS providers not classified as cable operators, such franchised MCS providers must petition and be granted the authority to pass through any increase in a franchise fee. 
(D)  Franchised MCS providers shall, to the degree required by the provisions of the Cable Act and the applicable rulings of the FCC and NYSCCT, pass through to subscribers the amount of any decrease in a franchise fee. 
(E)  A franchised MCS provider shall file with the council/franchising authority, within forty-five (45) days after the expiration of each of the franchised MCS provider's fiscal quarters, a detailed financial and revenue statement clearly showing the franchise fee due for the preceding quarter together with the bases of the calculations thereof. Such statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant or officer of a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness, and veracity of the revenue figures. Such statement shall be in a form and format adequate to show the subject revenue and fees due (subject to the reasonable review by the council/franchising authority) and shall include revenue from any source that is or may be a component of gross revenue as defined herein above. Revenue will be reported by service category, type, and level showing computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels, tiers, clusters, types of service and other revenue sources by kind and type, subject to appropriate protections of proprietary information (as such may be deemed proprietary by law) and the confidentiality of subscriber information under federal law. 
(F)  Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be rendered to the city at the time the financial and revenue statement is filed. 
(G)  In the event that payment is not made by the due date, or within ten (10) days thereafter upon proper notice or demand, then such franchised MCS provider may be declared in default of the franchise, and the franchise may be revoked, terminated, or canceled in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
(H)  The council/franchising authority reserves the right to audit a franchised MCS provider books, if the council/franchising authority deems it necessary subject to appropriate protections of the confidentiality of subscriber information under federal law. 
(I)  If an audit or other research discovers that franchise fees have been either underpaid or not paid for a period exceeding six (6) months from the original due date, then the city may seek full recovery of the underpaid or nonpaid fees plus interest not to exceed fifteen (15) percent or the maximum allowable under state law (whichever is lesser). 
(J)  All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees will be certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider and will be provided in the form, format and detail applicable to quarterly reports under subsection (F) above; such provider shall maintain records used in the preparation of said report, to be produced in their originality and totality upon request or demand by the council/franchising authority, subject to protection of the privacy of subscriber information pursuant to applicable law. 
(K)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of or an accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter, or for any other performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder. 
(L)  Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be considered, to the extent permitted by applicable federal and state law, in addition to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently adopted. 
(M)  A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by section 622 (g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 542(g)(2)(D)). 
(N)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the council/franchising authority to impose a tax, fee or other assessment of any kind, on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with respect to multi-channel service or other programming or communications service provided by such person over a multi-channel system for which charges are assessed to subscribers, but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of illustration only, this subsection shall include the situation(s) where a premium service directly bills a subscriber, or the franchised MCS provider acts as collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber, or where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a third party. 
(O)  For any twelve-month period, the fees paid by any person subject to subsection (N) who provides any such multi-channel service shall not exceed five (5) percent of such person's gross revenue, or such higher percentage as may be authorized by the FCC, Congress, or other governmental entity derived in such period from the provision of such service over the multi-channel system. 
(P)  If at any time, the highest court of the nation, or the highest court of the state, invalidates, voids, or rules as unconstitutional the concept of franchise fees, then the council/franchising authority may impose an alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider, in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Q)  In light of subsection (P) of this section, and recognizing that an alternative user charge may affect a franchised MCS provider, please note that the franchise agreement may contain express language which details a different method or manner for collection of franchise fees should the way they historically have been calculated (as a percentage of gross revenue) be ruled unconstitutional or unenforceable, so that the city's source of revenue and compensation for the use of the public right-of-way may be protected. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 107; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 39)  
Sec. 4-21-108. - Assignment of franchise. 
(A)  There shall be no assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise, in whole, or in part, by the affected MCS provider, without the prior express written approval by the council/franchising authority. 
(B)  Any assignment or transfer without such prior written consent shall constitute a default of such franchise. 
(C)  In the event of such a default, the council/franchising authority shall proceed according to the procedure set forth in this chapter, and any applicable state law (including any applicable rules or regulations of the NYSCCT). 
(D)  At least ninety (90) days before such a proposed assignment of an MCS provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised MCS provider shall petition in writing for the council/franchising authority's written consent for such a proposed assignment. 
(E)  The council/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold its consent to such an assignment, nor disclose information deemed confidential or proprietary by law considered in connection with such a petition. However, in making such a determination, the council/franchising authority may consider all relevant facts including the following: 
(1)  Experience of proposed assignee or transferee or buyer; 
(2)  Qualifications of proposed assignee or transferee or buyer; 
(3)  Legal integrity of proposed assignee or transferee or buyer; 
(4)  Financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee before and after the proposed assignment; 
(5)  If requested by the council/franchising authority, submittals from the proposed assignee or transferee or buyer, on what, if any, changes it intends to make in the operation and maintenance of the multi-channel system; 
(6)  The corporate connection, if any, between the franchised MCS provider, and proposed assignee or transferee or buyer; 
(7)  The economic viability or nonviability of the multi-channel system that may result from the proposed assignment in the future, based upon certain factors including the impact of the purchase price on the city and/or the proposed assignee or transferee or buyer; 
(8)  Any claimed benefits which may accrue from the assignments; and 
(9)  Any other legitimate aspect of the proposed assignee's or transferee's or buyer's background which could affect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry of the city as it relates to the operation of the multi-channel system. 
(F)  A copy of the completed sales agreement, or a functionally equivalent instrument, between the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee or buyer shall be provided to the council/franchising authority, so that the council/franchising authority may discover the assumption of obligations by the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee or buyer with respect to the multi-channel system. In lieu of the sales agreement, the council/franchising authority may accept an attested summary of obligations assumed by the above-referenced parties. The city may request additional information other than that which is expressly prohibited by law. 
(G)  Before an assignment is approved by the council/franchising authority, the proposed assignee shall execute an affidavit, acknowledging that it has read, understood, and intends to abide by both this chapter, and the applicable franchise agreement. 
(H)  In the event of any approved assignment the assignee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former franchised MCS provider, except as noted in subsection (I). Any consent by the city if granted may be absolute or conditional, e.g. with respect to assumption or nonassumption of liability, including but not limited to assumption of all obligations of the franchise and all monies owed the city. 
(I)  An assignment shall not relieve the former franchised MCS provider of its liabilities under the franchise agreement until the assignment actually takes place, or unless specifically relieved by federal, or state law (including any applicable NYSCCT rules and regulations), or unless specifically relieved by the council/franchising authority (or where applicable the NYSCCT) at the time an assignment is approved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 108; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 40)  
Sec. 4-21-109. - Special rules for hypothecation. 
(A)  Except as provided herein, an MCS provider may hypothecate its multi-channel system without prior, formal approval of the council/franchising authority. However, in those instances where an MCS provider allows the hypothecation to exceed forty (40) percent of the fair market value of the multi-channel system (including equipment and facilities), then the council/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider receive the prior approval of the council/franchising authority. 
(B)  In those instances where an MCS provider allows the hypothecation to exceed forty (40) percent of the fair market value of the multi-channel system (including equipment and facilities), then the MCS provider shall submit (along with its petition for approval) a plan detailing where and in what manner or for what purpose the funds from such hypothecation shall be expended. 
(C)  While the council/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold its consent of such hypothecation, it may nonetheless withhold approval and consent in those instances where the technical or financial integrity of the multi-channel system would be compromised to such an extent that the subscribers' ability to receive multi-channel services would be jeopardized. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 109)  
Sec. 4-21-110. - Default of franchise; revocation, termination or cancellation of franchise. 
(A)  When any event, act or omission (on the part of the franchised MCS provider) occurs which represents a violation of an integral provision of this chapter, or compromises the corporate character, or legal, financial or technical integrity and/or stability of the multi-channel system or the franchised MCS provider to such a degree that the interests of the customers are negatively affected, then such event, act or omission may be considered a major breach of this chapter. Under such circumstances, the council/franchising authority shall notify the affected MCS provider in writing of the specific breach and direct such franchised MCS provider to comply with all such provisions of its franchise agreement or this chapter. 
(B)  For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions include, but are not limited to: bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable), failure to receive written council/franchising authority approval for an assignment, or failure to abide by the integral terms and conditions of the franchise agreement, or integral provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, "integral" means a provision which either (1) affects the ability of the customer to receive multi-channel service, or (2) affects the ability of the council/franchising authority to receive compensation for the use of its rights-of-way, or (3) affects the ability of the council/franchising authority to evaluate an MCS provider's performance in the technical, financial, and legal aspects of the multi-channel system. 
(C)  Where a franchised MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the enumerated conditions, within sixty (60) days, then in no event shall the enumerated condition be weighed against such franchised MCS provider in any subsequent review of franchise performance. 
(D)  A copy of such notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety on the performance bond, unless otherwise directed by state law (including any applicable rule or regulation of the NYSCCT). 
(E)  Within seventy-five (75) days, after such written notice is mailed to a franchised MCS provider, the council/franchising authority shall conduct a public hearing on the matter (unless state law (or NYSCCT rule or regulation) requires a different procedure in which the state (or NYSCCT rule or regulation) procedure would control). 
(F)  The council/franchising authority shall provide written notice to a franchised MCS provider, and to the surety, of the time and place of said public hearing in a manner consistent with either state law, or approved by the council/franchising authority (including where necessary, the NYSCCT). 
(G)  At the time of the hearing, the affected franchised MCS provider may present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the franchise agreement. If the situation has been resolved, or steps are being taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised MCS provider should present the information at the hearing. 
(H)  If the affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing, and has not requested a continuance of the hearing, then such franchised MCS provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further continuation of the matter, and may be declared in default of the franchise agreement. 
(I)  After the public hearing, the council/franchising authority may determine the franchised MCS provider to be in compliance and dismiss the matter, or may determine that the MCS provider has cured any noncompliance and thereby dismiss the matter. However, the council/franchising authority may determine that a chapter violation exists and remains uncured. Consequently, upon a finding that the MCS provider violated an integral local law provision, or failed to cure an outstanding local law violation, the council/franchising authority may direct the affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective action within a specified period of time, or may declare such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement, and thereafter, may revoke, terminate, or cancel the franchise, unless the franchised MCS provider presents sufficient mitigating circumstances. 
(J)  If the council/franchising authority directs corrective action to take place within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement, then that declaration shall be reduced to writing, and the notice of corrective action or default shall be mailed to such franchised MCS provider, and surety, within twenty-one (21) days of the council/franchising authority's action. 
(K)  If within sixty (60) days the affected franchised MCS provider or surety does not take significant action to rectify the breach, or submit a plan detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach, then the council/franchising authority shall revoke such MCS provider's franchise, and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider, and surety forthwith, unless there are mitigating circumstances. 
(L)  The council/franchising authority reserves the right to assess any charges incurred (including costs for consultants, witnesses, and hearing preparation) in a default and/or revocation proceeding to the franchised MCS provider. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 110)  
Sec. 4-21-111. - Performance evaluations. 
The council/franchising authority is authorized to design a performance evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance of the franchised MCS provider with the terms and conditions of both the franchise and this chapter. Moreover, the council/franchising authority may periodically review, and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's financial, technical, legal, and character qualifications continue to meet required operational, maintenance, and performance levels in order to ensure the uninterrupted provision of multi-channel services. Such performance evaluations may be conducted every three (3) years during the franchise term, and may be done as part of any required survey. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 111)  
Secs. 4-21-112—4-21-115. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 112—115)  
Sec. 4-21-116. - Specific additional rules for MCS providers classified as cable operators or SMATV operators. 
(A)  In addition to any requirements contained within this chapter, all MCS providers that are classified as cable operators shall be expected to abide by, and comply with, all applicable provisions of the Cable Act, as amended. 
(B)  The specific provisions of the Cable Act include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Cable channels for public, educational, or governmental use (section 611 Cable Act—codified at 47 USC 531); 
(2)  Cable channels for commercial use (section 612—47 USC 532); 
(3)  General franchise requirements (section 621—47 USC 541); 
(4)  Franchise fees (section 622—47 USC 542); 
(5)  Regulation of rates (section 623—47 USC 543); 
(6)  Regulation of services, facilities, and equipment (section 624—47 USC 544); 
(7)  Modification of franchise obligations (section 625—47 USC 545); 
(8)  Franchise renewal (section 626—47 USC 546); 
(9)  Conditions of sale of a franchise (section 627—47 USC 547); 
(10)  Subscriber privacy (section 631—47 USC 551); and 
(11)  Equal employment opportunity (section 634—47 USC 554). 
(C)  Further, as an additional requirement, before the third anniversary of the effective date of this chapter, any MCS provider classified as a cable operator and providing cable service within the city shall design and activate a multi-channel system with a minimum capability of providing seventy-seven (77) full-time video programming services. 
(D)  Further, the council/franchising authority is committed that the goal of the Cable Act, as set forth in section 601(4) of the Act (codified at 47 USC 521(4)), is met at all times. As a result, the council/franchising authority expressly requires that upon the advent, implementation, and transmission of high-definition television (HDTV), its functional equivalent, or any subsequently developed technological advancement affecting channel capacity or needed band width for any video programming source or service, the MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall not lessen, dilute, or decrease the mix, level, quality, or quantity of programming services carried on the multi-channel system for reasons of lack of adequate channel capacity, except to the extent permitted pursuant to the applicable provisions of federal law. 
(E)  Notwithstanding the above subsections of this section, and where specifically included or referenced in the Cable Act, or by FCC interpretation of the Cable Act, all MCS providers classified as SMATV operators shall be expected to abide by, and comply with, such included or referenced sections of the Cable Act, as amended. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 116; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 41)  
Sec. 4-21-117. - Specific additional public, educational, and governmental rules for MCS providers classified as cable operators. 
(A)  The council/franchising authority recognizes that under section 611 of the Cable Act (codified at 47 USC 531), the council/franchising authority has certain power with respect to certain aspects for public, educational, or governmental (PEG) use that is provided by MCS providers classified as cable operators. 
(B)  To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill the council/franchising authority's desired goal of a public, educational, and governmental (PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long-range needs of the city, the council/franchising authority adopts the following: 
(1)  At the time of an initial or renewal application for an MCS franchise for a cable system, an MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall pledge to include the following guarantees: 
(a)  An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, a dedicated public access channel; and 
(b)  An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, a dedicated educational access channel; and 
(c)  An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, a dedicated governmental channel. 
(2)  Both the council/franchising authority and the affected franchisee shall review use after every twenty-four (24) months, including the percentage of use of every PEG channel. At the end of each eighteen-month period, the council/franchising authority or its designee shall evaluate the response and actual use of such channels. If, after any eighteen-month period, the percentage of use for any required PEG channel drops below twenty-five (25) percent of the total time allocated, then the required number of hours may be reduced to a number that most closely approximates the average hours of use per day. 
(3)  If a separate channel is not dedicated for either government or educational use at any time, and thereafter seventy-five (75) percent of the total time allocated for any combined required government/educational channel is consistently used five (5) days a week for a period of three (3) months, then upon request of the city the franchisee shall provide an additional PEG channel. 
(4)  A cable operator may be required to provide company-owned mobile, portable, and stationary equipment dedicated for PEG access, together with the aid of technical and production assistance provided by the cable operator. A cable operator shall provide equipment that can store programs for delayed cablecasting. There will be no cost for technical production assistance for White Plains PEG access users. Moreover, the cost of maintenance of such PEG access studio, and equipment required to run the studio, and other PEG access facilities shall be borne by the cable operator. 
(5)  To the extent required by Federal law, the franchisee shall be permitted to use the PEG channel capacity required by this local law for the provision of other services if such channel capacity is not being used for the purposes designated, which purposes, for application of this section, may include repetition of pre-programmed material or display of character-generated notices, on the condition that such use by the franchisee shall cease if required to accommodate the designated PEG program uses, subject to reasonable arrangements to avoid untimely disruption of current program services and to allow reasonable notice to subscribers. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 117; L.L. No. 3-1995, § 42)  
Sec. 4-21-118. - The council/franchising authority's objective as it relates to the provision of broad categories of video programming. 
(A)  Pursuant to section 624 of the Cable Act, the council/franchising authority recognizes that it should strive to ensure that its citizens receive the widest and most diverse selection of video programming possible. Consequently, for those MCS providers required to maintain a franchise, the council/franchising authority states as its objective to such franchised MCS providers that the provision of video programming to subscribers should include the following broad categories: 
(1)  Local broadcast stations; 
(2)  Two (2) distant carriage signals, or satellite-fed broadcast stations; 
(3)  PEG programming on the lowest offered and/or available tier; 
(4)  Sports programming services (regional and/or national); 
(5)  News, information, or public affairs/interest programming services; 
(6)  Financial/consumer-oriented programming services; 
(7)  Scientific and/or cultural programming services; 
(8)  Children's programming services; and 
(9)  Ethnically sensitive programming services.  
Secs. 4-21-119—4-21-125. - Reserved. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, §§ 119—125)  
Sec. 4-21-126. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall take effect immediately [i.e. April 7, 1993]. 
(L.L. No. 1A-1993, § 126)  
Chapter 4-22 - HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 12, 1995, § 1, enacted provisions pertaining to horse-drawn carriages, designated as Ch. 4-22, §§ 4-22-1—4-22-21. The sections have been redesignated as §§ 4-22-1, 4-22-12—4-22-16, 4-22-27—4-22-36, 4-22-47—4-22-49, 4-22-60, 4-22-71, in order to preserve the numbering system established for the Code. 
Cross reference— Taxicabs, Ch. 4-15; animals and fowl, Ch. 5-2; streets, sidewalks and public places, Ch. 7-2; traffic and street regulation, Tit. VIII. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-22-1. - Definitions. 
[As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Commissioner: Commissioner of public safety of the City of White Plains. 
Cruising: The operation of a horse-drawn carriage upon public streets when not employed by a passenger, and by work or actions soliciting prospective passengers for hire of the horse-drawn carriage. 
Horse-drawn carriage: A horse-drawn vehicle operating for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
Horse-drawn carriage operator's permit: Permit issued by the commissioner for a driver of a horse-drawn carriage. 
Horse-drawn carriage permit: Permit issued by the commissioner for each horse-drawn carriage. 
Owner: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association owning and operating horse-drawn carriage or carriages. 
Street: Any byway, roadway, street, alley, avenue, court, bridge, lane or public highway or any other public way in the city. 
Taxicab stand: Any place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere which is exclusively reserved by the commissioner of public safety for the use of taxicabs. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Secs. 4-22-2—4-22-11. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CARRIAGE OPERATORS 
 
Sec. 4-22-12. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate, or permit another to operate for hire, a horse-drawn carriage within the City of White Plains without first obtaining a horse-drawn carriage operator's permit from the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-13. - Procedures. 
Each applicant for a horse-drawn carriage operator's permit shall comply with the following requirements to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public safety or his designee prior to the issuance of a permit: 
(1)  Chauffeur's license: Possess a valid New York State Chauffeur's License; 
(2)  Age: Be at least eighteen (18) years old or over; 
(3)  Physical condition: Be of sound mind and body and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart disease, or any other infirmity of mind or body which might render the applicant incapable or unfit to safely operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire, subject, however to the requirements of the Americans with Disability Act; 
(4)  Literacy: Be able to read, write and speak the English language; 
(5)  Appearance and habits: Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of either intoxicating liquor or the use of drugs; 
(6)  Character: Be of good character and reputation; 
(7)  Personal history statement: Shall complete, sign and file a sworn statement on such form or forms as shall be required by the commissioner of public safety, showing compliance with the requirements hereinabove set forth and such other interests of the public safety, health and welfare. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-14. - Fees. 
Upon the filing of an application for a horse-drawn carriage operator's permit and as partial reimbursement to the city for the cost of investigation and processing of the permit, there shall be paid fifteen dollars ($15.00) upon the filing of an original application and ten dollars ($10.00) for the application for renewal of an existing permit, which sum shall be paid by check, cash or money order to the city, which sum may be received at the office designated by the commissioner of public safety for the receipt thereof. In the event that a permit is granted pursuant to such application, there shall be no additional charge; but in the event that the permit is denied, there shall be no entitlement to reimbursement thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-15. - Renewals. 
(a)  Renewals shall be on the same basis as a new application, provided the application is filed within thirty (30) days of expiration of the current permit on a form supplied by the commissioner. 
(b)  Such permit shall be for a period to expire on the thirty-first day of December of the calendar year for which issued unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(c)  The commissioner shall not renew any horse-drawn carriage permit in the event he shall determine that the horse-drawn carriage has not been operated for at least four (4) months during the preceding permit year, provided that such failure to operate shall not have been caused by extreme or dangerous weather or public catastrophe. However, in the event that it is shown to the commissioner by competent proof that the permittee has been disabled through illness or has been unable to operate the horse-drawn carriage because of other cause beyond his or her control, the commissioner may renew such permit. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-16. - Suspension, cancellation, revocation and refusal to renew or issue a permit. 
(a)  Reasons. The commissioner of public safety may suspend, cancel or revoke a horse-drawn carriage operator's permit and may refuse to approve an application or a renewal thereof for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction: The conviction of the applicant or permittee of a felony or of any crime or offense involving violence, dishonesty, deceit, indecency, degeneracy, moral turpitude, gambling, frequent public intoxication, or the illegal use, sale or possession of drugs. The commissioner of public safety shall nevertheless, apply the standards for licensure and employment of persons previously convicted of one (1) or more criminal offenses embodied in Article 23-A of the Correction Law. 
(2)  False application: If the permittee or applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a material fact in connection with the application or a permit or the renewal thereof. 
(3)  Violations: If the permittee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  True ownership requirement: If the applicant is not the true owner of the horse-drawn carriage or of the carriage business. 
(5)  Unfit applicant or permittee: If the applicant, in the opinion of the commissioner of public safety, is not fit to be a permittee hereunder in the best interest of the general public welfare and safety of the public. 
(b)  The applicant or permittee may appeal such adverse decision by requesting in writing an informal hearing before the commissioner or his designee within thirty days of the decision. The applicant or permittee may be represented by counsel at the hearing and may present evidence, and cross-examine any witnesses presented against him.  
Secs. 4-22-17—4-22-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CARRIAGES 
 
Sec. 4-22-27. - Permit Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a business involving the use of one (1) or more horse-drawn carriages in the city without first obtaining a permit from the commissioner for each horse-drawn carriage. 
(b)  Every horse-drawn carriage operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the horse-drawn carriage is in service. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-28. - Transfer. 
It shall be unlawful for a horse-drawn carriage permit, after being issued by the commissioner, to be transferred to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association for any cause whatsoever, except that permits for horse-drawn carriages may be transferred with the approval of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-29. - Number of carriages. 
(a)  Two horse-drawn carriages for hire are hereby found adequate to serve the needs of the public in the city and such number is established as the maximum number of horse-drawn carriage permits to be issued pursuant to this chapter subject to modification as herein provided. 
(b)  Additional permits: The commissioner of public safety may on his own motion or shall, upon written request by an applicant, conduct a public hearing to determine whether unnecessary hardship can be avoided or the public convenience, welfare and necessity shall be served by the operation of additional horse-drawn carriages. Notice of such public hearings shall be published in a newspaper, circulated in the city, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks. If the commissioner of public safety, after said public hearings shall determine that one (1) or more additional horse-drawn carriages are necessary, he shall grant new permits for said horse-drawn carriages provided the applicants meet all the other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-30. - Removal for violation. 
The commissioner of public safety shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a horse-drawn carriage which is in violation of this article, and to prohibit operation of such horse-drawn carriage until all deficiencies have been corrected. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-31. - Fees. 
There shall accompany each application for a permit, cash, check or money order made to the order of the city in the amount of seventy dollars ($70.00) for each horse-drawn carriage, to be paid at the office designated by the commissioner of public safety, which shall be a partial reimbursement payment to the city for the cost and expense for the processing and the investigation thereof. In the event of the disapproval of any such application, there shall not be any entitlement to the reimbursement of any part of the fees. There shall be no additional fee for the issuance of the permit pursuant to such application. The fee for any such permit shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) per carriage per calendar year and in each case shall expire on the thirty-first day of December of the calendar year for which issued. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-32. - Indemnity. 
Any horse-drawn carriage company operating under this article shall indemnify and hold the city, its officials, officers, agents, servants and employees, harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any horse-drawn carriage company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees, during the operation by the company of a horse-drawn carriage business or service, either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-33. - Insurance. 
Any horse-drawn carriage company desiring a permit to do business shall provide and maintain a policy of liability insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of New York for each carriage in the following amount: 
Liability in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage each occurrence; 
The City of White Plains shall be named as an additional insured for the commercial liability insurance; 
In addition the carriage company shall maintain New York State Workers Compensation insurance with statutory limits. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-34. - Safety equipment. 
Each horse-drawn carriage that is driven upon a public street from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at such other times as visibility for a distance of three hundred fifty (350) feet ahead of such vehicle is not clear, shall display: 
(1)  At least two (2) lighted lamps on the front of the vehicle, one on each side, having light sources of equal power and visibility from the front for a distance of at least three hundred fifty (350) feet; 
(2)  Two lighted lamps on the rear, one on each side, which shall display a red or amber fixed or flashing light visible from the rear for a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet; and 
(3)  Reflective material upon the shafts of the vehicle or other parts thereof which shall normally parallel the body, head or legs of the horse pulling such vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-35. - Inspection. 
(a)  A vehicle shall be permitted as a horse-drawn carriage only after it shall have been examined and inspected as specified by the city once a year to ensure safe operation on any street. Such certification of safety shall be submitted to the commissioner of public safety prior to being issued a permit. The commissioner shall refuse a permit to, or if already issued, suspend the permit of any horse-drawn carriage found to be unfit for operation. 
(b)  Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted, and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-36. - Veterinary examination and condition of animal. 
(a)  A licensed veterinarian shall certify, after due and proper inspection, the good health of each horse before it is placed into service. A minimum of one (1) such health inspection shall be required for each animal each calendar year. 
(b)  Unless written approval is given by a licensed veterinarian, no horse having open sores or wounds or any disease or ailment shall be permitted to be in service on the streets of the city. 
(c)  Each horse shall have its hooves properly trimmed and shod for street surfaces. 
(d)  Each horse shall be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff, or a dirty coat. 
(e)  Harnesses shall be properly fitted, maintained, and oiled so that no irritating material will come in direct contact with the animal. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Secs. 4-22-37—4-22-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATING RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-22-47. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  A driver may not use more than a light touch of the whip upon any animal, and no driver or other person may forcefully strike an animal, or make movements or noise intended to frighten or harm an animal. 
(b)  A driver shall not permit an animal to pull a carriage at a speed faster than a slow trot, except in emergency situations. 
(c)  No horse shall be subject to any condition or treatment, whether in service or out of service, which will impair the good health and physical condition of that animal. 
(d)  Selling or offering for sale articles of merchandise or literature to the passengers in the vehicle is prohibited. 
(e)  A driver shall not engage in cruising or, after leaving the starting point, solicit or receive additional passengers between such starting point and the ultimate destination, or operate on any route other than the prescribed route, when such a route is designated. 
(f)  A driver shall not abandon his vehicle, or permit another to drive it for him, except an apprentice when accompanied by a licensed driver. 
(g)  A driver shall not operate the vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs. 
(h)  No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a horse-drawn carriage as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his horse-drawn carriage. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(i)  No driver shall impede the normal flow of traffic on city streets at any time. Horse-drawn carriages are required to travel in the right-most lane under normal conditions and shall not make use of any taxicab stands or bus stop locations. 
(j)  No horse-draw carriage shall operate in violation of any provision of this article, ordinance of the city, or the law of the State of New York. 
(k)  No horse-drawn carriage shall operate in extreme weather conditions where the health and/or safety of the horse will be impaired. 
(l)  Bells or other noise-making devices except warning signals are prohibited except when authorized by the commissioner of public safety. 
(m)  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, under request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-48. - Sanitation requirements. 
Manure and urine must be treated with a chemical deodorizing solution, and manure must be removed as soon as possible from the street by the carriage operator. Each carriage must be equipped with a suitable scoop shovel and air-tight container. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Sec. 4-22-49. - Hours of operation. 
Horse-drawn carriages shall not be driven or operated on city streets during the following periods of time: 
Monday through Friday except legal holidays 4:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
Any day between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Secs. 4-22-50—4-22-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RATES 
 
Sec. 4-22-60. - Rates of fare; rate card required. 
No owner or driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall charge a greater sum for the use of the horse-drawn carriage than in accordance with the published and advertised rates which shall be displayed in each vehicle. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Secs. 4-22-61—4-22-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 4-22-71. - Penalties for article violation. 
Any owner, driver or person who violates any provision of this article shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 4-12-95, § 1)  
Chapter 4-23 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISING AND LICENSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 1, 1997, provided for the addition of a new chapter, Telecommunications Franchising and Licensing. Such ordinance did not specify a title for inclusion thereof; hence, such provisions have been designated as ch. 23 of title 4, §§ 4-23-1—4-23-11 by the editor. 
Cross reference— Multi-channel service providers, § 4-21-1 et seq.; public works, tit. VII; traffic and street regulations, tit. VIII. 
 
Sec. 4-23-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (i) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; (ii) each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and (iv) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition of Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
City means the City of White Plains, New York. 
Common council means the common council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the equipment in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than ten (10) percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). "Control" or "controlling interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one (1) person or group of persons. 
Equipment means the poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are used to provide telecommunications services. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
May is permissive. 
Mayor means the mayor of the city or his/her designee. 
Ordinance means this chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city or the city school district of the City of White Plains. 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the limited occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 4-23-2(b) and (g) of this chapter. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means all transmissions, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
Telecommunications provider means any person who: 
(1)  Owns, constructs, operates or maintains equipment in the streets used to provide telecommunications services regardless of whether such telecommunications services originate or terminate in the city; or 
(2)  Provides telecommunications services that originate or terminate in the city by means of: (i) specifically identifiable equipment in the streets, which equipment is owned by such person or made available to such person under a lease or any other arrangement for a period longer than one hundred twenty (120) days; or (ii) equipment in the streets if the use of such equipment is continuing and substantial, and the city has determined that it is necessary and appropriate to impose the requirements of this chapter in order to preserve the application of this chapter on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis consistent with applicable law. 
Telecommunications services means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. The term "telecommunications services" shall not include cable services. 
Telecommunications system means the plant, equipment, real property (including interests in real property), tangible and intangible personal property, buildings, offices, furniture, customer lists, cable, wires, optical fibers, amplifier, antenna, and all other electronic devices, equipment and facilities used to provide telecommunications services. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Sec. 4-23-2. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets as a telecommunications provider, or construct, operate or maintain equipment in the streets used to provide telecommunications, without a franchise or revocable license granted by the city. A franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to grant any rights or authorization to provide cable services in the city, and any person seeking to provide cable services in the city shall first obtain a separate franchise in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  Any person seeking to use the streets to construct, operate or maintain equipment to provide telecommunications for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person in the city, shall first obtain a revocable license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The common council may grant one (1) or more franchises and revocable licenses in accordance with this chapter, provided that the common council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the common council and shall be on such terms and conditions as shall be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the franchisee or licensee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises, revocable licenses or other authorizations for use of the streets by any means, as the city deems appropriate. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. 
(g)  A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets to provide telecommunications services and shall be granted only if: 
(1)  The use or occupation of such streets, together with all revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) linear feet; or 
(2)  The use or occupation of such streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services to any person within the city. 
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in subsection (1) or (2) above, then such telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Sec. 4-23-3. - Compliance with rules; permits required. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the city may adopt rules, policies and requirements to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter. Each applicant, franchisee and licensee shall comply with such rules, policies and requirements. 
(b)  No person shall construct or install any equipment in the streets used to provide telecommunications services without first obtaining such permits or other authorizations as may be required by the city. No permits or other authorizations for such construction or installation shall be issued prior to the granting of a franchise or a revocable license pursuant to this chapter or such other authorization as may be required by applicable law. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Sec. 4-23-4. - Submission of application. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted to the commissioner of public works with a copy also to be submitted to the corporation counsel. 
(b)  An application shall contain the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license as the city may deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with applicable law: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person the city may contact concerning the application; 
(2)  A description of the telecommunications services proposed to be provided, including, without limitation, a description of facilities and equipment; 
(3)  A description of the proposed franchise area or in the case of a revocable license, the specifically identified streets and/or portions thereof proposed to be used; 
(4)  A proposed construction schedule and sequence; 
(5)  A map showing the proposed location of the applicant's telecommunications system; 
(6)  Proposed financing plans for the construction and operation of the telecommunications system by which the proposed telecommunications services would be provided; 
(7)  A description of the legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant to hold the franchise or revocable license; 
(8)  Ownership of the applicant and identification of all affiliated persons. 
(c)  The application fee for installation of small wireless facilities as defined by the Federal Communications Commission's Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order adopted September 26, 2018 (No. 18-133) shall be $500 for up to five (5) units and $100 for each additional unit proposed and a fee of $1,000 if a new pole is proposed for the facility. Said non recurring fee shall apply to the initial application for a small wireless facilities as part of the franchise agreement as well as subsequent requests for additional units in the future. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-23-5. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Sec. 4-23-6. - Design guidelines for small wireless facilities. 
The Commissioner of Public Works is hereby authorized to promulgate design guidelines for the installation of small wireless facilities as defined by the Federal Communications Commission's Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order adopted September 26, 2018 (No. 18-133). 
( Ord. of 4-1-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-23-7. - Negotiation of agreement. 
If an application is complete and otherwise complies with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city, including the provisions of this chapter, the city shall enter into negotiations with the applicant to determine whether such applicant and the city are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license in accordance with sections 4-23-10 and 4-23-11 of this chapter. The city may reject any application which is incomplete or otherwise fails to comply with applicable law, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97)  
Sec. 4-23-8. - Factors for review of application. 
(a)  In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise or revocable license, the common council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, provided such factors are consistent with applicable law, including without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise or the revocable license; 
(4)  Any services or uses of the streets that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise or revocable license; and the adverse impact of the proposed franchise or revocable license on the efficient use of the streets or utilities at present and in the future; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions, limitations, requirements and policies with respect to the franchise or the revocable license; 
(6)  The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise or revocable license agreement to protect the public interest, consistent with applicable law; and 
(7)  Any other public interest factors or considerations that the city has a lawful right to consider and that are deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(b)  Consistent with applicable law, the city may develop and implement policies and requirements to ensure that the streets have sufficient capacity reasonably to accommodate existing and future uses in a rational and efficient manner. In evaluating an applicant for a franchise or revocable license, the city may consider an applicant's proposals for addressing capacity needs and compliance with city policies and requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Sec. 4-23-9. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The common council may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the common council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and revocable licenses and to determine whether a franchise or revocable license should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the common council may seek advice from city officials, departments, agencies, boards, commissions or boards, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the common council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  Consist with applicable law, upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the common council, the common council may grant or deny the franchise or revocable license, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise or revocable license is granted. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Sec. 4-23-10. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise and/or in a separate written agreement. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not become effective until said separate ordinance becomes effective and any separate agreement is executed by both parties. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2  The franchise area and the telecommunications services to be offered; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which shall include the payment of fees and/or the provision of facilities or services; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  The obligation of the franchisee to supply an engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the applicant's telecommunications system, including any manholes or overhead poles, the size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or other enclosure, and the relationship of the system to all existing poles, utilities, sidewalks, pavement, telecommunications systems, and other improvements in the streets, all of which shall be subject to approval by the appropriate city departments; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the franchise will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest, consistent with applicable law. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Sec. 4-23-11. - Terms and conditions of revocable license. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any revocable license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the revocable license and/or in a separate written agreement. A revocable license granted pursuant to this chapter shall not become effective until the separate ordinance granting the license becomes effective and any separate written agreement is executed by both parties. Such separate ordinance and/or written agreement shall address the same subjects listed in section 4-23-10 of this chapter subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The revocable license shall be for a term not to exceed ten (10) years from the date that the ordinance granting the revocable license becomes effective; 
(2)  The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or for the city's purposes; and 
(3)  The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses previously granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services to any person in the city. 
In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a telecommunications provider to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in section 4-23-11(3) of this chapter, then such telecommunications provider must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(Ord. of 12-1-97, § 1)  
Chapter 4-24 - IDENTITY THEFT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 4-24-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of an identity theft prevention program is to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in connection with the opening of certain accounts or certain existing accounts. Every creditor, including municipalities that offer or maintain one (1) or more covered accounts must develop and implement a written identity theft prevention program ("program"). Accordingly, the City of White Plains ("city") hereby developed this identity theft prevention program pursuant to the Federal Trade Commission's Red Flag Rule ("rule") which implements Section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003.16C.F.R. § 681.2. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Sec. 4-24-2. - Requirements. 
Under the red flag rule, every creditor is required to establish an "identity theft prevention program" tailored to its size, complexity and the nature of its operation. Each program must contain reasonable policies and procedures to: 
(1)  Identify relevant red flags for new and existing covered accounts and incorporate those red flags into the program; 
(2)  Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the program; 
(3)  Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identify theft; and 
(4)  Ensure the program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the creditor from identity theft. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Sec. 4-24-3. - Definitions. 
The red flag rule defines "identity theft" as fraud committed using the identifying information of another person. 
A red flag is defined as a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
According to the rule, a municipal utility is a creditor subject to the rule requirements. The rule defines creditors "to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where non-profit and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too are to be considered creditors." 
All the city's accounts that are individual utility service accounts held by customers of the city whether residential, commercial or industrial are covered by the rule. Under the rule, a "covered account" is: 
(1)  Any account the city offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and 
(2)  Any other account the city offers or maintains for which there is a reasonable foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft. 
Identifying information is defined under the rule as "any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person," including: name, address, telephone number, Social Security number, date of birth, government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's Internet Protocol address, or routing code. 
Program administrator is defined as the Mayor of the City of White Plains or a duly appointed designee. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Sec. 4-24-4. - Identification of red flags. 
In order to identify relevant red flags, the city considers the types of accounts that it offers and maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identity theft. The city identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed categories: 
(1)  Notification and warnings from credit reporting agencies. 
a.  Report of fraud accompanying a credit report; 
b.  Notice or report from a credit agency of a credit freeze on a customer or applicant; 
c.  Notice or report from a credit agency of an active duty alert for an applicant; and 
d.  Indication from a credit report of activity that is inconsistent with a customer's usual pattern or activity. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. 
a.  Identification document or card that appears to be forged, altered or inauthentic; 
b.  Identification document or card on which a person's photograph or physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the document; 
c.  Other document with information that is not consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person's signature on a check appears forged); and 
d.  Application for service that appears to have been altered or forged. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identifying information. 
a.  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other information the customer provides (example: inconsistent birth dates); 
b.  Identifying information presented that is inconsistent with other sources of information (for instance, an address not matching an address on a credit report); 
c.  Identifying information presented that is the same as information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent; 
d.  Identifying information presented that is consistent with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing address); 
e.  Social Security number presented that is the same as one given by another customer; 
f.  An address or phone number presented that is the same as that of another person; 
g.  A person fails to provide complete personal identifying information on an application when reminded to do so (however, by law Social Security numbers must not be required); and 
h.  A person's identifying information is not consistent with the information that is on file for the customer. 
(4)  Suspicious account activity or unusual use of account. 
a.  Change of address for an account followed by a request to change the account holder's name; 
b.  Payments stop on an otherwise consistently up-to-date account; 
c.  Account used in a way that is not consistent with prior use (example: very high activity); 
d.  Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned as undeliverable; 
e.  Notice to the city that a customer is not receiving mail sent by the city; 
f.  Notice to the city that an account has unauthorized activity; 
g.  Breach in the city's computer system security; and 
h.  Unauthorized access to or use of customer account information. 
(5)  Alerts from others. 
Notice to the city from a customer, identity theft victim, law enforcement or other person that it has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Sec. 4-24-5. - Detecting red flags. 
(a)  New accounts. In order to detect any of the red flags identified above associated with the opening of a new account, city personnel will take the following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account: 
(1)  Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, driver's license or other identification; 
(2)  Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's license or other identification card); 
(3)  Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity; and 
(4)  Independently contact the customer. 
(b)  Existing accounts. 
(1)  Verify the identification of customers if they request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email); 
(2)  Verify the validity of requests to change billing addresses; and 
(3)  Verify changes in banking information given for billing and payment purposes. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Sec. 4-24-6. - Preventing and mitigating identify theft. 
(a)  Prevent and mitigate. 
(1)  Continue to monitor an account for evidence of identifying theft; 
(2)  Contact the customer; 
(3)  Change any passwords or other security devices that permit access to accounts; 
(4)  Not open a new account; 
(5)  Close an existing account; 
(6)  Reopen an account with a new number; 
(7)  Notify the program administer for determination of the appropriate step(s) to take; 
(8)  Notify law enforcement; or 
(9)  Determine that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances. 
(b)  Protect customer identifying information. In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, the city will take the following steps with respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information: 
(1)  Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure; 
(2)  Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information; 
(3)  Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a set period of time; 
(4)  Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information; 
(5)  Request only the last four (4) digits of Social Security numbers (if any); 
(6)  Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and 
(7)  Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility purposes. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Sec. 4-24-7. - Program updates. 
This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the city from identity theft. At least on an annual basis, the program administrator will consider the city's experiences with identity theft situation, changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and prevention methods, changes in types of accounts the city maintains and changes in the city's business arrangements with other entities. After considering these factors, the program administrator will determine whether changes to the program, including the listing of red flags, are warranted. If warranted, the program administrator will update the program or present the common council with his or her recommended changes and the common council will make a determination of whether to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Sec. 4-24-8. - Program administration. 
Responsibility for developing, implementing and updating this program lies with an identity theft committee for the city: The committee is headed by a program administrator, or his or her appointee. Two (2) or more other individuals appointed by the program administrator comprise the remainder of the committee me membership. The program administrator will be responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate training of city staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances and considering periodic changes to the program. 
(1)  Staff training and reports. City staff responsible for implementing the program shall be trained either by or under the direction of the program administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive steps to be taken with a red flag is detected. 
(2)  Service provider arrangements. In the event the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one (1) or more accounts, the city will take the following steps to ensure the service provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent and mitigate the risk of identity theft. 
a.  Require, by contract, that service providers have such policies and procedures in place; and 
b.  Require, by contract, that service providers review the city's program and report any red flags to the program administrator. 
(Res. of 12-1-08)  
Chapter 4-25 - VIDEO CAMERA SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 4-25-1. - Requirements for video camera systems. 
It shall be required that the following business establishments: businesses that are licensed to sell alcohol by the State of New York to the public for consumption, either on or off premises; businesses whose premises are regularly open to the public for any amount of time between the hours of 12:00 a.m. midnight and 4:00 a.m.; check cashing businesses; licensed second hand dealers that buy and sell precious metals, pharmacies that are licensed by the State of New York; and pawn shops that are licensed by the City of White Plains, (hereinafter collectively referred to in this Chapter as "businesses") install and maintain a video camera system (hereinafter referred to as "system") that conforms with the following requirements: 
(a.)  The video cameras shall be installed at or near each entrance or exit regularly used by customers or employees. Said cameras shall be positioned so as to view and record a full frame of the individual's face as he/she is entering the business establishment, and, to the extent practicable, activity within 15 feet of the area around each entrance or exit; 
(b.)  The video cameras shall be sufficiently light sensitive and provide sufficient image resolution (supported by additional lighting if necessary) to produce easily discernible images recorded at all times; 
(c.)  The video cameras shall record at a minimum speed of eight frames per second; 
(d.)  The video camera images shall be capable of being viewed through use of appropriate technology, including but not limited to a computer screen or closed circuit television monitor; 
(e.)  The video recorder shall be digital in nature and be capable of transferring the recorded images to a portable, digital form of media; 
(f.)  The video cameras shall not have an audio capability; 
(g.)  The video cameras shall be maintained in good working condition; 
(h.)  The video cameras shall be in operation and recording during all hours of operation of the business and for two hours after the business closes; 
(i.)  The recordings made by video cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this section shall be indexed by dates and times. 
(Ord. of 2-3-14, § 1)  
Sec. 4-25-2. - Operating procedures. 
The businesses subject to the provisions of this Chapter must comply with the following requirements in relation to the preservation of the recordings, storage of the system, availability of recordings, dissemination of recordings, inspections of systems, and certification of compliance: 
(a.)  The recordings made by video cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this Chapter must be preserved for a minimum of seven (7) days. 
(b.)  The recordings made by video cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this Chapter must be made available to the White Plains Department of Public Safety for purposes of an official investigation or when approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety or his/her designee. 
(c.)  The recordings must be turned over to the White Plains Department of Public Safety upon its demand while the business is open and or as soon as possible if the business in closed. 
(d.)  All recordings made by video cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this Chapter while in the possession of the business shall be stored in a locked receptacle, preferably located in a controlled access area, to which only authorized personnel have access, or shall otherwise be secured so that only authorized personnel may access such video recordings. 
(e.)  The establishment shall keep a log of all instances of requests for, access to, dissemination and use of, recorded materials made by video cameras installed and maintained pursuant to this Chapter. Copies of the access log shall be provided to the White Plains Department of Public Safety upon demand. 
(f.)  The video camera system must be available to the White Plains Building and Public Safety Departments for inspections, at all times, during which the business is open to the public to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(g.)  Each business establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter shall submit a Certification Report to the Department of Public Safety, on a form prescribed by said department by January 31 of each year. The report shall certify that the business has complied with this section. 
(Ord. of 2-3-14, § 1)  
Sec. 4-25-3. - Installation of video camera systems. 
The businesses subject to the provisions of this Chapter must comply with the Building Code and Electrical Code of the State of New York and the City of White Plains' Supplemental Building Code when installing and maintaining the video camera system. 
(Ord. of 2-3-14, § 1)  
Sec. 4-25-4. - Penalties. 
Any person or business who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be subject to a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each day said violation continues to exist, or be subject to imprisonment not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day said violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 2-3-14, § 1)  
Chapter 4-26 - Filming 
 
Sec. 4-26-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
(a)  Filming. The taking of still or motion pictures either on film, videotape, photograph, digital recording, or by similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes intended for viewing on television, in theaters, video streaming, or for institutional uses. The provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to include the "filming" of news stories within the City of White Plains. 
(b)  Public Lands. Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square, public park or playground or any other public place, including a municipal parking area, or public building within the City of White Plains which is within the jurisdiction and control of the City of White Plains. 
(c)  Private Land. Any land within the City of White Plains that is not public land, a public place or a public building. 
(d)  Staging. Any and all activity involved with or incidental to filming such as, but not limited to, the parking of equipment vehicles, motor vehicles or trailers, the placement of generators or other mechanical equipment or lighting, the erection of tents or similar temporary structures, or the placement or storage of miscellaneous material or items. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-26-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person or organization or entity shall film, permit filming, or stage for filming on public or private land within the City of White Plains without first having obtained a permit from the office of the Mayor, which permit shall set forth the approved location of such filming and the approved duration of such filming by specific reference to day or dates. The City of White Plains shall be acknowledged in the film credits for any feature film that shoots for ten (10) or more days on public land or private land in the City of White Plains. Said permit must be readily available for inspection by City officials at all times at the site of the filming. 
(b)  All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the office of the Mayor during normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form approved by the office of the Mayor and be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by this Chapter in Section 4-26-11 herein. The application shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person or entity making the film; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone of the location coordinator or other contact person, such as the on site coordinator; 
(3)  Purpose of the filming; 
(4)  Specific location of each property to be used in the filming; 
(5)  Dates and times of the day that the property will be used; 
(6)  Name and address of the property owner; 
(7)  Consent of the owner of the property; 
(8)  The number of actors, extras, crew and all other persons who will participate in the filming; 
(9)  The estimated number and description of types of vehicles to be used by the crew, including vehicles used for transportation; 
(10)  A description of the arrangements for parking for the crew and work vehicles; 
(11)  A description of sanitary arrangements to be made for crew and bystanders; 
(12)  A description of crowd control measures; 
(13)  A description of cleanup methods to be used; 
(14)  A description of any event which may cause public alarm, including, but not limited to: pyrotechnic activity, aviation activity, motor vehicle activity, weapon activity, use of animals, or physical confrontations. 
(15)  A description of any special electrical requirements and the methods of satisfying those requirements, including all electrical permits required. 
(16)  Such other information as may be required by the office of the Mayor to protect the health, safety and welfare of residents of the City of White Plains. 
(d)  The Mayor or his or her designee may grant, deny or grant the permit with restrictions and/or conditions. 
(e)  As provided in Section 4-26-6 herein, the Mayor or his or her designee may deny an application for a filming permit if it should be determined, in writing, that it will create a dangerous condition, interfere with the use of the City streets or public places, create a nuisance to the City residents , or violate any provisions of the White Plains Charter and Municipal Code. 
(f)  The City reserves the right to cancel a filming permit in the event of adverse or inclement weather, as such filming which could pose an impediment to the City's operation of its streets or other public places. 
(g)  If a permit is issued and, due to adverse or inclement weather or other good cause, filming does not in fact take place on the date(s) specified, the office of the Mayor may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other provisions of this Chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this permit, provided that such filming is in the same location(s) and for the same duration as specified in the original permit. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-26-3 - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  No permits shall be issued by the office of the Mayor unless applied for prior to five (5) days before the requested shooting date; provided, however, the Mayor or his or her designee may waive the five-day period if, in his or her judgment, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and adjacent property owners or tenants do not need to be notified. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for filming upon public land(s) unless the applicant shall provide the City of White Plains with satisfactory proof of the following: 
(1)  Proof of insurance coverage as follows: 
The applicant shall procure and maintain for the duration of the filming the following insurance coverage protecting against claims for injuries to persons (including death) or damage to property which may arise in connection with the applicant's products and operations of applicant and premises occupied or used by the applicant and motor vehicles owned, leased, hired, or borrowed by the applicant, its agents, representatives, employees, vendors, or subcontractors: 
(i)  Comprehensive Commercial General Liability, including products and completed operation and damage to rented premises: a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000) limit per occurrence and $3,000,000 in the general aggregate for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage; 
(ii)  Automobile Liability: a minimum of three million dollars ($3,000,000) combined single limit per accident for bodily injury and property damage; and 
(iii)  New York State Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance in accordance with statutory requirements. When an entity headquartered outside New York State provides the City of White Plains with a Certificate of Insurance for Workers' Compensation and Employer's Liability, the entity shall reflect in the Description of Operation section of the Certificate the phrase "New York State included in coverage." 
(c)  The applicant, in its sole discretion, may obtain and maintain any and all of the foregoing insurance through a primary umbrella/excess coverage policy. 
(d)  The City of White Plains, its officials, officers, employees and volunteers are to be covered as additional insured with respect to liability arising out of the activities performed by or on behalf of the applicant, products and operations of the applicant and premises occupied or used by the applicant and motor vehicles owned, leased, hired or borrowed by the applicant. 
(e)  The applicant shall furnish the City with Certificate(s) of Insurance evidencing the above coverages. Each insurance policy shall: 
(1)  not be suspended, voided, canceled or reduced in coverage or in limits without thirty (30) days prior written notice having being received by the City's Commissioner of Finance; 
(2)  be placed with insurers admitted in New York State with an A.M. Best's rating of no less than A-. When an entity is headquartered outside New York State and their insurers are not admitted in New York State, the insurance policies must be placed with insurers admitted in the state where the entity is headquartered with an A.M. Best rating of no less than A-. 
(3)  include a Waiver of Subrogation clause in favor of the City of White Plains; 
(4)  include an endorsement clarifying that the applicant and/or the applicant's insurance(s) is/are primary and Non-Contributory to any insurance the City of White Plains may maintain; 
(5)  include an Occurrence Policy Form; and 
(6)  have a policy deductible that does not exceed $10,000. 
(f)  To the fullest extent permitted by New York State law, the applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any claims, damages, losses and expenses, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting from products and operations of the applicant and premises occupied or used by the applicant and motor vehicles owned, leased, hired, or borrowed by the applicant, its contractors, vendors, or their respective employees or agents provided such claims, damages, losses or expenses are attributable to bodily injury, sickness, disease or death, or to injury to or destruction of tangible property, including the loss of use resulting therefrom. Such obligation shall not be construed to negate, abridge or reduce other rights or obligations of indemnity which would otherwise exist to a party or person described herein. 
(g)  The posting of a maintenance bond in the amount of $2500.00 running in favor of the City of White Plains and protecting and insuring that the location utilized will be left after filming, in a satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and equipment, and that due observance of all City laws and regulations will be followed. Within twenty-one (21) days of the completion of the filming, the City of White Plains will return the bond if there has been no damage to public property or public expense caused by the filming. 
(h)  The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Department of Public Safety with respect thereto. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-26-4. - Interference with public activity; notice of filming. 
(a)  The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public streets. 
(b)  The holder of a permit shall avoid any interference with previously scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible, any interference with normal public activity on such public lands. Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at least three (3) days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed that objections may be filed with the City Clerk for submission to the office of the Mayor, said objections to form a part of the applicant's application and be considered in the review of same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners shall be submitted to the City Clerk within two (2) days of the requested shooting date. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-26-5. - [Permitted hours of filming.] 
Filming in residential zones shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., provided that all requests for night scenes shall be approved in the permit to be granted in accordance with Section 4-26-7 hereof. The setup, production and breakdown required by all filming shall be included in the hours set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-26-6. - Refusal to issue permit; employment of police and electrician. 
(a)  The Mayor or his or her designee may refuse to issue a permit whenever he or she determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the application and a report thereon by the Department of Public Safety and other City agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/or the time set forth in the application would violate any law or would unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Further, the City of White Plains reserves the right to require one or more on-site police officers in situations where the proposed production may impede the proper flow of traffic, the cost of said police officer to be borne by the applicant as a cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines are to be utilized by the production, an on-site licensed electrician may be similarly required if the production company does not have a licensed electrician on staff. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-26-7. - Waiver of requirements of chapter by office of the mayor. 
The office of the Mayor may authorize filming other than during the hours herein described. In determining whether to allow an extension of hours under this section, the Mayor or his or designee shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  Traffic congestion at the location caused by vehicles to be parked on the public street. 
(2)  Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public streets. 
(3)  When the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public streets or public parking during the course of the filming. 
(4)  Nature of film shoot itself; e.g., indoor or outdoors; day or night; on public or private lands. 
(5)  Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the City of White Plains, if any. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-26-8. - Copies of permits; inspections. 
Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Departments of Public Safety, Parking and Public Works, the City Clerk, the Corporation Counsel, and other appropriate City departments. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or other City inspectors to inspect the site and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all safety instruction issued by the Fire Prevention Bureau or other City inspectors. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-26-9. - Reimbursement of certain costs. 
In addition to any other fees mentioned in this Chapter, the applicant shall reimburse the City of White Plains for any lost revenue, such as parking meter revenue, repairs to public property or other revenues that the City was prevented from deriving because of filming. The applicant shall also be responsible for costs with City of White Plains personnel required to ensure health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, police, firefighters, public works employees and safety inspectors. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Sec. 4-26-10. - Fees. 
(1)  Basic filming permit: 
For a crew of fewer than three (3) persons: Three hundred fifty dollars ($350) per day. 
For a crew of three (3) to fifteen (15) persons: One thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100) the first day and seven hundred fifty ($750) each day thereafter. 
For a crew of greater than fifteen (15) persons: One thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600) the first day and one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100) each day thereafter. 
(2)  Staging permit: 
Staging in the City of White Plains for filming outside of the City that includes more than three equipment vehicles, motor vehicles or trailers, or any combination thereof: Five hundred dollars ($500) per day. 
(3)  Expedited permit: 
Where an applicant requests a waiver of the provision of Section 4-26-3(a) requiring expedited processing of a permit application submitted less than five (5) business days prior to the filming date, the fee for processing the application on an expedited basis shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) in addition to the basic filming permit fee. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 1, eff. 7-1-19 ; Ord. of 8-5-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-26-11. - Violation and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1500.00 for each day or part thereof that such filming or related activities are conducted. 
(Ord. of 10-5-15, § 1)  
Chapter 4-27 - VALET PARKING 
 
Sec. 4-27-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Commissioner: The Commissioner of Parking, or his or her designee. 
On-street valet parking service: A valet parking service in which the valet operator receives a vehicle from or returns a vehicle to a customer at an area in a public street. 
Person: A person, as referred to herein shall include an individual, business, corporation, partnership or other legally recognized entity. 
Service location: The location of the business sponsoring the valet parking service. 
Sponsor: Any person or entity who operates, or causes to be operated, a valet parking service in the street space in front of, adjacent or contiguous to the sponsor's place of business. 
Traffic control device: A cone, sign, or meter bag that has been approved by the Commissioner. 
Valet loading area: The street space along the curbline of a public sidewalk area, as approved by the Common Council, where a valet operator may receive vehicles from and return vehicles to members of the public, but at no time shall any vehicle be parked in this area during the approved hours of the valet parking service. 
Valet operator: The person or entity, including employees, agents and representatives of the approved person or entity, that provides valet parking services to members of the public. 
Valet parking area: The off-street area designated and reserved for the parking of patron vehicles. 
Valet parking plan: A written plan describing the location where the valet parking operation will be performed including the valet parking area, the number of parking spaces exclusively available for use by the valet operator, and a map depicting the placement of traffic control devices, the valet loading area and the routes used when moving a vehicle. 
Valet parking service: The service of receiving, parking, and returning vehicles for the customers of a business. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-2. - Restriction of on-street valet parking. 
On-street valet parking service is permitted only as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-3. - Valet parking rules and regulations. 
The Commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement this Chapter, which rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk. The Commissioner shall also establish rates and regulations for the use of the valet loading area, the valet parking area, and for valet parking meter bags. The valet parking meter bags shall cover parking meters in approved valet loading areas. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-4. - Insurance and indemnification. 
A.  Insurance. A valet operating permit holder must maintain general liability insurance and motor vehicle insurance coverage naming the City as an additional insured in an amount and upon such terms and conditions as required by the Commissioner as outlined in the valet parking rules and regulations established pursuant to section 4-27-3. 
B.  Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by New York State law, the valet operator and sponsor shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, it's officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any claims, damages, losses and expenses, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting from: (1) any use or performance under the permit; (2) the activities and/or operations of the valet operator or sponsor and their employees, subcontractors, agents or assigns; (3) any condition of property used in the operation of the valet services; or (4) any acts, errors or missions including without limitation, professional negligence of the valet operator or sponsor and their employees, subcontractors, agents or assigns in connection with the valet parking operation. This indemnity includes but is not limited to, personal injury, including death, and property or other damage sustained by any person or persons. Such obligation shall not be construed to negate, abridge or reduce other rights or obligations of indemnity which would otherwise exist to a party or person described in this paragraph. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-5. - Valet operating permit required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an on-street valet parking service without a valet operating permit issued under this Chapter by the Commissioner. 
B.  A person may operate a valet parking service conducted entirely on private property without a valet operating permit. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-6. - Application for on-street valet operating permit. 
A.  To obtain or renew an on-street valet operating permit a person must: 
1.  Submit an application to the Commissioner on a form prescribed by the Commissioner; 
2.  Pay the application fee, when applicable; 
3.  Pay the annual permit fee for the location at which the applicant intends to provide valet parking services; and 
4.  Pay the annual fee for the use of the valet loading area, the annual fee for meter bags, if applicable, and the fee for valet permit parking, as specified in the valet rules and regulations. 
B.  An application for a valet operating permit must include; 
1.  The name, mailing address, and phone number of the valet operator and sponsor; 
2.  The name and address of the person, officer, partner or owner of the valet operator and sponsor requesting the valet operating permit; 
3.  The valet operator and sponsor's federal tax identification number; 
4.  The name and location of the service location at which the valet operator or sponsor intends to provide on-street valet parking service; 
5.  The location and number of parking spaces proposed to be utilized for the valet parking area including a written valet parking plan; 
6.  The hours of operation of the on-street valet parking service at the service location along with the proposed fee; 
7.  A description of the employee uniform to be used and the proposed minimum number of employees at the site; 
8.  A description of the routes to be used between any valet loading area, valet parking area, and back to the initial pickup point; 
9.  Disclosure of all prior valet operating permits issued to the sponsor or valet operator by the City and/or any other municipality including a list of lawsuits resulting in a finding of liability or any prosecutions resulting in a guilty plea or verdict that relate to the operation of the valet parking services; 
10.  For each and every employee of the valet operator, the valet operator shall disclose all felony criminal offenses, and all misdemeanor offenses relating to driving or intoxication, for which the person has been convicted, including the nature of the offense and the place and date of conviction; 
11.  A copy of any written contract, lease or license between the valet operator or sponsor and the private operator of any parking facility or storage area designated as the valet parking area, which agreement shall contain a provision that it cannot be canceled without at least thirty (30) days' written notice to the other party and to the City. Such cancellation may result in the suspension or revocation of the valet operating permit. 
12.  Documentation showing that the valet operator or sponsor has an insurance policy as required by section 4-27-4; 
13.  Certification that each of the valet operator's employees has a valid driver's license; 
14.  Certification that the valet operator's employees who are engaged in valet parking vehicles will wear retro-reflective safety vests or other retro-reflective material while working during the nighttime; 
15.  Certification that loading or offloading of customers from vehicles will occur only in the designated valet loading area; 
16.  A telephone number that will allow the Commissioner to contact a local employee, agent, representative or other person in charge of the valet parking services 24 hours a day; and 
17.  The location of any signs or attendance stands to be used by the valet operator at the service location and the designated valet loading area. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-7. - Issuance of valet operating permit. 
A.  The Commissioner shall issue a valet operating permit to operate in locations approved by the Common Council if the requirements of § 4-27-6 are complied with and the Commissioner determines that: 
1.  The sponsor and valet operator meet the requirements of this Chapter; and 
2.  There is an appropriate valet parking area. 
B.  The Commissioner shall list the following on the valet operating permit: 
1.  The service location that related to the on-street valet parking services; 
2.  The location of the requested valet loading area including the number, if any, and location of on-street parking spaces that the permit holder may use to receive vehicles from and return vehicles to the permit holder's customers; 
3.  The hours during which valet parking service may be provided at the service location; and 
4.  Any special conditions approved by the Commissioner to protect the public safety, the public's right to equal access to public property and to ensure noninterference with normal traffic flow. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-8. - Temporary or special event valet operating permit. 
A valet operator with a valid permit may apply for a temporary or special event operating permit for a nonrecurring special event or for a new location where valet service will be provided for 20 calendar days or less. 
The application for a temporary or special event valet operating permit should be filed at least 30 business days prior to the time the valet service is required. The City cannot guarantee approval of a temporary or special event valet operating permit if filed less than 30 business days in advance. Applications must be accompanied by the fee specified herein. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-9. - Duties and responsibilities of valet operator. 
A.  The valet operator shall place the valet operator's booth or stand at the service location in the sidewalk or public right-of-way, in a manner preserving the unobstructed pedestrian pathway, as approved by the Commissioner. 
B.  The valet operator shall provide a retro-reflective safety vest or other retro-reflective material to an employee who enters the street while on duty during nighttime hours. All employees shall be required to wear the uniform described in the approved application, a name tag and the retro-reflective vest or retro-reflective material while on duty. 
C.  The valet operator is responsible for the security of keys left with the valet operator by a customer. The valet operator shall keep the keys in a secure place. 
D.  The valet operator shall place a valet parking tag inside each customer's vehicle that includes the following information, which must be clearly legible from the outside of the vehicle: 
1.  The name of the valet operator; and 
2.  A telephone number that will allow the customer to obtain information about the valet parking operator twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
The information required above may be provided by a recorded message that informs a customer of the time and place the customer may obtain keys left in the valet operator's custody, and the location of the parking facility at which the valet operator parks vehicles for each designated valet loading area. 
E.  The valet operator shall maintain a copy of the permit, which shall be visibly displayed in a manner approved by the Commissioner, and the route diagram at every valet loading and parking area. 
F.  The valet operator shall post a sign, approved by the Commissioner, during business hours at each location where the valet operator takes possession of vehicle. The sign must identify the valet operator, the rates charged, the hours of operation and a telephone number where an employee, agent or representative of the valet operator may be reached 24 hours a day. 
G.  The valet operator shall cover all parking meters that are present at the approved valet loading area with valet parking meter bags in a manner approved by the Commissioner. 
H.  The valet operator shall provide the on-street valet parking service to the general public, at the rate specified in the approved application, for any passenger motor vehicle, without restriction. 
I  It shall be unlawful for the valet operator, its employees or agents, to provide or engage in valet parking service without a valid valet operating permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. A valet operating permit that has expired or that has been suspended or revoked is not a valid permit. 
J.  It shall be unlawful for the valet operator, its employees or agents, to provide or engage in valet parking service in violation of the terms and conditions of a valet operating permit that pertains to the valet parking service. 
K.  It shall be unlawful for the valet operator, its employees or agents, to stop or direct traffic. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-10. - Restrictions on handling vehicles. 
A.  A valet operator may not: 
1.  Double park a vehicle; 
2.  Leave a vehicle unattended in the street except in the designated valet loading area; 
3.  Receive or return a customer's vehicle at a location other than the designated valet loading area; 
4.  Park a vehicle on private property unless written authorization has been obtained from the owner of the property; or 
5.  Violate a law relating to the stopping, standing, or parking of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-11. - Parking citations. 
The valet operator shall immediately inform a customer of a parking citation issued to the customer's vehicle during the time the vehicle was parked by the valet operator. In addition, the valet operator shall be responsible for the fees associated with any violation issued while the customer's vehicle was in the custody of the valet operator. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-12. - Indication of designated valet loading area. 
The valet operator shall: 
A.  Utilize the parking meter bags or signage approved by the Commissioner that identifies the designated valet loading area and clearly state that the parking meter spaces in the designated area are reserved for valet parking only; 
B.  Install traffic control devices at the designated area indicating the location and extent of the designated area reserved for valet parking; and 
C.  Only use signage as required in subsections A and B above, that has been properly approved by the Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-13. - Transfer of valet operating permit. 
A.  A valet operating permit may not be transferred to a subsequent owner or valet operator of the business at the designated valet loading area. 
B.  A new owner or valet operator of the business must file an application under section 4-27-6. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-14. - Denial of permit. 
A.  The Commissioner shall deny an application for a permit under this Chapter if the applicant: 
1.  Makes a false statement on the application; 
2.  Fails to meet the application requirements of this Chapter; or 
3.  Has outstanding collection accounts with the City of White Plains. 
B.  In addition to the requirements of subsection (a), the Commissioner shall deny an application for a valet operating permit if the Commissioner determines that the proposed valet parking service at the location may: 
1.  Unreasonably interfere with normal traffic flow on a public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public property; or 
2.  Create a hazard to public safety. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-15. - Revocation, modification or temporary suspension of permit. 
A.  Revocation and modification. 
1.  The Commissioner may revoke or modify a permit under this section if the permit holder is convicted of violating this Chapter at the designated valet loading area on more than three incidents within a twelve-month period. 
2.  The Commissioner may revoke a permit at any time if the Commissioner determines that the applicant made a false statement on the permit application. 
3.  A permit may be revoked or modified after a hearing if it is determined, by substantial evidence, that: 
(a)  The permit holder, or any of its drivers, employees or agents have operated or parked vehicles, or operated the valet parking service, contrary to law including the use of unlicensed drivers or the failure to comply with this Chapter or any other provision of the Municipal Code, Traffic Ordinance, or state law in connection with the operation under permit; or 
(b)  The operations constitute a danger to public health, safety or welfare including without limitation, interference with the normal flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic on any public right-of-way or city owned property; or that the operations constitute a public nuisance. 
B.  Suspension. 
1.  The Commissioner may temporarily suspend or modify a permit without a hearing if: 
(a)  A temporary street closure includes the designated valet loading area; 
(b)  An emergency requires the suspension or modification; 
(c)  The contract, lease or license for the designated valet parking area is cancelled until such time as the valet operator obtains a valet parking area approved by the Commissioner; or 
(d)  The valet operator or sponsor fail to maintain the minimum levels and standard of general liability and motor vehicle insurance until such time as the appropriate insurance is provided. 
If the Commissioner suspends or modifies a permit due to a. or b. above, the Commissioner may allow the permit holder to temporarily conduct valet parking operations at an alternate location, approved by the Commissioner. 
2.  A police officer may suspend all operations of a valet parking operator, without a hearing, except for retrieval of vehicles already subject to valet parking, for the remainder of the that day's operation (which suspension may extend to 8:00 a.m. of the following day) upon: 
(a)  The occurrence, in said location, of any traffic accident arising out of operating conditions within or around a valet parking area or valet loading area, or where otherwise required because of an emergency situation whether or not arising from the operation of the valet parking operation; or 
(b)  A violation of the permit operating conditions that: (i) interfere, or threaten to interfere, with the public's use of the streets, the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public right-of-way, city owned property; or (ii) creates a hazard to public safety. 
C.  Notice and hearing. 
1.  Notice. If the Commissioner revokes a permit under this section, the Commissioner shall send notice of the proposed revocation or modification to the permit holder by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder's mailing address listed on the application. A notice mailed under this section is considered received on the 5th day after mailing, unless an earlier date is indicated on the return receipt. 
2.  Hearing. A permit may be suspended or revoked after a hearing, with at least five days notice to the permit holder, held by the Commissioner of Parking, the Commissioner of Public Safety and the Commissioner of Public Works or their designees, whereby it is determined that there was a violation of: this Chapter or any conditions set forth in the permit; or that the operation of the valet service of the poses a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community. 
3.  Determination. Ten (10) days after delivery of a notice of decision to revoke or suspend a permit, the City shall have the right to require the immediate removal of all obstructions in the public right-of-way, and may perform such removal if the permit holder fails to do so. The permit holder shall reimburse the City for any expense incurred by the City in removing any obstruction. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-16. - Fees. 
A.  Non-refundable application fee. The application for a valet operating permit shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
B.  Permit fee. The issuance or renewal of a valet operating permit shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) annually. 
C.  Application and temporary permit fee. The application for and issuance of a temporary permit shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
D.)  Operating without a permit. Any person who participates in a valet parking operation prior to obtaining a permit therefor shall pay a legalization fee equal to double the permit fee. The payment of the additional fee shall not relieve such person from the obligations imposed by this Chapter, or from the penalties otherwise prescribed herein. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 4-27-17. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or regulations hereunder or the terms and conditions of any permit issued hereunder shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense, by imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation exists and each instance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 2-1-16 , § 1)  
Chapter 4-28 - SHARED ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION DEVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-28. - Shared alternative transportation devices. 
Shared alternative transportation device refers to the shared used of a bicycle, scooter, or other transportation mode, excluding vehicles that must be registered with the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, that enables users to gain access to transportation modes on an as-needed basis. It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any shared alternative transportation device to store, park or otherwise maintain such device in the public right-of-way unless authorized and licensed pursuant to this Chapter. 
( Ord. of 8-6-18, § 2 )  
Sec. 4-28-1. - Pilot program. 
A.  Term of Pilot Program. A pilot program is hereby established for the Commissioner of Parking to administer a dockless bike share permit program for a period ending on the day following the first anniversary of the effective date of this Chapter. Following the expiration of the pilot period, this Chapter shall remain in effect unless terminated by the Common Council. 
B.  Modification or Termination of Pilot Program. Sixty (60) days before the first anniversary of the effective date of this Chapter, the Commissioner shall report to the Common Council on the effectiveness of the dockless bike share system permit pilot program. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Customer - a person who rents and uses a bicycle from a bike share operator. 
Dockless bike share system - a system which provides bicycles for short-term rentals for point-to-point trips, which bicycles may be locked and unlocked without the requirement of a bicycle rack or other docking station to be installed within the city. 
Dockless bike share operator or operator - a corporation, firm, joint venture, limited liability company, partnership, person, or other organized entity that operates a dockless bike share system, whether for profit or not-for-profit. 
Commissioner - the Commissioner of Parking, or his or her designee. 
Geofence - a virtual perimeter or geographic boundary, defined by global positioning system (GPS) or radio frequency identification (RFID) technology, that enables software to trigger a response when a mobile device enters or leaves a particular area. 
Rebalance - the collection and delivery by a dockless bike share operator of a bicycle, or multiple bicycles, from one location to another location within the operator's service area for the purpose of restoring the availability of bicycles to a desired service level. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-3. - Operations. 
Each bike share operator shall: 
(A)  Maintain a staffed operations center within the City limits; 
(B)  Maintain a 24-hour customer service phone number for customers to report concerns, complaints, or inquiries; 
(C)  Maintain a record of all bicycles, each assigned and tracked by operator with a unique identifier, to be deployed as part of the operator's dockless bike share system; 
(D)  Affix on each bicycle the following items: 
(1)  The contact information of the operator, including the website address; 
(2)  Contact information for operator's customer service department and a statement on how to report incorrectly parked bicycles, safety concerns, complaints, or questions; 
(3)  A clearly visible name, logo, trademark, or other identifying information of the operator; and 
(4)  Unique identification, consisting of numbers or letters or both. 
(E)  Notify customers via a web site or mobile device application of the following information: 
(1)  The items in subsection (5)(a)-(c) of this section; 
(2)  Customers are encouraged to wear helmets; 
(3)  Customers must follow all traffic laws; 
(4)  Customers may not ride bicycles on City sidewalks; and 
(5)  Customers must park the bicycles properly and in compliance with this Chapter and applicable laws. 
(F)  Provide customer payment options for cash-based and electronic methods; 
(G)  Be responsible for educating customers regarding the proper parking and safe use of a bicycle and knowledge of compliance with applicable laws; 
(H)  Provide the direct contact information to the City for the operator's staff responsible for relocating or rebalancing bicycles; 
(I)  Maintain staff to relocate or rebalance bicycles on a daily basis, in addition to the times provided under section 4-28-5 of this Code; 
(J)  Remove from the public right-of-way each bicycle that is inoperable, unsafe, or otherwise failing to meet the standards under section 4-28-4 of this Code, within the following times: 
(1)  Within four (4) hours of receiving notice between 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., seven days per week, except a holiday observed by the closure of City offices; and 
(2)  Within ten (10) hours of receiving notice during all other times. 
(K)  Fix, repair, or correct each bicycle that is inoperable, unsafe, or otherwise in violation of the standards under section 4-28-4 of this Code before re-deployment back into service; 
(L)  Be responsible for costs of repair to public infrastructure damaged by the use of its bicycles, and costs incurred by the city to remove and store bicycles that have been improperly parked or otherwise are required to be removed from the public right-of-way in this Chapter; 
(M)  Any bike share operator with a fleet size of three hundred (300) or more bicycles may be directed to deploy ten (10) percent or more of its fleet in underserved areas as determined by the Commissioner in consultation with the Department of Planning. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-4. - Bicycle standards. 
All bicycles deployed by a bike share operator shall meet the standards outlined in the following: 
(A)  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, Chapter II, Subchapter C, Part 1512 — Requirements for Bicycles, as may be amended; and 
(B)  International Standards Organization 43.150 — Cycles, subsection 4210, as may be amended. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-5. - Bicycle parking. 
A.  Parking Requirements. The bike share operator shall ensure that all bicycles are parked in the following manner: 
(1)  In an upright position on a hard surface; 
(2)  To allow unimpeded pedestrian travel space on a sidewalk to a width of at least four (4) feet; 
(3)  To allow unimpeded access to entrances to public or private property; 
(4)  To allow unimpeded access to all accessibility ramps. 
(5)  To allow unimpeded access to all bicycle parking areas, including any stationary fixture designed for the secure attachment of bicycles or any painted area designated for bicycle parking; 
(6)  To allow adequate area for unimpeded vehicular travel on any all public streets; and 
(7)  In an area or location which the Commissioner may specify. 
B.  Relocation or Removal of Illegally Parked Bicycles. The operator shall re-park or remove any bicycle that is parked in violation of this Chapter within the following times: 
(1)  Within four (4) hours of receiving notice between 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., seven (7) days per week, except a holiday observed by the closure of City offices; and 
(2)  Within ten (10) hours of receiving notice during all other times. 
C.  Relocation by City. The Commissioner may require any bicycle that is parked in the public right of way in violation of section (a) above, or is parked in one location for more than three consecutive days, be removed and taken to a city facility for storage at the expense of the operator. 
D.  Relocation Fee. If City employees or contractors remove or relocate a bicycle from a public right-of-way where a bicycle is prohibited, the Commissioner may assess a bicycle relocation fee, the amount of which shall be stated in the city fee schedule, against the dockless bike share operator. 
E.  Geofenced Parking. The Commissioner may create geofenced areas where bicycles must be parked. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-6. - Records and data sharing. 
A.  Records. The operator shall maintain records of its fleet and each unique identifier associated with each bicycle, bicycle locations, parking, customer membership, trip information regarding time and distance, and complaints received and time of response or if no response was made by the operator. On a regular basis to be determined by the Commissioner or within 2 business days of the Commissioner's request, the bike share operator shall deliver the records to the Commissioner in a format to be determined by the Commissioner. 
B.  Data Sharing. The bike share operator shall provide to the Commissioner real-time anonymized data on trips and other information regarding its dockless bike share system to be determined by the Commissioner. The operator's user agreement with each customer shall clearly indicate this data will be collected and shared by the operator with the City. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 4-28-7. - Permit. 
A.  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to operate a dockless bike share system within the City unless the operator possesses a valid permit for the dockless bike share system. 
B.  Permit Validity. A permit is valid only for operations of a dockless bike share system within the public right-of-way. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-8. - Permit. 
A bike share operator may submit an application for a new permit, or an application for a renewal, on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, which contains the following information: 
(A)  The name and form of business of the operator; 
(B)  The name, phone number, and street address (and mailing address if different) of the operator's agent for service of legal process; 
(C)  Proof that the Operator is currently operating in ten (10) markets in the United States with deployment of fifty (50) or more bicycles in each market for a period of sixty (60) days or more; 
(D)  The total fleet size the operator intends to deploy during the first 30-day period of the permit term, starting on the date of the permit application approval. For a new permit, the total fleet size shall not be more than one hundred fifty (150) bicycles during the first 30-day period. Following the first 30-day period of a new or renewal permit term, operator may deploy additional bicycles, and increase the size of its fleet, by complying with the requirements in section 4-28-10(B) of this Chapter, provided that any deployment of additional bicycles, and increase to the size of operator's fleet, shall be according to the limitations to be determined by the Commissioner based on the following criteria: 
(1)  The total fleet size, service area, and maintenance plan of the operator; 
(2)  Whether operator has the ability to meet increased demand for timely rebalance and relocation of the proposed additional bicycles to its fleet; 
(3)  Whether the deployment of additional bicycles in the City poses a risk to traffic or pedestrian safety concerns; and 
(4)  The potential risk to City property posed by the deployment of additional bicycles in the city. 
(E)  A photographic image or visual representation of each type of bicycle to be deployed as part of the operator's bike share system; 
(F)  A description of an internet-enabled mobile device application to be used by customers to register membership to use, pay for, lock, and unlock each bicycle; 
(G)  The service area at launch, including any area in which operator plans to expand its bike share system during the permit period; 
(H)  A maintenance plan which details operator's ability to maintain each bicycle in a safe and operable condition, including the operator's ability to recover and repair bicycles discovered or reported to be unsafe or inoperable before redeployment; 
(I)  A plan for operator to rebalance and relocate bicycles; 
(J)  A plan for educating customers on proper bicycle parking; 
(K)  A plan for educating customers on the safe use of a bicycle and knowledge of compliance with all applicable laws; 
(L)  A commitment and a plan for operator, upon possessing a fleet size of three hundred (300) or more bicycles, to deploy and maintain the availability of at least ten (10) percent of its fleet in locations which the Commissioner in consultation with the Department of Planning determines to be underserved areas; 
(M)  A document executed by the operator to certify that the operator's equipment complies with the requirements under section 4-28-4 of this Chapter; 
(N)  Proof of current coverage of insurance as required by section 4-28-11 of this Chapter. 
(O)  A bond as required by section 4-28-12 of this Chapter; and 
(P)  Any additional information as requested by the Commissioner for the administration of this article. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-9. - Permit fees. 
Each permit application shall include the payment of the following fees: 
Initial permit application 	$250.00 
Permit issuance 	$10.00 per bike 
Bicycle relocation 	$50.00 per bike 
Annual renewal fee 	$100.00 plus $10.00 per bike 
 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-10. - Permit issuance; denial; right to revoke. 
A.  Issuance. The Commissioner shall issue a new, amended or renewal permit upon review and approval within thirty (30) days of an operator's submission of an application that fully complies with this article. 
B.  Amendment. A bike share operator make request to amend the permit to increase to the size of its dockless bike share fleet by providing the following items to the Commissioner: 
(1)  Written notification of the fleet size increase; 
(2)  The unique identifier for each additional bicycle to be added to operator's fleet; and 
(3)  The fee for each additional bicycle, if such fee has not been paid by the operator. 
C.  Denial. The application shall be denied and no permit shall be issued if the Commissioner finds that: 
(1)  Any statement made in the application is incomplete, misleading, or false; 
(2)  The operator, its partners, officers, owners, and other principals have not paid to the city all fees due under this Chapter; or 
(3)  The operator has otherwise not complied with this Chapter. 
D.  Term. The Commissioner shall issue permits for a term of one year, starting from the date of approval. The initial application may be renewed annually. 
E.  Revocation. A permit issued hereunder may be revoked after a hearing, with at least five (5) days notice to the permit holder, held by the Commissioner of Parking, whereby it is determined that there was a violation of this Chapter, or any applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation. In addition to revoking the permit, the Commissioner may require an operator to remove, at the operator's cost, the operator's entire fleet of bicycles from the public right of way within ten (10) days of the date of written notice to the operator. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-11. - Insurance and indemnification. 
A.  Insurance. A bike share operator must maintain insurance in the form of commercial general liability, including contractual liability, bodily injury and property damage, personal and advertising injury, and products and completed operations coverage naming the City as an additional insured in an amount and upon such terms and conditions as required by the Commissioner as outlined in the bike share rules and regulations established pursuant to § 4-28-13. 
B.  Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by New York State law, the operator shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, it's officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers from and against any claims, damages, losses and expenses, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of or resulting from: (1) any use or performance under the permit; (2) the activities and/or operations of the operator and their employees, subcontractors, agents or assigns; (3) any condition of property used in the operation of the bike share system; or (4) any acts, errors or missions including without limitation, professional negligence of the operator or their employees, subcontractors, agents or assigns in connection with the bike share system. This indemnity includes but is not limited to, personal injury, including death, and property or other damage sustained by any person or persons. Such obligation shall not be construed to negate, abridge or reduce other rights or obligations of indemnity which would otherwise exist to a party or person described in this paragraph. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-12. - Bond 
Each operator shall furnish, along with the permit application, for the Commissioner's review and approval, a bond in an amount determined by the Commissioner to be adequate to cover the cost of removal of bicycles from the public right of way upon the revocation of a permit or the abandonment by operator of such bicycles. The form of the bond shall be approved by the Corporation Counsel. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-13. - Rules and regulations. 
The Commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations to implement this Chapter, which rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Sec. 4-28-14. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or regulations hereunder or the terms and conditions of any permit issued hereunder shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense, by imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation exists and each instance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1 )  
Chapter 4-29 - RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRY AND LICENSE PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted July 2, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as ch. 4-28. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, these provisions have been included as ch. 4-29, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 4-29-1. - Purpose. 
The City of White Plains finds that the establishment of a rental housing registry and license program is necessary to enhance the public health, safety, and welfare of tenants in certain rental properties by requiring that landlords of such rental properties proactively inspect their buildings on a regular basis to identify any building deficiencies and/or unsafe housing conditions and report those inspection results to the city. The collection of information associated with the landlord inspections, as well as building management information and the physical characteristics of each property, will strengthen the city's code enforcement capabilities. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings indicated. 
1.  "City" The City of White Plains. 
2.  "Commissioner" The Commissioner of the Department of Building or his/her duly authorized representative. 
3.  "Dwelling unit" A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
4.  "Inspector" A City of White Plains duly authorized individual that conducts inspections in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  "Multi Family Dwelling Unit" Three or more dwelling units within a building. 
6.  "Owner" Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to a property; or otherwise having control of a property; including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
7.  "Rent" A return in money, property or other valuable consideration (Including payment in-kind or for services or other thing of value) for use and occupancy or the right to use and occupancy of a dwelling unit, whether or not a legal relationship of landlord and tenant exists between the owner and the occupant or occupants thereof. 
8.  "Rental Housing Property" A parcel of real property, as shown on the latest equalized tax assessment roll as maintained by the assessor of the City of White Plains, upon which a rental housing unit is maintained. 
9.  "Rental Housing Unit" A dwelling unit that is being rented, or is intended to be rented. 
10.  "Tenant" A person or group of persons whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a rental housing unit. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-3. - Exemptions. 
Unless otherwise specified, the following rental housing units shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(a)  Owner occupied Single family dwelling units; 
(b)  Two (2) family dwelling units where one of the units is owner-occupied; 
(c)  Condominium and Co-operative buildings; 
(d)  Multifamily rental buildings with more than twelve (12) dwelling units; 
(e)  Hotels, Motels, Rooming Houses, Group Homes, Nursing Homes and Assisted Living facilities; or 
(f)  Multifamily rental buildings managed by a State or Federal governmental agency or a quasi-governmental agency. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-4. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, trust, partnership, or other legal entity, to conduct, keep, manage, or operate, or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated any rental housing unit until a Rental Housing License is issued by the Department of Building. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-5. - Duration of license. 
Licenses shall be valid from January 1 through December 31 of a given year unless sooner terminated or revoked. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-6. - License application. 
An owner of rental housing property must complete a City of White Plains Rental Housing License Program application and submit the completed application, along with all applicable fees, to the Department of Building. All applications for existing rental housing shall be submitted between the first of October and the first of December of each calendar year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an application for a rental license must be filed at least thirty days prior to offering a dwelling unit for rent. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-7. - License changes and transfers. 
A.  An owner holding a rental housing license shall notify the Department of Building within 30 calendar days of any transfer of ownership of the rental property with the new property owner contact information. 
B.  Any person who takes ownership of a licensed rental property may apply to the Department of Building within 30 calendar days after taking ownership of the rental property for a transfer of the license for the unexpired portion of the term for which the license was issued. 
C.  Whenever the ownership of a rental housing property is transferred, the transferee shall promptly notify all tenants of the rental housing property of the name, street address, email address and telephone number of the transferee on matters relating to the rental housing property. 
D.  The Department of Building shall be notified within 15 calendar days of any change to the information provided in the Rental Housing License program application. 
E.  The owner of a rental housing property shall notify the Department of Building in writing when a property becomes vacant. Such notification shall include the estimated duration of the vacancy and shall clearly indicate the emergency contact information for the property during the vacancy period. 
F.  The Department of Building may reject an application or suspend or revoke a license if the applicant or licensee does not provide the notification required by this section. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-8. - Provisional license. 
The Commissioner may issue a provisional license to the owner of an existing rental property who has submitted an application, paid the license fee and had an inspection by the Department of Building that resulted in written orders to correct violations/deficiencies. A provisional license authorizes the continued occupancy of the rental dwelling unit (s) as long as the violations/deficiencies are not hazardous to the occupant(s) and the building is not over- occupied or illegally occupied. A provisional license is valid for up to 180 days. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-9. - Application process. 
A.  Initial Application. 
1.  An applicant for a Rental Housing License shall submit the following upon initial application: 
a)  Completed rental housing license application form; 
b)  Minimum 8-1/2"x11" sketch of each floor of the building showing dwelling unit(s) and common areas and providing approximate dimensions of each bedroom. Plans do not need to be drawn to scale but must be legible and each space shall be properly labeled (e.g. living rooms, kitchens, bedrooms, storage rooms, mechanical spaces, etc.); and 
c)  Application fee. 
2.  An inspection by the Department of Building of the rental housing property including all public and private areas of the premises shall occur and a Rental Housing License Inspection Report shall be completed. 
3.  The Department of Building shall review the application for completeness and accuracy. The Department of Building shall issue a Rental Housing License certificate if the application is deemed complete and there are no outstanding Building Code violations for the property that affect the health and safety of the occupants. 
4.  The Building Commissioner or his/her designee may deny a Rental Housing License by notifying the property owner in writing. A license may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
a)  The applicant is found to have made false statements, misrepresentations, or fraudulent statements on the Rental Housing License application or other information required by this Chapter; 
b)  The applicant does not meet all the requirements set forth in the application; 
c)  The premises do not meet the minimum standards required by applicable state and city codes; or 
d)  The property owner fails to correct violations identified during the inspection. 
B.  Annual Renewal. 
1.  Rental Housing Licenses shall be renewed annually as follows: 
a)  The owner shall inspect each rental housing unit for compliance with the requirements contained in the Rental Housing License Inspection Report form provided by the Department of Building; 
b) Immediately make repairs to all items that are not in compliance 
c) Complete and submit the Rental Housing License Inspection Report form to the Department of Building along with a completed application and updated floor sketches (if required) and the annual license fee. 
The Department of Building shall review the application for completeness and accuracy and shall issue a Rental Housing License Renewal Certificate if the application is deemed complete and upon a finding that there are no outstanding Building Code violations for the property that affect the health and safety of the occupants. 
2.  Licensees who fail to renew by the renewal date shall be subject to late fees per section 4-29-14. Renewal applications shall not be accepted until all late fees are paid. The late fees shall be exclusive of the renewal application fee and any penalties that may be imposed by a court. 
C.  Denial. The Building Commissioner or his/her designee may deny the renewal of a Rental Housing License by notifying the property owner in writing. A license may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
a.  If the applicant is found to have made false statements, misrepresentations, or fraudulent statements on the Rental Housing License application or other information required by this Chapter; 
b.  If the applicant does not meet all the requirements set forth in the application; 
c.  If the premises do not meet the minimum standards required by applicable state and city codes; or 
d.  If the property owner fails to correct violations identified during the inspection. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-10. - Inspections. 
A.  All rental housing property are subject to inspection by the Department of Building to determine the condition of the rental housing units and to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
B.  The Building Commissioner or his/her designee is authorized to enter any rental housing property or any rental housing unit within the building, upon consent of the owner if the rental unit is unoccupied or upon consent of the occupant if the rental unit is occupied. The Building Commissioner or his/her designee may enter between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday or as scheduled with the owner and/or tenant. 
C.  The Building Commissioner or his/her designee is authorized to make an application to the City Court of White Plains or Supreme Court of Westchester County for the issuance of an administrative search warrant in order to conduct an inspection of any premises covered by this chapter where the owner refuses or fails to allow an inspection of its rental premises and where there is a reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-11. - Posting of license certificate. 
Owners shall conspicuously post their Rental Housing License Certificate within the building vestibule or lobby where it can be readily seen by all tenants. It shall be permanently affixed to the wall under clear glass or plastic. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-12. - Vacant buildings. 
If an owner that has a valid license elects to vacate a building, he/she shall notify the Department of Building immediately. The license for the building will remain in effect for the duration of the licensing period. The owner is not required to perform interior self-inspections while the building is vacant, however, it is the owner's responsibility to turn off gas at the street, secure all doors and windows and maintain exterior areas of the building/property in accordance with the New York State Property Maintenance Code and the White Plains Supplemental Building Code. Periodic inspections (at a minimum of once per month) of the property are required to ensure that the building remains secure. Re-occupancy and rental of the building after the license period has expired will require a new application. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-13. - Revocation and appeals. 
A.  A Rental Housing license may be revoked upon the occurrence of any of the following events: 
1.  If the applicant is found to have made false statements, misrepresentations, or fraudulent statements on the Rental Housing License application or other information required by this Chapter; 
2.  Upon a finding of guilt in City Court for failure to comply with any property maintenance, zoning, building, fire, or other applicable city, county, or state codes; or failure to correct deficiencies stated in Violation Notice(s) or Court Appearance Ticket(s). 
3.  The recipient of a provisional rental housing license fails to correct the deficiencies/violations prior to the 180 day expiration date. 
4.  Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or other relevant City of White Plains ordinances. 
B.  The Building Commissioner may revoke a Rental Housing license by notifying the owner in writing via hand delivery or certified mail. A license revocation shall take effect 14 business days after a notice of revocation is sent to the owner. Prior to the effective date of a revocation, a property owner may request a hearing. The Building Commissioner shall hold a hearing on the revocation, and shall issue a ruling in writing within seven business days of the conclusion of the hearing. 
C.  When a Rental Housing License has been revoked, or when an application for a Rental Housing License has been denied, it shall be unlawful for the property owner to rent or lease the rental housing unit(s) until the Rental Housing License for the property has been issued, re-issued or reinstated. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-14. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, association or corporation which violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of $200.00 per day for a first offense; $500.00 per day for a second offense; and $1,000.00 per day for a third or subsequent offense. Each and every day said violation continues to exist constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-15. - License fees. 
A non-refundable license application fee shall be paid upon the filing of an application for a Rental Housing License or for a renewal Rental Housing License in accordance with the following schedule: 
Initial License Application: 	$125.00 plus $10.00 per each non-owner occupied unit 
Annual Renewal License Application: 	One half the amount of the total Initial License Application fee 
Renewal Late Fee: 	$250.00 (up to seven (7) business days past expiration date 
Renewal Per Diem Late Fee 	$25.00 (beyond seven (7) day grace period) 
*Note: Applications that are more than 60 days late may be subject to court action. 
 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
Sec. 4-29-16. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect on July 3, 2018. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18 )  
TITLE V. - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
CHAPTER 
 5-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 5-2  ANIMALS AND FOWL 
 5-3  HANDBILLS 
 5-4  SHOPPING CARTS 
 5-5  WEEDS AND OTHER NOXIOUS MATERIALS 
 5-6  GRAFFITI 
 5-7  ENERGIZE NY OPEN C-PACE FINANCING PROGRAM 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Games of chance legalized, § 4-1-1; bingo legalized, § 4-1-2; motion pictures on Sunday, § 4-1-3; public sports on Sunday, § 4-1-4; rules and regulations to be followed when in parks and playgrounds, Ch. 6-2; skateboarding or playing ball on streets, § 7-2-3; parades, Ch. 8-4; fire bombs, § 9-6-15.112. 
 
Chapter 5-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 5-1-1. - Memorial Day. 
(a)  The legal holiday known as Memorial Day being by general consent set apart for rest, repose and patriotic observances and uses, and the observance thereof being for the general welfare and health of the community, the going of certain acts hereinafter specified, which are deemed serious interruptions and desecrations of the repose and patriotic liberty and sentiment of the community, are prohibited. 
(b)  All labor, manufactures and trades on such holiday are prohibited, excepting the works of necessity and charity, which includes whatever is needful during the holiday for the good order, health or comfort of the community, and which is performed in orderly manner so as not to interfere with the repose or patriotic liberty and sentiment of the community. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit public or private sports, exercises, games, recreation, concerts, dances, shows, entertainments or performances, nor any necessary labor involved in such activities. 
(c)  All manner of public selling or offering for sale of any property upon such holiday is prohibited during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m., except as follows: 
(1)  Articles of food may be sold, served, supplied and delivered at any time of the day; 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold for on-premises or off-premises consumption, at such times of the day as prescribed by law, or by rule duly adopted for the locality pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law; 
(3)  Flowers, souvenirs, newspapers, gasoline, oil, tires, drugs, medicine and surgical instruments may be sold and may be delivered at any time of the day. 
(d)  A violation of the prohibition herein specified is an offense, punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding five (5) days, or by both, but for a second or other offense, where the party shall have been previously convicted, it shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not less than five (5) or more than fifteen (15) days, or both. 
(Ord. of 5-21-62, § 1; Ord. of 10-21-74; Ord. of 3-18-81, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-24-94, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-96, § 1) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate commercial and business activities on Memorial Day and Independence Day, General Municipal Law, § 86.  
Sec. 5-1-2. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages, or possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages on public property. 
(a)  The consumption of any alcoholic beverage, or the possession of any opened container containing any alcoholic beverage under circumstances evincing intent to consume, on any public property within the city including the public areas of property of the White Plains Housing Authority is prohibited, except that the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons permitted to use or possess alcoholic beverages by virtue of Section 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law, nor to persons invited to attend or participate in events permitted or sponsored by the city through the department of parks and recreation or the common council. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation and on the first conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in amount, and on any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) in amount, or to imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days or to both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Ord. of 9-2-80, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-15-80, § 1; Ord. of 7-5-83, § 1) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4; penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Sec. 5-1-3. - Placement of iceboxes, containers, etc., accessible to children. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave or suffer to remain in any place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any substantially air-tight container of any kind, of a size large enough to contain any child, unless such icebox, refrigerator or other container can be readily opened from the interior by any child, or unless it has been kept securely closed and locked to prevent entry, or unless the latching or locking mechanism on the door, doors, lid or cover on the same has or have been removed or unless all such doors, lids or covers on the same have been removed. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of subsection (a) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment not in excess of thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. of 10-5-53, §§ 1, 2) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4; penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37. 
State Law reference— Abandonment of containers attractive to children, Penal Law, § 270.10.  
Sec. 5-1-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 5-1-4, prohibiting loitering in municipal public parking areas, derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 17, 1960, was repealed by § 1 of an ordinance adopted July 7, 1986. Loitering is covered in § 240.35 of the Penal Law. A loitering ordinance similar to that formerly contained in § 5-1-4 was struck down by the New York Court of Appeals in People v. Burck in 1973.  
Sec. 5-1-5. - [Use of public areas for manufacturing, producing, etc., materials, etc.—Prohibited.] 
No person shall use or occupy any portion of any public area in the city of White Plains including but not limited to streets, sidewalks or public parking lots for manufacturing, fabricating, producing, processing or preparing any material or substance, including but not limited to dry cleaning, laundering or preparing or cooking any food products. 
(L.L. No. 2-1963, § 1) 
State Law reference— Power of city to adopt local law governing the use of its highways, roads, streets, avenues and property, Municipal Home Rule Law, § 10,1.(ii)a.(6).  
Sec. 5-1-6. - [Same—Exceptions.] 
The provisions of this local law [sections 5-1-5 through 5-1-7] shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Preparation of concrete by "mix in transit" trucks, provided such trucks are actually traveling over public streets or are parked at the actual location where the concrete is to be used. 
b.  Public areas under the charge of the commissioner of recreation and parks. 
c.  Activities in public areas being conducted for municipal purposes by officers, agents, servants or employees of the city. 
d.  Activities in public areas as may be authorized by the commissioner of public safety in connection with a duly designated public celebration or festival. 
e.  Governmental activities in public areas over which other governmental agencies have jurisdiction. 
(L.L. No. 2-1963, § 2; L.L. No. 1-1975, § 1)  
Sec. 5-1-7. - [Same—Violations and penalties.] 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and on conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in amount, or imprisonment not exceeding one hundred fifty (150) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment for each such violation. 
(L.L. No. 2-1963, § 3) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of local laws, General Municipal Law, § 10, 4.(b).  
Sec. 5-1-8. - Public urination and public defecation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public park, street, sidewalk, alley, highway, public meeting, assembly, or other public place, or in the immediate neighborhood thereof and in view from the same places; provided, that this section shall not be applicable to the act of urinating or defecating in a proper receptacle in a restroom or bathroom in any enclosed structure or portable, self-contained sanitation facility. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days or both. 
(Ord. of 3-1-10, § 1)  
Chapter 5-2 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Noisy animals, § 3-4-3(d); pets in parks, § 6-2-11; horse-drawn carriages, Ch. 4-22; fastening animals to trees, § 7-5-6; disposal of dead animals, § 7-6-7; keeping of animals and pets in dwelling units, § 9-8-200.7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-2-1. - Fowl running at large. 
(a)  No live chickens, geese, ducks or other fowl shall be kept in the city unless they are securely enclosed in such a manner as to prevent them from straying from the premises of the person owning them. 
(b)  Any person who shall permit chickens, geese, ducks, or other fowl owned by him to stray from his premises shall be subject to a fine of not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. of 7-5-21, §§ 1, 2) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4; penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Sec. 5-2-2. - Livestock running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any livestock which is under his ownership, care, custody or control to run at large 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. of 5-13-18, § 3) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4; penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 5-2-3—5-2-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING, IDENTIFICATION AND CONTROL OF DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Nov. 1, 2010, § 1, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 5-2-16—5-2-21, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to dogs. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
State Law reference— Power of city to regulate dogs, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124. 
 
Sec. 5-2-16. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the licensing and identification of dogs, the control and protection of the dog population and the protection of persons, property, domestic animals and deer from dog attack and damage. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Sec. 5-2-17. - Application. 
Any dog harbored within the City of White Plains which is owned by a resident of New York City or is licensed by the City of New York, or which is owned by a non-resident of New York State and licensed by a jurisdiction outside the State of New York, shall for a period of thirty (30) days be exempt from the licensing and identification provisions of this article herein. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Sec. 5-2-18. - Licensing of dogs; rabies vaccination requirement. 
(a)  All dogs within the City of White Plains four (4) months of age or older, unless otherwise exempted shall be licensed. The owner of each dog required to be licensed shall obtain, complete and return to the office of the city clerk a dog license application prescribed by the city together with the license application fee, any applicable license surcharges, and any such additional fees as may be established by the city. Each license issued shall be valid for a period of one (1), two (2) or three (3) year(s) and shall not be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog, the new owner shall immediately apply for a new licenses for the dog. A license cannot be transferred to another dog. 
(b)  Each license application shall be accompanied by proof in the form of a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian showing that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies. No license shall be issued or renewed for a period expiring after the expiration date of the current rabies certificate for the dog being licensed. In lieu of a vaccination certificate, the applicant shall be required to present a statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that the administration of such vaccination would endanger the dog's life, in which case vaccination shall not be required. Where an applicant for a license submits said certified statement, a license shall be issued or renewed for a period of one (1) year from the date of said statement. 
(c)  Any owner failing to renew a dog license within sixty (60) days after the expiration thereof may be issued a summons by an authorized individual in the office of city clerk, an authorized animal control officer, a police officer or any authorized agent of the department of public safety. 
(d)  The city does not allow the licensing of dogs by a shelter. The shelter must send the adoptive dog owners to the licensing authority of the municipality in which the dog will be harbored for licensing within ten (10) days of adoption. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Sec. 5-2-19. - License fees. 
(a)  The City of White Plains hereby establishes that the license fee for each year or portion thereof for each dog license issued by the city clerk pursuant to this article shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for a spayed or neutered dog and eighteen dollars ($18.00) for an unspayed or an unneutered dog. Any dog owner may license his or her spayed or neutered or unspayed or unneutered dog for multiple years at a cost of seventeen ($17.00) for a two-year license for a spayed or neutered dog and twenty-seven dollars ($27.00) for an unspayed or an unneutered dog; however, no multiple year license can be issued if the expiration date were to exceed the expiration date of the rabies vaccination. 
(b)  Exempted from payment of the license fee are applications submitted for a dog license for any guide, hearing, service, war, working search, detection, police work and therapy dogs, as such dogs are defined by Section 108 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law. 
(c)  Incorporated within the license fees established by subsection (a) above of this section herein, is a surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) if the dog to be licensed is altered, or a fee of three dollars ($3.00) if the dog sought to be licensed is unaltered. 
(d)  A purebred kennel license may be issued by the city clerk for a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a kennel housing between one (1) and ten (10) purebred dogs, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a kennel housing between eleven (11) and twenty-five (25) purebred dogs, and a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a kennel housing more than twenty-five (25) dogs. In addition to the license fee, a surcharge of three dollars ($3.00) shall also be imposed at the time the dog application is filed. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Sec. 5-2-20. - Identification of dogs. 
(a)  Each dog licensed pursuant to this article shall be assigned, at the time the dog is first licensed, a City of White Plains identification number. Such identification number shall be carried by the dog on an identification tag which shall be affixed to a collar on the dog at all times. 
(b)  A dog participating in a dog show shall be exempt from the identification requirement during such participation. 
(c)  The official identification number shall constitute the official identification of the dog to which it is assigned, regardless of changes of ownership, and the number shall not be reassigned to any other dog during the lifetime of the dog to which it is assigned. 
(d)  At the time a dog is first licensed, one (1) identification tag shall be furnished to the owner at no additional charge. Any replacement tag shall be obtained by the owner at the owner's expense, for the sum of three dollars ($3.00) to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Sec. 5-2-21. - Change of ownership, lost or stolen dogs. 
(a)  Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog, the new owner shall immediately make application for a license for such dog. The original issued identification tag shall remain the same for the duration of the dog license. 
(b)  In the event of a change in ownership of any dog which has been assigned an official identification number, or in the event of a change in address of the owner of record of any such dog, the owner of record shall, within ten (10) days of such change, notify the city clerk. 
(c)  If any dog assigned an official identification number is lost or stolen, the owner of record shall, within ten (10) days of the discovery of such loss or theft, notify the city clerk. 
(d)  In the case of a dog's death, the owner of record shall so notify the city clerk either prior to renewal of license or upon the time of such renewal. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Sec. 5-2-22. - Seizure of dogs; redemption periods; impoundment fees. 
The owner of any dog impounded by the City of White Plains shall be entitled to redeem that dog within five (5) business days, excluding the day the dog is impounded, from the day the dog is impounded, provided that the owner produces proof the dog is licensed, vaccinated and identified and pays a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person for each twenty-four (24) hours or part thereof; a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the second impoundment within one (1) year of the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person and an additional fee of three dollars ($3.00) for each additional twenty-four-hour period; a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) for a third and each subsequent impoundment within one (1) year of the first impoundment of any dog owned by that person and an additional fee of three dollars ($3.00) for each additional twenty-four-hour period. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Sec. 5-2-23. - Running at large. 
(a)  No person owning, harboring or having the custody and control of a dog shall permit such dog to be at large in the city elsewhere than on the premises of the owner, except it be on the premises of another person with the knowledge and assent of such other person. 
(b)  The owner, harborer or person having custody and control of a dog, in the city which is not on the premises of the owner or upon the premises of another person with the knowledge and assent of such person, shall control and restrain such dog by a chain or leash not exceeding eight (8) feet in length. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2) 
State Law reference— Impoundment of dogs found at large, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 118.  
Sec. 5-2-24. - Removal of feces from public places. 
A person who owns, harbors or has custody and control of a dog shall remove any feces left by his dog on any sidewalk, gutter, street or other public area. This section shall not apply to a blind person while such person is actually using a "guide dog" as defined by Section 108 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and licensed by the city as such. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4.  
Sec. 5-2-25. - Penalty. 
(a)  A violation of section 5-2-23 or section 5-2-24 of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  A violation of section 5-2-18 of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), except where the person was found to have violated this section or former article seven of the Agriculture and Markets Law within the preceding five (5) years, the fine may not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00), and (ii) where the person was found to have committed two (2) or more violations within the preceding five (5) years, the civil penalty may not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37. 
State Law reference— Violation of dog ordinances, Agriculture and Markets Law, § 124.  
Sec. 5-2-26. - Severability clause. 
The provisions of this article are declared to be severable, and if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or part thereof is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or part of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-1-10, § 2)  
Chapter 5-3 - HANDBILLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
 
Sec. 5-3-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as is indicated below: 
Handbill shall mean any written or printed poster, pamphlet, sheet of paper, booklet, leaflet, sticker, circular or advertisement, other than newspapers or magazines, whether original or a reproduction thereof. 
Public place shall mean any and all streets, avenues, highways, lanes, alleys or other public places, and all public parks, parking areas, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Ord. of 11-5-53, § 1; Ord. of 8-2-82, § 1(1); Ord. of 3-7-88, § 1)  
Sec. 5-3-2. - Distribution, etc., in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to post, deposit, place, throw, scatter, cast or cause to be posted, deposited, placed, thrown, scattered or cast any handbill in any public place in the city. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, attach or otherwise affix any handbill to any bridge, statue, monument, curb, sidewalk, tree, lamppost, utility pole, telephone booth, police call box, fire call box, traffic-control signal, traffic sign, fence, fire hydrant or any property owned by the city. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of paragraph (a) above, it shall be lawful to distribute handbills. 
(Ord. of 11-5-53, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 8-2-82, § 1(2), (3); Ord. of 3-7-88, § 2)  
Sec. 5-3-3. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a term of imprisonment not to exceed ten (10) days, a fine not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), or both. 
(Ord. of 11-5-53, § 4; Ord. of 8-2-82, § 1(4)) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violation of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 5-4 - SHOPPING CARTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-4-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(1)  Public place: A street, sidewalk, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, broadway, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, every class of road, square, place and municipal parking lot. 
(2)  Shopping cart: A handdrawn or propelled vehicle or wheeled container made of wire, metal, wood or other material, such as is generally provided by merchants for carting or carrying merchandise or food stuffs to automobiles or other places, hereinafter referred to as cart. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 1; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(1))  
Sec. 5-4-2. - Removal from premises of owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart or suffer or permit such removal of a shopping cart from the property of any food dispensing or other establishment or business, except to convey the same to an adjoining private parking lot or a sidewalk area immediately in front of or contiguous to such food dispensing or other establishment or business, and except that the owners of such food dispensing or other establishments or businesses may move carts, in bulk, from one store to another store or to another location. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 2; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(2))  
Sec. 5-4-3. - Tagging. 
Every person who, in connection with the conduct of a food dispensing or other establishment or business, owns or makes any cart available to the public, shall make or cause the same to be marked and identified conspicuously with the name and address of the owner. Such identification shall be in the form of a metal tag securely fastened to the cart or a cutting or stamping on the frame of the cart. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 4; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(4))  
Sec. 5-4-4. - Leaving on public property prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or suffer or permit to be left upon any public place any shopping cart which is owned by him or which is in his possession, custody or control. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 3; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(3))  
Sec. 5-4-5. - Exemption. 
This chapter shall not apply to any cart or personal property which may come into the possession or custody of any department of the city pursuant to any other ordinance, law or regulation. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 10; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(10))  
Sec. 5-4-6. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding five (5) days, or both fine and imprisonment for the first offense; and by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both such fine and imprisonment for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 11; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(11); Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 11; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 11) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 5-4-7—5-4-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REMOVAL FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 5-4-16. - Removal by commissioner of public works required. 
The commissioner of public works of the city shall remove, or cause to be removed, from time to time, any shopping cart found upon any public place, and shall take the same to city property where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 5; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(5))  
Sec. 5-4-17. - Notice to owner and redemption by owner. 
Whenever the city shall remove any shopping cart bearing identification of ownership, the commissioner of public works shall mail a notice to the owner at the address shown on the identification tag, cut or stamp. Such notice shall advise that such cart may be redeemed upon payment to the department of finance of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each cart so redeemed and shall set forth the place for the redemption of such cart where possession of the same may be procured. Payment for redemption shall be made to the department of finance and a receipt shall be given therefor, which receipt shall entitle such owner to redeem, at the place of storage thereof, one or more carts, as provided for in said receipt, upon surrender of the same at the place of storage of such cart or carts. No cart shall be delivered to a person seeking to redeem the same unless proof is submitted establishing, to the satisfaction of the city, such person's ownership or right to possession. Any delivery to a person deemed entitled thereto by the city, from the proof submitted, shall be an absolute defense of the city against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 6; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(6); Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 12)  
Sec. 5-4-18. - Auction of unredeemed carts. 
After the mailing of the notice provided for in section 5-4-17 of this Code or after removal of a shopping cart bearing no identification of ownership, the city shall, from time to time, sell such carts at public auction. Notice of such public auction shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the city by publication at least once, the first date of publication to be not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of public auction and shall set forth the time and place of holding such public auction and shall also advise that said carts will be sold at public auction. Any cart or carts may be redeemed by the owner thereof at least two (2) days prior to such public auction upon payment to the city of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each cart. No cart shall be delivered to a person seeking to redeem the same unless proof is submitted establishing, to the satisfaction of the city, such person's ownership or right to possession. Any delivery to a person deemed entitled thereto by the city, from the proof submitted, shall be an absolute defense of the city against any other person claiming to be entitled thereto. Such sale at public auction shall be conducted by the commissioner of public works, or such other person as he shall designate. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 7; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(7); Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 13)  
Sec. 5-4-19. - Carts not sold at auction. 
If a shopping cart is not sold at public auction, the city may similarly offer the same again for sale at public auction or may dismantle or destroy or otherwise dispose of such cart. Any disposition of such cart made pursuant to this chapter shall be without any liability on behalf of the city or to any person lawfully entitled thereto or having any interest therein. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 8; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(8))  
Sec. 5-4-20. - Use of funds. 
Upon a redemption or sale of a shopping cart the proceeds shall be deposited in the general funds of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-19-63, § 9; Ord. of 5-2-83, § 1(9))  
Chapter 5-5 - WEEDS AND OTHER NOXIOUS MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 5-5-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  The words "commissioner of building" as used in this chapter shall mean the commissioner of building of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
(b)  The words "commissioner of finance" as used in this chapter shall mean the commissioner of finance of the city, or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 12-2-74, § 1)  
Sec. 5-5-2. - Cutting and removal of grass, weeds and other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant, having control of any occupied or unoccupied building lot or plot of land or any part thereof in any developed section of the city to permit or maintain on any such lot or plot of land or on or along the sidewalk, street or alley adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb or middle of the alley, or for ten (10) feet outside the property line, if there be no curb, any growth of weeds, grass or other rank vegetation to a height greater than twelve (12) inches, on the average, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any such person to cause, suffer or allow poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants or plants detrimental to health, to grow on any such lot or plot of land in such manner that any part of such ivy, ragweed, or other poisonous weed shall extend upon, overhang, or border any public place, or allow weeds, pollen or other poisonous particles or emanations therefrom to be carried through the air into any public place. 
(Ord. of 12-2-74, § 1(2))  
Sec. 5-5-3. - Duty of owner, lessee or occupant. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any such lot or plot of land in the city to cut and remove or cause to be cut and removed all such weeds, grass or other rank, poisonous or harmful vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of section 5-5-2 of this Code; provided, that cutting and removing such weeds, grass and vegetation at least once in every three (3) weeks between May 15 and September 15 shall be deemed to be a compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-2-74, § 1(3))  
Sec. 5-5-4. - Throwing or casting of rubbish, junk or flammable materials upon vacant land. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, agent, tenant, or otherwise, to throw, cast, or deposit, or cause or permit to run, drop or remain or to be thrown, cast or deposited, in or upon any vacant lot of land or vacant place, upon the surface of any lot of land, enclosed or otherwise, within the city, except at such place or places designated or provided by the board of health of the county or the department of public works, any waste, leaves, brush, hay, weeds, straw, litter, waste paper, boxes, abandoned vehicles, debris, junk, shavings or any filthy, combustible or flammable materials, rubbish, garbage, or dirt whereby a fire hazard, danger or risk is or may be endangered or injuriously effected or whereby the premises of another, or the enjoyment of the premises of another, are or may be injured, damaged, interfered with, or prejudiced. Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit the depositing of manure upon any private property for the purpose of cultivating same. 
(Ord. of 12-2-74, § 1(4))  
Sec. 5-5-5. - Notice of removal; removal. 
(a)  If the provisions of sections 5-5-2 through 5-5-4 of this Code are not complied with, the commissioner of building shall serve written notice upon the owner, lessee or occupant or any person having the care or control of any such lot or land to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If the person upon whom the notice is served fails, neglects or refuses to cut or remove, or to cause to be cut and removed, such weeds, grass or other vegetation, or shall fail to cause such substances or matter described in such notice to be removed within ten (10) days thereafter, the commissioner of building shall cause such work to be done as is necessary to comply with the provisions of such notice. 
(b)  The commissioner of building shall charge the actual cost of such work, plus five (5) per centum for inspection and other additional costs in connection therewith, and on or before November 1 in each year shall mail or otherwise deliver a bill or statement thereof to the owner of such lot or land so far as such owner and the address of such owner are known. If payment of such bill or statement shall not be made on or before December 1 of such year the commissioner of building shall make a list of all unpaid accounts as hereinafter set forth. 
(c)  During the month of December in each year the commissioner of building shall make a list of all such charges and file the same in his office and give public notice of such filing by publication in the official newspaper, two (2) insertions, that said list has been made and filed and that for ten (10) days from the date of the first publication of said notice said list may be examined by any person interested therein and that upon a day and hour stated in such notice, and at least ten (10) days after the first publication thereof, he will attend at his office to hear any objections to said list and pass upon all objections, and, if need be, alter and correct said list. 
(d)  After said hearing and making of the necessary corrections, if any, he shall attach thereto his certificate that such hearing has been had and that said list is now complete and file the same with the commissioner of finance, whereupon the commissioner of finance shall mail to each owner of real property included in such list whose name and address he is able to ascertain a statement of the amount of charges against his property. Upon the filing of the said list with the commissioner of finance the several sums mentioned in said list shall be deemed to be assessed against the several persons named therein and the commissioner of finance shall, when extending the next general tax upon the city assessment roll, place unpaid amounts thereon as against the property of the person named in said list and such amount shall be collected at the same time, in the same manner and by the same proceedings as other taxes on said roll. The failure to mail any notice or statement referred to in this section or failure of the addressee to receive the same shall not in any manner affect the validity of the assessment or the penalties imposed by law with respect thereto. 
(Ord. of 12-2-74, § 1(5)) 
State Law reference— Power of city to fix, levy, impose, collect and administer rents, charges, rates and fees, penalties and rates of interest thereon, liens on local property in connection therewith and charges thereon, Statute of Local Governments, § 10, 6.  
Sec. 5-5-6. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice herein provided, or who shall resist or obstruct the commissioner of building or his employees or any employee of the city in carrying into effect the provisions of any notice served hereunder, shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof, subject to the following fines: 
(1)  For a first conviction, a fine not to exceed twenty five hundred dollars ($2,500). 
(2)  For a second or subsequent offense, a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000), or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. 
In case of continuing violation, every day's continuance thereof, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 12-2-74, § 1(6); Ord. of 5-30-19, § 2, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 5-6 - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 5-6-1. - Legislative intent. 
It has become apparent that the use of pens, writing and artistic devices, spray can and marking devices used in connection with the writing of graffiti on walls and other places of buildings and property has reached such significant levels and proportions that immediate local attention should be given this matter by this municipality. The defacing of such property and the use of foul language in many of the writings is harmful to the general public and violative of the good and welfare of the citizens, residents and people of the city. It is the further intent of the common council that any person guilty of writing graffiti on buildings and property shall be punished so that the punishment shall fit the offense. 
(Ord. of 5-6-85, § 1; Ord. of 11-4-91, § 1)  
Sec. 5-6-2. - Writing on property without permission of owner prohibited. 
No person shall write, paint or draw any inscription, figure or mark of any type on any building, public or private, or any other property, real or personal, owned, operated or maintained by any public benefit corporation, the city, or by any person, firm or corporation or any agency or instrumentality thereof, without the express written permission of the owner of the property or his agent. 
(Ord. of 5-6-85, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-91, § 1)  
Sec. 5-6-3. - Penalties for offenses. 
Any person who violates section 5-6-2 of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense, and of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second or subsequent offense, or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 5-6-85, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-91, § 1)  
Sec. 5-6-4. - Reward. 
Under the authority of section 91 of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York, any person who shall provide information which leads to the detection, arrest and conviction of any other person of a violation of this chapter shall be entitled to a reward equal to one-half of any fine imposed by the court, but in no event greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. of 5-6-85, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-91, § 1)  
Sec. 5-6-5. - Responsibility of owner. 
It is the responsibility of the owner or his agent of the building or structure which has been defaced without the owner's, or his agent's, prior written permission by a writing, painting or drawing of any inscription, figure or mark, to completely remove said graffiti from the building or structure within ten (10) business days of receipt of written notice of the defacement by the commissioner of public safety, or his designee, said notice served personally or as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. of 11-7-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-9-07, § 1)  
Sec. 5-6-6. - Penalty for owner. 
Failure of the owner of the building or structure to remove the graffiti within the time allowed after written notice may subject the owner to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense. Each ten (10) business day period thereafter where the owner fails to take action shall be deemed a separate offense and shall subject the owner to additional fines not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. of 11-7-91, § 1; Ord. of 7-9-07, § 1)  
Chapter 5-7 - Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, adopted Aug. 5, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 5-7, §§ 5-7-1—5-7-9, and enacted a new Ch. 5-7 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5-7 pertained to Energize NY Benefit Financing Program and derived from L.L. No. 1-2013 , § 1, 2-4-2013; L.L. No. 1-2018 , § 1, 3-5-18. 
 
Sec. 5-7-1. - Legislative findings, intent and purpose, and authority. 
5-7-1-1. It is the policy of both the City of White Plains and the State of New York (the "State") to achieve energy efficiency and renewable energy improvements, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, mitigate the effect of global climate change, and advance a clean energy economy. The City of White Plains finds that it can fulfill this policy by providing property assessed clean energy financing to Qualified Property Owners (as defined below) for the installation of renewable energy systems and energy efficiency measures. This Chapter establishes a program that will allow the Energy Improvement Corporation (as defined below, "EIC"), a local development corporation, acting on behalf of the City of White Plains pursuant to the municipal agreement (the "Municipal Agreement") to be entered into between the City of White Plains and EIC, to make funds available to Qualified Property Owners that will be repaid through charges on the real properties benefited by such funds, thereby fulfilling the purposes of this Chapter and accomplishing an important public purpose. This Chapter provides a method of implementing the public policies expressed by, and exercising the authority provided by, Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law (as defined below, the "Enabling Act"). 
5-7-1-2. The City of White Plains is authorized to execute, deliver and perform the Municipal Agreement and otherwise to implement this Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program pursuant to the Constitution and laws of New York, including particularly Article IX of the Constitution, Section 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, the Enabling Act and this Chapter. 
5-7-1-3. This Chapter, which is adopted pursuant to Section 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law and the Enabling Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program". 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-2. - Definitions. 
Capitalized terms used but not defined herein have the meanings assigned in the Enabling Act. For purposes of this Chapter, and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context requires, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
5-7-2-1. Annual Installment Amount - shall have the meaning assigned in Section 5-7-8-2 of this Chapter. 
5-7-2-2. Annual Installment Lien - shall have the meaning assigned in Section 5-7-8-2 of this Chapter. 
5-7-2-3. Authority - the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority. 
5-7-2-4. Benefit Assessment Lien - shall have the meaning assigned in Section 5-7-3-1 of this Chapter. 
5-7-2-5. Benefited Property - Qualified Property for which the Qualified Property Owner has entered into a Finance Agreement for a Qualified Project. 
5-7-2-6. Benefited Property Owner - the owner of record of a Benefited Property. 
5-7-2-7. EIC - the Energy Improvement Corporation, a local development corporation, duly organized under Section 1411 of the Not-For-Profit Corporation Law of the State, authorized hereby on behalf of the City of White Plains to implement the Program by providing funds to Qualified Property Owners and providing for repayment of such funds from money collected by or on behalf of the City of White Plains as a charge to be levied on the real property. 
5-7-2-8. Eligible Costs - costs incurred by the Benefited Property Owner in connection with a Qualified Project and the related Finance Agreement, including application fees, EIC's Program administration fee, closing costs and fees, title and appraisal fees, professionals' fees, permits, fees for design and drawings and any other related fees, expenses and costs, in each case as approved by EIC and the Financing Party under the Finance Agreement 
5-7-2-9. Enabling Act - Article 5-L of the General Municipal Law of the State, or a successor law, as in effect from time to time. 
5-7-2-10. Finance Agreement - the finance agreement described in Section 5-7-6-1 of this Chapter. 
5-7-2-11. Financing Charges - all charges, fees and expenses related to the loan under the Finance Agreement including accrued interest, capitalized interest, prepayment premiums, and penalties as a result of a default or late payment and costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Financing Party as a result of a foreclosure or other legal proceeding brought against the Benefited Property to enforce any delinquent Annual Installment Liens. 
5-7-2-12. Financing Parties - Third party capital providers approved by EIC to provide financing to Qualified Property Owners or other financial support to the Program which have entered into separate agreements with EIC to administer the Program in the City of White Plains. 
5-7-2-13. City of White Plains - the City of White Plains, a municipality of the State constituting a tax district as defined in Section 1102 of RPTL of the State. 
5-7-2-14. Municipal Lien - a lien on Qualified Property which secures the obligation to pay real property taxes, municipal charges, or governmentally imposed assessments in respect of services or benefits to a Qualified Property. 
5-7-2-15. Non-Municipal Lien - a lien on Qualified Property which secures any obligation other than the obligation to pay real property taxes, municipal charges, or governmentally-imposed assessments in respect of services or benefits to a Qualified Property Owner or Qualified Property. 
5-7-2-16. Program - the Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program authorized by this Chapter. 
5-7-2-17. Qualified Project - the acquisition, construction, reconstruction or equipping of Energy Efficiency Improvements or Renewable Energy Systems or other projects authorized under the Enabling Act on a Qualified Property, together with a related Energy Audit, Renewable Energy System Feasibility Study and/or other requirements under or pursuant to the Enabling Act, with funds provided in whole or in part by Financing Parties under the Program to achieve the purposes of the Enabling Act. 
5-7-2-18. Qualified Property - Any real property other than a residential building containing less than three dwelling units, which is within the boundaries of the City of White Plains that has been determined to be eligible to participate in the Program under the procedures for eligibility set forth under this Chapter and the Enabling Act and has become the site of a Qualified Project. 
5-7-2-19. Qualified Property Owner - the owner of record of Qualified Property which has been determined by EIC to meet the requirements for participation in the Program as an owner, and any transferee owner of such Qualified Property. 
5-7-2-20. RPTL - the Real Property Tax Law of the State, as amended from time to time. 
5-7-2-21. Secured Amount - as of any date, the aggregate amount of principal loaned to the Qualified Property Owner for a Qualified Project, together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges, as provided herein or in the Finance Agreement, as reduced pursuant to Section 5-7-8-3 of this Chapter. 
5-7-2-22. State - the State of New York. 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-3. - Establishment of an Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program. 
5-7-3-1. An Energize NY Open C-PACE Financing Program is hereby established by the City of White Plains, whereby EIC acting on its behalf pursuant to the Municipal Agreement, may arrange for the provision of funds by Financing Parties to Qualified Property Owners in accordance with the Enabling Act and the procedures set forth under this Chapter, to finance the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, and installation of Qualified Projects and Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved by EIC and by the Financing Party under the Finance Agreement. EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, and with the consent of the Benefited Property Owner, will record a Benefit Assessment Lien on the Benefited Property in the Secured Amount (the "Benefit Assessment Lien") on the land records for the City of White Plains. Such recording shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee in the same manner as if recorded by the City of White Plains. 
5-7-3-2. Before a Qualified Property Owner and a Financing Party enter into a Finance Agreement which results in a loan to finance a Qualified Project, repayment of which is secured by a Benefit Assessment Lien, a written consent from each existing mortgage holder of the Qualified Property shall be obtained, permitting the Benefit Assessment Lien and each Annual Installment Lien to take priority over all existing mortgages. 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-4. - Procedures for eligibility. 
5-7-4-1. Any property owner in the City of White Plains may submit an application to EIC on such forms as have been prepared by EIC and made available to property owners on the website of EIC and at the City of White Plains' offices. 
5-7-4-2. Every application submitted by a property owner shall be reviewed by EIC, acting on behalf of the City of White Plains, which shall make a positive or negative determination on such application based upon the criteria enumerated in the Enabling Act and this Chapter. EIC may also request further information from the property owner where necessary to aid in its determination. 
5-7-4-3. If a positive determination on an application is made by EIC, acting on behalf of the City of White Plains, the property owner shall be deemed a Qualified Property Owner and shall be eligible to participate in the Program in accordance with Section 5-7-6 of this Chapter. 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-5. - Application criteria. 
Upon the submission of an application, EIC, acting on behalf of the City of White Plains, shall make a positive or negative determination on such application based upon the following criteria for the making of a financing: 
5-7-5-1. The property owner may not be in bankruptcy and the property may not constitute property subject to any pending bankruptcy proceeding; 
5-7-5-2. The amount financed under the Program shall be repaid over a term not to exceed the weighted average of the useful life of Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvements to be installed on the property as determined by EIC; 
5-7-5-3. Sufficient funds are available from Financing Parties to provide financing to the property owner; 
5-7-5-4. The property owner is current in payments on any existing mortgage on the Qualified Property; 
5-7-5-5. The property owner is current in payments on any real property taxes on the Qualified Property; and 
5-7-5-6. Such additional criteria, not inconsistent with the criteria set forth above, as the State, the City of White Plains, or EIC acting on its behalf, or other Financing Parties may set from time to time. 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-6. - Energize NY finance agreement. 
5-7-6-1. A Qualified Property Owner may participate in the Program through the execution of a finance agreement made by and between the Qualified Property Owner and a Financing Party, to which EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, shall be a third-party beneficiary (the "Finance Agreement"). Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement, the property that is the subject of the Finance Agreement shall be deemed a "Benefited Property". 
5-7-6-2. Upon execution and delivery of the Finance Agreement, the Benefited Property Owner shall be eligible to receive funds from the Financing Party for the acquisition, construction, and installation of a Qualified Project, together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved by EIC and by the Financing Party, provided the requirements of the Enabling Act, the Municipal Agreement and this Chapter have been met. 
5-7-6-3. The Finance Agreement shall include the terms and conditions of repayment of the Secured Amount and the Annual Installment Amounts. 
5-7-6-4. EIC may charge fees to offset the costs of administering the Program and such fees, if not paid by the Financing Party, shall be added to the Secured Amount 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-7. - Terms and conditions of repayment. 
The Finance Agreement shall set forth the terms and conditions of repayment in accordance with the following: 
5-7-7-1. The principal amount of the funds loaned to the Benefited Property Owner for the Qualified Project, together with Eligible Costs and Financing Charges approved by EIC and by the Financing Party, shall be specially assessed against the Benefited Property and will be evidenced by a Benefit Assessment Lien recorded against the Benefited Property on the land records on which liens are recorded for properties within the City of White Plains. The special benefit assessment shall constitute a "charge" within the meaning of the Enabling Act and shall be collected in annual installments in the amounts certified by the Financing Party in a schedule provided at closing and made part of the Benefit Assessment Lien. Said amount shall be annually levied, billed and collected by EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, and shall be paid to the Financing Party as provided in the Finance Agreement. 
5-7-7-2. The term of such repayment shall be determined at the time the Finance Agreement is executed by the Benefited Property Owner and the Financing Party, not to exceed the weighted average of the useful life of the systems and improvements as determined by EIC, acting on behalf of the City of White Plains. 
5-7-7-3. The rate of interest for the Secured Amount shall be fixed by the Financing Party in conjunction with EIC, acting on behalf of the City of White Plains, as provided in the Finance Agreement 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-8. - Levy of annual installment amount and creation of annual installment lien. 
5-7-8-1. Upon the making of the loan pursuant to the Finance Agreement, the Secured Amount shall become a special Benefit Assessment Lien on the Benefited Property in favor of the City of White Plains. The amount of the Benefit Assessment Lien shall be the Secured Amount. Evidence of the Benefit Assessment Lien shall be recorded by EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, in the land records for properties in the City of White Plains. Such recording shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee in the same manner as if recorded by the City of White Plains. The Benefit Assessment Lien shall not be foreclosed upon by or otherwise enforced by the City of White Plains. 
5-7-8-2. The Finance Agreement shall provide for the repayment of the Secured Amount in installments made at least annually, as provided in a schedule attached to the Benefit Assessment Lien (the "Annual Installment Amount"). The Annual Installment Amount shall be levied by EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, on the Benefited Property in the same manner as levies for City of White Plains charges, shall become a lien on the Benefited Property as of the first day of January of the fiscal year for which levied (the "Annual Installment Lien") and shall remain a lien until paid. The creation or any recording of the Annual Installment Lien shall be exempt from any charge, mortgage recording tax or other fee in the same manner as if recorded by the City of White Plains. Payment to the Financing Party shall be considered payment for this purpose. Such payment shall partly or wholly discharge the Annual Installment Lien. Delinquent Annual Installment Amounts may accrue Financing Charges as may be provided in the Finance Agreement. Any additional Financing Charges imposed by the Financing Party pursuant to the Finance Agreement shall increase the Annual Installment Amount and the Annual Installment Lien for the year in which such overdue payments were first due. 
5-7-8-3. The Benefit Assessment Lien shall be reduced annually by the amount of each Annual Installment Lien when each Annual Installment Lien becomes a lien. Each Annual Installment Lien shall be subordinate to all Municipal Liens, whether created by Section 902 of the RPTL or by any other State or local law. No portion of a Secured Amount shall be recovered by the City of White Plains, EIC, or an assignee upon foreclosure, sale or other disposition of the Benefited Property unless and until all City of White Plains Liens are fully discharged. Each Annual Installment Lien, however, shall have priority over all Non-Municipal Liens, irrespective of when created, except as otherwise required by law. 
5-7-8-4. Neither the Benefit Assessment Lien nor any Annual Installment Lien shall be extinguished or accelerated in the event of a default or bankruptcy of the Benefited Property Owner. Each Annual Installment Amount shall be considered a charge upon the Benefited Property and shall be collected by EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, at the same time and in the same manner as real property taxes or municipal charges. Each Annual Installment Lien shall remain a lien until paid. Amounts collected in respect of an Annual Installment Lien shall be remitted to EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, or the Financing Party, as may be provided in the Finance Agreement. 
5-7-8-5. EIC shall act as the City of White Plains' agent in collection of the Annual Installment Amounts. If any Benefited Property Owner fails to pay an Annual Installment Amount, the Financing Party may redeem the Benefited Property by paying the amount of all unpaid Municipal Liens thereon, and thereafter shall have the right to collect any amounts in respect of an Annual Installment Lien by foreclosure or any other remedy available at law. Any foreclosure shall not affect any subsequent Annual Installment Liens. 
5-7-8-6. EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, may sell or assign for consideration any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual Installment Liens to Financing Parties that provide financing to Qualified Properties pursuant to Finance Agreements. The Financing Parties may sell or assign for consideration any and all Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual Installment Liens received from EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, subject to certain conditions provided in the administration agreement between EIC and the Financing Party. The assignee or assignees of such Benefit Assessment Liens and Annual Installment Liens shall have and possess the same powers and rights at law or in equity as the City of White Plains would have had if the Benefit Assessment Lien and the Annual Installment Liens had not been assigned with regard to the precedence and priority of such lien, the accrual of interest and the fees and expenses of collection. 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-9. - Verification and report. 
EIC, on behalf of the City of White Plains, shall verify and report on the installation and performance of Renewable Energy Systems and Energy Efficiency Improvements financed by the Program in such form and manner as the Authority may establish. 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
Sec. 5-7-10. - Separability. 
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part of this Chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
( L.L. No. 3-2019, § 1, 8-5-19 )  
TITLE VI. - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
CHAPTER 
 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 6-2 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS 
 6-3 RECREATIONAL PROGRAM 
 6-4 PROHIBITING SMOKING AND VAPING IN SPECIFIED CITY-OWNED OUTDOOR AREAS IN THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Dedication of parks, § 122 et seq.; commissioner of parks and recreation, § 238-b; public libraries, § 269 et seq. 
 
Chapter 6-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 6-1-1. - Recreation advisory committee. 
(a)  A recreation advisory committee is hereby established for the purpose of advising and cooperating with the common council in relation to the establishment, maintenance and operation of playgrounds and recreation centers in this city. 
(b)  Such committee shall consist of eleven (11) residents of the city who shall serve for two-year terms; ten (10) of the members, including the chairman, shall be appointed by the common council. The eleventh member shall be a representative of the city school district and shall be designated by the board of education. One (1) of the members appointed by the common council shall be a member thereof. 
(Res. of 10-15-74; Res. of 9-5-78)  
Sec. 6-1-2. - Jacob Purdy Park and House and White Plains Monument Committee. 
(a)  The land temporarily known as the Kirby-Ridge Park being the property shown on the tax assessment map of The City of White Plains known as lots 1A, 1C, 2H, 2I, 8, 9, and 10, block 22, ward 4, be designated as the Jacob Purdy Park. 
(b)  The commissioner of recreation and parks shall be ex officio a member of The Battle of White Plains Monument Committee, Inc. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized on behalf of the city to enter into an agreement with The Battle of White Plains Monument Committee, Inc., in relation to the Purdy House which agreement shall read substantially as follows: 
AGREEMENT made as of the ________ day of _______, 1973, between THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of New York, having its principal office at the Municipal Building, 255 Main Street, White Plains, New York (the "city"); and 
THE BATTLE OF WHITE PLAINS MONUMENT COMMITTEE, INC., a not-for-profit corporation, organized and existing under the laws of the State of New York, having its principal office at Buckout Road, White Plains, New York (the "committee"); 
WITNESSETH: 
WHEREAS, on August 8, 1973, in order to preserve the Purdy House as an historic structure the committee conveyed to the city all their right, title and interest in and to the said structure; and 
WHEREAS, the city agreed that it would restore and perpetually maintain the Purdy House for historical purposes; 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises contained herein it is covenanted and agreed by the parties hereto as follows: 
1.  As long as the committee remains a chartered non-profit corporation it shall have exclusive control of all activities conducted therein, the maintenance thereof, the furnishings placed within the Purdy House and the custodial care of the Purdy House. 
2.  The committee further agrees that should its charter be revoked, terminated or suspended, or should the committee determine that it be unable to continue the maintenance and operation of said house for historical purposes, this agreement will be deemed to have terminated. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have executed this agreement as of the date first above written. 
THE CITY OF 
WHITE PLAINS 
BY _______ 
THE BATTLE OF 
WHITE PLAINS 
MONUMENT 
COMMITTEE,INC. 
BY 
(Acknowledgments to be added) 
(Ord. of 9-4-73, § 3)  
Chapter 6-2 - PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS 
 
Sec. 6-2-1. - Definitions. 
The term "city school district" as used in this chapter shall be deemed to mean the city school district of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 1)  
Sec. 6-2-2. - Intoxicants and alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall bring into, sell, give away, display or drink, or cause, permit or procure to be sold, given away, displayed or drunk, any alcoholic or spirituous liquors or beverages in any park, playground, sports field of the city or city school district or any other property of the city school district, except only as may be permitted by the commissioner of recreation and parks of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 2)  
Sec. 6-2-3. - Loitering at night. 
No person shall loiter or remain within any park, playground or sports field of the city between 11:00 p.m. and one (1) hour before sunrise without permission, except that the commissioner of recreation and parks shall have the authority to designate those parks, playgrounds and sports fields which shall be closed one (1) hour after sunset. No person shall loiter or remain on any city school district property between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise except for the running tracks at White Plains High School, White Plains Middle School and White Plains Intermediate School where they are permitted until 11:00 p.m.; provided that persons may remain within any of the aforementioned properties at any time when in attendance at an activity being staged, supervised or sanctioned by the department of recreation and parks or the city school district. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 3)  
Sec. 6-2-4. - Camping and overnight sleeping. 
No person shall tent or camp or erect or maintain a tent, shelter or camp in any city or city school district park, playground, or sports fields unless said camp or overnight sleeping be part of a special program sponsored, sanctioned or supervised by the department of recreation and parks or the city school district. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 4)  
Sec. 6-2-5. - Fires. 
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire in a city or city school district park, playground, or sports field except that charcoal cooking fires shall be permitted in reserved picnic areas specified by the department of recreation and parks or the city school district. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person over eighteen (18) years of age from the time it is kindled until it is completely extinguished. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 5)  
Sec. 6-2-6. - Operation of vehicles in paths, grass and surfaced areas. 
No motorized vehicle of any kind except a city school district vehicle, emergency vehicle or city vehicle shall be allowed or permitted on any park, sidewalk, walkway, or trail maintained for pedestrians or on any grass area of any park or property of the city or city school district; nor shall said vehicle be permitted on running tracks, tennis courts, or other off-limit areas owned by the city or city school district. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 6)  
Sec. 6-2-7. - Bicycling. 
Bicycling in parks, playgrounds and sports fields shall be permitted, except where prohibited by the commissioner of recreation and parks. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 6-a)  
Sec. 6-2-8. - Preservation of trees, shrubs, and grass. 
No person shall destroy, cut, pick, deface, mutilate, injure, disturb, or remove any plant, flower bed, shrub, tree, plant growth or any branch, stem, fruit or leaf thereof located in any park; or pile or maintain any material or debris of any kind against or upon the same; or attach any rope, cable or other contrivance thereto; or set fire or assist another to set fire to any timber, tree, shrubs, plants, flowers, grass, or plant growth, or suffer any fire upon other lands to extend to any park, playground, sports field or turf area owned by the city or city school district. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 7)  
Sec. 6-2-9. - Littering prohibited. 
No person shall throw, dump, deposit or place or cause to be thrown, dumped, deposited or placed upon any park, playground, sports field or similar area owned by the city or city school district any refuse, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter or any nauseous or offensive matter. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 8)  
Sec. 6-2-10. - Dogs and other pets prohibited. 
The presence of dogs and other pets within any park, playground, sports field of the city or any other property of the city school district is hereby prohibited except when in attendance at an activity being staged, supervised or sanctioned by the department of recreation and parks or the city school district. Dogs and other pets on leashes are restricted to walkways of the aforementioned properties only for the purpose of traversing said properties. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 9)  
Sec. 6-2-11. - Prohibited uses of parks, playgrounds and sports fields. 
No person shall use in any manner whatsoever any park, playground or sports fields, turf or hard-surface area owned by the city or city school district, or any building thereon for any illegal, immoral or bawdy purpose, or for any purpose in violation of any federal, state or municipal law, ordinance, rule, or regulation, now in effect or hereafter adopted. There shall be no golfing, or archery, except with the written permission of the commissioner of recreation and parks or the superintendent of schools. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 10; Ord. of 5-4-92, § 1)  
Sec. 6-2-12. - Sport field permits. 
Organized groups using city parks or school district facilities shall have valid permits to use the facilities. An organized group shall mean any team use of city or school facilities by a municipality, corporation, organization, club or sports team playing or practicing for and in competition with others in or out of uniform. The casual use of city and school facilities by White Plains residents will be permitted providing these sport fields have not had valid permits issued for their use to others. 
Only valid permit holders may use voice amplification equipment or other electronic equipment when authorized on the permit by the commissioner of recreation and parks or the superintendent of schools. 
All sport field permits are subject to being revoked due to weather conditions as determined by city or school district representatives. 
Sale or distribution of any food items or merchandise without the written permission of the commissioner of recreation and parks or the superintendent of schools is prohibited. 
Valid permit holders must remove from the premises any refuse or waste emanating from the players or spectators. Such refuse and rubbish shall be deposited in receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the premises by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. Failure to remove any refuse or waste by the permit holder will be grounds for the denial of a permit for future activities. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 10-a; Ord. of 5-4-92, § 2)  
Sec. 6-2-13. - Parking. 
The parking of any motor vehicle on city park, ballfield, playground or city school district property is prohibited, except at such places designated as parking areas, and at such times the parking of said vehicles is permitted, to wit, when said site is open for regular operation or when the occupant of said vehicle will attend a gathering, function or special event being staged therein by the city or city school district. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 11)  
Sec. 6-2-14. - Police access during school hours. 
(a)  Members of the city police department shall not enforce this chapter in respect to city school district property during the hours that students are in attendance at regularly scheduled classes without the expressed request of the school principal or his or her designee. 
(b)  This section authorizes the White Plains Police Department to be the complainant in the enforcement of all matters contained in this chapter, within their ability to do so, on school district property during the hours that students are not in attendance at regularly scheduled classes or at the expressed request of the school principal or his or her designee. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 13; Ord. of 5-4-92, § 2)  
Sec. 6-2-15. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation and on the first conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in amount, and on any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) in amount, or to imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Ord. of 5-19-80, § 12)  
Chapter 6-3 - RECREATIONAL PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power of commissioner of parks and recreation to make rules and regulations governing parks, § 238-b. 
 
Sec. 6-3-1. - Generally. 
(a)  The White Plains Department of Recreation and Parks provides an extensive publicly financed program of recreational activities that are planned, organized and operated to serve all city residents. The department also operates city parks and other assigned city-owned properties. 
(b)  Insofar as possible, it is the intent of the city government to provide programs and facilities without cost to residents. However, there are programs and services desired by many city residents that generate leadership, maintenance and operating costs beyond the general funding capability of the city. Under these circumstances and in situations where proper control of participation relates closely to equitable facility use and program continuity, the additional funds required must be secured from the actual participants through a system of charges and fees. 
(c)  To permit these expanded programs and services and guarantee their availability to residents on a first priority basis, the commissioner of the department of recreation and parks, subject to the supervision and control of the common council, shall establish and maintain a system to properly control program and facility operations. He shall also, subject to the supervision and control of the common council, establish and maintain a uniform system of charges and fees for special programs and facility use. These charges and fees shall be set at the lowest possible levels consistent with proper operating standards. Fees and charges established in accordance with this policy shall either be waived or reduced for senior adults. 
(d)  Under this policy, the commissioner of the department of recreation and parks may, in response to changing needs, initiate programs that are not funded in the current budget by extending the charges and fees system. Programs so initiated shall be carefully evaluated and, where justified, presented to the common council for possible funding during the next fiscal year. Annually, all programs and services involving charges and fees shall be evaluated and considered in a similar manner since it is the intent of this policy to evolve a system of charges and fees that will stimulate resident use and enjoyment of their parks and recreation programs. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79; Ord. of 6-2-03, § 1)  
Sec. 6-3-2. - Permits generally. 
(a)  By providing proof of residency, permits in the form of a plastic laminated, wallet-size card featuring a recent photo of the individual and carrying other essential information will be issued and used to control program and facility operations. Upon presentation, the holder will be entitled to special rates for program participation and facility use. The I.D. card may also, upon payment of an applicable fee, be validated to entitle the holder to seasonal program and facility use without further payments. 
(b)  Permits will be issued pursuant to the fees as fixed by the common council in the budget ordinance of the City of White Plains pursuant to the fee schedule filed with the city clerk by the commissioner of recreation and parks and deemed part of the budget. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79; Res. of 5-25-94)  
Sec. 6-3-3. - Charges and fees. 
The charges and fees for the programs organized and operated by the department of recreation and parks shall be fixed by the common council in the budget ordinance of the City of White Plains pursuant to the fee schedule filed with the city clerk by the commissioner of recreation and parks and deemed part of the budget. Advance deposit may be required at the discretion of the commissioner. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79; Res. of 5-25-94)  
Chapter 6-4 - PROHIBITING SMOKING AND VAPING IN SPECIFIED CITY-OWNED OUTDOOR AREAS IN THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 6, 2018, amended the title of Ch. 6-4 to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 6-4 pertained to prohibition of smoking in outdoor areas owned by the City of White Plains. 
 
Sec. 6-4-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
(1)  Park means city-owned parks, playgrounds, playing fields, trails, and recreation areas. Parking lots are not included within the definition herein. 
(2)  Playground means a city-owned outdoor recreation area that is designed and intended for use by children. For the purposes of this chapter, a city-owned playground that is fenced or otherwise physically demarcated shall be deemed to include all of the area inside such fence or demarcation; a city-owned playground that is not fenced or otherwise demarcated shall be deemed to include all open space that is associated with or adjacent to it. 
(3)  Playing field means that portion of an outdoor recreation area owned by the City of White Plains that is set up and marked in some way for the playing of one (1) or more specific games (such as baseball, football or soccer) and open to the general public. For the purposes of this chapter, a playing field owned by the city that is fenced or the outside perimeter of which is otherwise physically demarcated shall be deemed to include all of the area inside such fence or demarcation, together with any bleachers or other, designated viewing area; a playing field that is not fenced or otherwise demarcated (as to its outside perimeter) shall be deemed to include all of the area customarily required for playing the game for which it is being used, together with any bleachers or other designated viewing area. 
(4)  Recreational area means any outdoor area that is owned by the city and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes but is not limited to city-owned playing fields, playgrounds, parks, plazas, picnic areas, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, and bike paths. 
(5)  Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. 
(6)  Vaping means the use of an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette. 
(7)  Electronic cigarette or e-cigarette means an electronic device that delivers vapor which is inhaled by an individual user and shall include any refill cartridge and any other component of such device. 
(Ord. of 6-6-11, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-18, § 2 )  
Sec. 6-4-2. - Prohibition of smoking and vaping in outdoor areas owned by the City of White Plains. 
(1)  Smoking and vaping is prohibited in all of the following public places owned by the City of White Plains: 
(a)  Parks; 
(b)  Playgrounds; 
(c)  Playing fields; 
(d)  Plazas, including, but not limited to the area near the White Plains Library, and the fountain area at the corner of Main and Mamaroneck Avenue; 
(e)  The Greenway and other trails; and 
(f)  Recreational areas. 
(2)  The sidewalks immediately adjoining but not traversing parks, playgrounds, playing fields, plazas, trails, and recreation centers are excluded from the smoking and vaping prohibition contained herein. 
(Ord. of 6-6-11, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-18, § 3 )  
Sec. 6-4-3. - Other requirements and prohibitions. 
No ashtray, or other smoking and vaping waste receptacle shall be placed in any area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-6-11, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-18, § 4 )  
Sec. 6-4-4. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(1)  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense punishable by the following penalties: 
1st offense: $50.00 
2nd offense: $75.00 
3rd or subsequent offense: $100.00 
(Ord. of 6-6-11, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-18, § 5 )  
Sec. 6-4-5. - Statutory construction and severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any section of this chapter is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalidated provision. 
(Ord. of 6-6-11, § 1)  
Sec. 6-4-6. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this chapter shall be thirty (30) days from the date of its enactment. 
(Ord. of 6-6-11, § 1)  
TITLE VII. - PUBLIC WORKS[1] 
CHAPTER 
 7-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 7-2  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES GENERALLY 
 7-3  STREET, SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY REPAIR, EXCAVATION, ETC. 
 7-4  VAULTS 
 7-5  TREES 
 7-6  SOLID WASTES 
 7-7  PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES, ACTIVITIES AND CONNECTIONS TO THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS' MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) 
 7-8  WATER 
 7-9  SIDEWALK CAFES 
 7-10 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of public works, § 117 et seq. 
Cross reference— Use of public areas for manufacturing, etc., § 5-1-5 et seq.; removal of shopping carts from public property, § 5-4-16 et seq.; numbering of buildings, § 9-3-61 et seq. 
 
Chapter 7-2 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4; what are deemed public streets, § 120. 
Cross reference— Removal of dog feces from public places, § 5-2-17. 
 
Sec. 7-2-1. - Snow removal by owners of abutting property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any lot or premises abutting or adjoining any public street, alley, park or place within the city to clean and keep free from snow, ice, dirt and debris or other foreign matter, the sidewalk in front of or adjoining said lot or premises. Should the snow cease to fall or the foreign matter be deposited in the daytime, such removal shall be completed within two (2) hours after such fall or deposit, if the abutting or adjoining lot or premises is a place of business, or is within a "B," "BR," "CB," "UR," "OR," "CO" or "LI" District of the zoning ordinance, and within ten (10) hours if the abutting or adjoining lot or premises is within any other district of the zoning ordinance. Should the snow cease to fall or the foreign matter be deposited in the nighttime, such removal shall be done before 10:00 the next morning if the abutting or adjoining lot or premises is a place of business, or is within a "B," "BR," "CB," "UR," "OR," "CO" or "LI" District of the zoning ordinance, or before 12:00 noon if the abutting or adjoining lot or premises is within any other district of the zoning ordinance. In the event the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk, the owner or occupant of said lot or premises shall cause the sidewalk to be strewn with ashes, sand or some other approved abrasive material and shall as soon thereafter as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean such sidewalk. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any hereinabove described lot or premises may place in the gutter only the fallen snow that has been removed from the sidewalk area. 
(c)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than thirty-five dollars ($35.00) or more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. of 12-19-66, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 10-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 5-3-10, § 1) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37; lien for cleaning snow and ice from walks, § 160. 
Cross reference— Amount in annual budget for snow removal by city, § 2-4-16; zoning, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-2-2. - Driving vehicles on closed streets. 
(a)  All persons are hereby forbidden from driving or operating any vehicle upon or through that portion of any street, avenue, highway or public place of the city which has been closed by order of the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as forbidding a street railway from operating upon its tracks in such closed street, avenue, highway or public place where other provisions have not been made, nor shall anything herein contained forbid egress or ingress to any property bounded upon such street providing no egress and ingress may not be had in any other manner. 
(c)  Violations of any provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished upon conviction by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not exceeding twenty-five (25) days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 8-16-17, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 5-3-93) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4; penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Sec. 7-2-3. - Skateboarding, playing ball, etc., on street. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section the term "street" shall include the entire right-of-way as shown on the official map of the city. 
(b)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any sleigh, sliding device, coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard or similar device shall go in any municipal parking facility or upon any street, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(c)  No person shall play ball or any game or sport with a ball, football, or any other object, or throw, cast or propel any missile or any other object, in, over, across, along or upon any street in the city. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense and, on the first conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in amount, and on any subsequent conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00) in amount or to imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Ord. of 2-20-67, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 3-2-92, § 1) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4; penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37. 
Cross reference— Official plan, § 9-3-1.  
Chapter 7-3 - STREET, SIDEWALK AND DRIVEWAY REPAIR, EXCAVATION, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Waiver of fee for certain public agencies authorized, § 2-1-3; prohibition of illicit discharges, activities and connections to the City of White Plains' municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), Ch. 7-7; notice of excavations for water lines, § 7-8-7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-3-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms as used in this chapter shall mean as indicated below: 
(a)  Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of public works, or his duly authorized representative. 
(b)  Permit shall refer to the written permission issued with the approval and signature of the commissioner of public works and specifically authorizing a person to perform certain work or in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Permittee shall mean the person obtaining a permit, or his duly authorized representative. 
(d)  The words directed, required, permitted, ordered, designated, selected, prescribed, determined, certified, specified, or words of like import used in this article shall mean, respectively, the direction, requirement, permission, order, designation, selection, prescription, determination, certification or specification of the commissioner of public works. 
(e)  The words approved, authorized, acceptable, satisfactory, equal, necessary, adequate, suitable, competent, or words of like import shall mean respectively, approved by, authorized by, acceptable to, satisfactory to, equal to, or necessary, adequate, suitable or competent in the opinion of the commissioner of public works. 
(f)  Sanitary sewer shall refer to the lateral or street sewer or manhole built thereon in public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or other public area, and under the control of the city. 
(g)  Sewer service line shall mean the pipe or conduit laid between its connection point on a sanitary sewer and a building for the purpose of conducting domestic sewage and noninjurious water liquids from the said building into the said sanitary sewer. 
(h)  Stormwater drain shall refer to the lateral or main stormwater drain in public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or other public area, and under the control of the city. 
(i)  Drainage service line shall refer to the pipe or conduit laid between its connection point on a stormwater drain and a building or property for the purpose of conducting waste other than domestic sewage and other than injurious water liquids from the said building or property into the said stormwater drain. 
(j)  Invert shall mean the lowest point in the internal cross-section of a sanitary sewer, storm-water drain, house sewer or drain. 
(k)  Sidewalk drain and curb drain shall refer to the pipe or other conduit laid under or across the sidewalk area between the curb or curb line and the property line for the purpose of conducting roof and surface water from buildings and ground into the gutter. 
(l)  A public service corporation is a gas corporation, electric corporation, gas and electric corporation, steam corporation, and telephone or telegraph corporation operating an agency or agencies for public service, subject to the jurisdiction, supervision and regulations prescribed by or pursuant to the Public Service Law. 
(m)  The phrase, R-0, R-1, and R-2 and R-3 districts when used in this article shall mean and include any residence-one- and two-family or residence-one-family use zone in which the minimum size of lot per family as prescribed by the zoning ordinance is not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet for a one-family dwelling. 
(n)  Plate shall mean a temporary cover approved by the commissioner to provide a traffic surface over an unclosed street opening. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-69, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 1; Ord. of 11-14-96, § 1) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-3-2. - Notice to gas company and commissioner prior to doing work; inspections; work on holidays. 
(a)  Except for emergencies governed by section 322-a. of the General Business Law or section 7-3-46 of this Code, a permittee shall not begin or carry on any part of work provided to be done under any permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter until the written notices required to be delivered to the person or corporation engaged in the distribution of gas in the territory involved have been duly given, at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance, to such company and a copy thereof has been filed with the office of the commissioner and the commissioner's approval to commence work under said permit has been endorsed upon said permit. The copy of such notice delivered to the commissioner shall have endorsed thereon a signed statement by the applicant or permittee attesting to the delivery of such notice to such person or corporation engaged in the distribution of gas. At the time of application for a permit, the commissioner shall notify the applicant of the name and address of such person or corporation engaged in the distribution of gas in such territory. 
(b)  The commissioner shall not be required to inspect any work done under the provisions of the chapter unless the permittee shall have given said commissioner not less than twenty-four (24) hours' notice that said work is ready for inspection. 
(c)  No work provided to be done under the said permit shall be performed on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays except with the prior approval of the commissioner or in the event of an emergency as described herein. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 2; Ord. of 8-4-54, § 2; Ord. of 7-8-58, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-69, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-3. - Restrictions as to time of doing work. 
(a)  No street openings, street obstructions or maintenance operations will be allowed in streets located in or contiguous to any B District or C District, exclusive of C-O Campus Office District, as set forth in the zoning ordinance, nor in streets designated as county roads, on any day during the period beginning on the second Monday preceding Thanksgiving Day and ending on the first day of January, on any day during the week immediately preceding Easter Sunday, nor, in the discretion of the commissioner, on days occurring during periods of unusually heavy traffic, except in cases of emergency specifically certified by the commissioner. 
(b)  Any such emergency work, if and when authorized as provided above, shall be restricted to Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless otherwise authorized by the commissioner and no material or equipment shall be allowed to obstruct the normal flow of traffic between said hours. 
(c)  In all such cases work is to be completed and any obstruction removed, and trenches or other areas must be temporarily resurfaced at close of work or not later than the final day of effective period of permit except as otherwise authorized in advance by the commissioner. 
(d)  In the event that openings have not been backfilled and satisfactorily resurfaced, or obstructions removed, on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays or during periods of unusually heavy traffic volume or at the expiration of effective period of permit as provided above, the city reserves the right to backfill and resurface such openings or to remove such obstructions, by contract or otherwise, at permittee's own expense. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 2-a; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 1) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-3-4. - Expenses incurred by city. 
(a)  Any expenses that may be incurred by the city in connection with any inspection and/or other expenses incurred by the city in connection with the work to be done under the provisions of the permit and/or in the enforcement of this chapter or by reason of the failure or default on the part of the permittee, as determined and certified by the commissioner, shall be paid by the permittee within ten (10) days after the commissioner shall have sent the permittee a statement of such expenses. 
(b)  If not paid by the permittee within the above specified period, the said expenses shall be deducted from the deposit as herein otherwise provided for. 
(c)  The commissioner may, at his discretion, assign a representative to inspect, on behalf of the city, the work to be done under the provisions of any permit granted to a permittee, in which case such permittee shall pay, in addition to the fees provided in section 7-3-43 of this Code, to the city by check payable to the city, a weekly amount to be determined and established by the commissioner for each week or fraction thereof that such work shall be in progress, as payment for such inspection. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 3; Ord. of 5-19-54, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-72, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-5. - Materials. 
(a)  All materials used or incorporated in any work done under the provisions of this chapter shall conform to such specifications as may be promulgated by the commissioner. 
(b)  In general, the current standard specifications of the department of public works shall be followed, subject to the prior approval of the commissioner before these materials are incorporated in the work. 
(c)  Materials shall, at the discretion of the commissioner, be submitted to such tests as may in his opinion be necessary to determine their quality and acceptability. Such tests may be made in any laboratory designated by the commissioner and the city shall be reimbursed by the permittee for any expense incurred by said city on account of such tests. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 4)  
Sec. 7-3-6. - Performance of work to be at permittee's expense; compliance with other laws. 
All work related to any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be performed by the permittee at said permittee's own expense and strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and ordinances of the city, the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public works and such specifications as may be promulgated by the commissioner, and to the satisfaction of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 5)  
Sec. 7-3-7. - Permit to be exhibited. 
The permit shall be exhibited on the job site to the commissioner or to any authorized representative of the city upon request. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 6; Ord. of 10-16-72)  
Sec. 7-3-8. - Transfer of permit. 
A permit shall not be assigned or transferred except upon the prior written consent of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 8)  
Sec. 7-3-9. - Revocation of permits. 
The commissioner shall have the right to revoke or cancel a permit at any time should the permittee fail to comply with any of the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 7)  
Sec. 7-3-10. - Cleaning up and top soil restoration. 
(a)  A permittee shall clean up and remove promptly from the site of the work, upon completion thereof, all surplus excavated material and debris, and shall leave the site of the work in a neat and orderly condition. 
(b)  Where top soil, seeded areas or sod are disturbed in the course of the work, the permittee shall restore the ground surfaces to a condition as good as they were previously. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, § 9)  
Sec. 7-3-11. - Payment of fees by public service corporation. 
(a)  A public service corporation may, in lieu of payment of fees required by sections 7-3-21 through 7-3-56 or 7-3-86 through 7-3-94 of this Code, file and keep on file with the commissioner of public works an agreement, approved as to form by the corporation counsel, to pay such fees monthly to the city, upon being billed by the commissioner of public works for the amount of fees due on permits taken out by such public service corporation during the preceding month. Such bills shall be paid within thirty (30) days after same shall have been rendered by the commissioner. 
(b)  A public service corporation shall not be required to pay the fees otherwise prescribed in this article where the said corporation is required to relocate its facilities at its own cost and expense in connection with, and within the limits of, a street improvement project or other public works project carried on by the city, county or the state when said relocation is made necessary by said project. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. I, §§ 10, 11; Ord. of 8-5-68, § 1; Ord. of 11-3-69, § 3)  
Sec. 7-3-12. - Penalty. 
Any person doing or permitting to be done or causing to be done any act or thing contrary to the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a violation and, on the first conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in amount, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both such fine and/or imprisonment, and on any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a violation and shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in amount or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both fine and imprisonment for each such violation. Every violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense and, in case of continuing violation, every day's continuance thereof, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VIII; Ord. of 8-7-72, § 8; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 2, eff. 7-1-19 ) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Sec. 7-3-13. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  The city may issue a stop work order for violations of this Chapter. Persons receiving a stop work order shall be required to halt all land development or redevelopment activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to the stop work order. The stop work order shall be in effect until the city confirms that the land development or redevelopment activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop work order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  Any work done without a required permit shall be subject to a five hundred dollar ($500.00) additional fee in addition to all applicable permit fees. 
(Ord. of 5-30-13, § 1, eff. 7-1-13)  
Secs. 7-3-14—7-3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK, CURB AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION, REMOVAL, REPLACEMENT OR REPAIR 
 
Sec. 7-3-21. - Permit required. 
No person shall construct, remove, replace or repair a sidewalk, curb or driveway within the limits of any public street, highway or other public property, without first obtaining therefor from the commissioner a written permit. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-22. - Expiration and extension of permit. 
The permit required by the provisions of this article shall be valid for a period, not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, to be determined and specified therein by the commissioner. Such period may be extended, if so requested in writing by the permittee prior to expiration thereof, for such additional period as the commissioner, at the latter's discretion, may authorize. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-23. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring the permit required by the provisions of this article for such work shall make application to the commissioner upon forms provided for that purpose. The application shall contain: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner of the property in front of which or for whom the work is to be performed; 
(2)  The location of such property, the ward, block and lot designation thereof; 
(3)  The extent and nature of the work to be done; 
(4)  The date or dates when the work is to be done; 
(5)  Such necessary sketches and additional information as the commissioner may require; and 
(6)  A signed statement by the applicant that the applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is granted strictly in accordance with the conditions of the permit, the provisions of the charter and the ordinances of the city and the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public works, and that the city is to be saved harmless from any loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of the permit or from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his servants or agents, in connection with any of the work done under or in connection with the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-24. - Fees. 
No permit for the construction, removal, replacement or repair of a sidewalk, curb or driveway shall be issued by the commissioner until the applicant pays to the commissioner, in cash or by check payable to the city, a fee of one hundred and seventy-five dollars ($175.00) or ten (10) per cent of amount of deposit, whichever is greater, when such work, or any part thereof, is to be performed in streets located in or contiguous to any district other than the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5 and R2-4 districts, as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city; no fee shall be required for the construction, removal, replacement or repair of such portion of a driveway or curb located within the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5 and R2-4 zoning districts, the limits of a county road under the jurisdiction of the county commissioner of public works, or within the limits of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the state superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, § 2-a; Ord. of 7-8-58, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 2; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 1; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 1) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-3-25. - Deposits. 
(a)  No permit for the construction, removal, replacement or repair of a sidewalk, curb or driveway shall be issued by the commissioner until the applicant has paid to the commissioner, in cash or by check payable to the city, a deposit in an amount to be determined in accordance with the following unit prices for work to be done as determined by the commissioner: 
SIDEWALK to be constructed, removed, replaced or repaired, for each square foot ..... $25.00 
DRIVEWAY to be constructed, removed, replaced or repaired, for each lineal foot ..... 30.00 
CURB to be constructed, removed, replaced or repaired, for each lineal foot ..... 75.00 
DEPRESSED CURB — lowering, raising or cutting curb, or setting depressed curb for driveway entrance, for each lineal foot ..... 75.00 
TREES to be replaced (other than in R-0, R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts), for each tree ..... 750.00 
MINIMUM AMOUNT OF DEPOSIT ..... 250.00 
(b)  The amount of deposit, and minimum amount thereof, noted above, shall be doubled when such work, or any part thereof, is to be performed in front of property in a district other than the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5, and R2-4 districts, as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, except that no deposit shall be required for the construction, removal, replacement or repair of such portion of a driveway or curb located within the limits of a county road under the jurisdiction of the county commissioner of public works or within the limits of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the state superintendent of public works. 
(c)  The deposit shall be retained by the city until the final completion of the work to be done pursuant to the terms of the permit, as security for the faithful performance by the applicant of all the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the applicant's part to be done or performed. Upon the failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on its part to be done and performed, said deposit may be used by the city for any expense incurred by the city by reason of such failure or default on the part of the permittee. 
(d)  Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as determined and certified by the commissioner, has been paid and deducted from the amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 3; Ord. of 7-8-58, § 3; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 3; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 2; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 2) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-3-26. - Work to conform with city specifications. 
(a)  Sidewalks, curbs and driveways shall be constructed, removed, replaced or repaired in accordance with such grades and specifications as may be determined or promulgated by the commissioner and the permittee shall perform the work so as to meet the grade and alignment of the adjoining sidewalk, curb and driveway and/or such established line and grade as may be determined by the commissioner and in accordance with the latter's directions. 
(b)  In general, the current standard specifications of the department of public works shall be followed, subject to the prior approval of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 4)  
Sec. 7-3-27. - Depressed curb for driveway entrance. 
(a)  Upon prior written approval of the commissioner and subject to the provisions of this chapter, existing curbs may be cut or lowered, as provided herein, for the purpose of providing driveway entrances or exits. 
(b)  Bluestone and granite curbs shall not be cut, but shall be lowered in an acceptable manner. Concrete curbs may be cut if so authorized by the commissioner and provided such cutting can be done in a workmanlike and satisfactory manner. 
(c)  The cutting or lowering of existing curbs, or the construction of new depressed curbs, for the purpose of providing driveway entrances or exits shall not be allowed unless the permittee shall provide and install in each such case, an adequate driveway ramp or apron between the said curb and the abutting property line and extending over the entire width of the existing or proposed driveway. 
(d)  The driveway ramp or apron shall be surfaced with reinforced concrete seven (7) inches in thickness, or macadam at least four (4) inches in thickness, or not less than two (2) inches of bituminous surfacing material over four (4) inches of crushed stone, of satisfactory workmanship and construction. 
(e)  The portion of a curb so depressed shall not exceed in length such limits as shall be established by the commissioner, in the latter's discretion. 
(f)  The portion of driveway ramp or apron common with the sidewalk and forming a part thereof shall, unless otherwise authorized, consist of reinforced concrete seven (7) inches in thickness. 
(g)  When a depressed curb or portion thereof is no longer used or needed for driveway entrance purposes, the owner of property fronting thereon shall, upon the written order of the commissioner and within thirty (30) days following such written order, raise and restore such depressed curb or such portion thereof to its full height to conform with adjoining curbs or to such grade as shall be established by the commissioner. 
(h)  Failure of said owner to comply with such written order of the commissioner within the time specified hereinabove shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the owner shall thereupon be subject to the penalty provided for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 5; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 3)  
Sec. 7-3-28. - Trees removed for driveway purposes. 
Whenever it becomes necessary to remove a tree on city property in order to construct, replace or repair a sidewalk or driveway, the permittee shall furnish and plant a new tree for each tree removed, of a species and size acceptable and in an approved location, in front of or adjoining the permittee's property. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 5-a; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 4; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-3-29. - Pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
Pedestrian and vehicular traffic is to be adequately protected by the permittee by means of suitable protective barricades and lighted red lanterns around the work and the work is to be so arranged as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and hazard to such pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. II, § 6)  
Secs. 7-3-30—7-3-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET, SIDEWALK, ETC., OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-3-41. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall open or cause to be opened, by cutting or excavating, the surface or soil of any street, highway, sidewalk area or public ground for any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining therefor from the commissioner a written permit for street opening except, however, that the construction, removal, replacement, or repair of a sidewalk, curb or driveway shall be done under a permit for sidewalk, curb or driveway, as set forth in sections 7-3-21 through 7-3-29 of this Code, in lieu of a permit for street opening. 
(b)  No person shall make or cause to be made any connection into a sanitary sewer, storm-water drain or water main in an easement or right-of-way across private property, said sanitary sewer, storm-water drain or water main forming a part of the sewer, drainage or water distribution system, respectively, of the city, without first obtaining from the commissioner a written permit for street opening. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-42. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring a permit for street opening shall make application therefor to the commissioner for each such opening upon forms to be provided for that purpose. The application shall contain: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner of the property in front of which or for whom the work is to be performed; 
(2)  The location of such property, the ward, block and lot designation thereof; 
(3)  The size and purpose of the opening to be made and the maximum size of such opening; 
(4)  The dates when the work is to be performed; 
(5)  The type of pavement or surface to be disturbed; 
(6)  Such necessary sketches and additional information as the commissioner may require; and 
(7)  A signed statement by the applicant that the said applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is granted strictly in accordance with the conditions of the permit, the provisions of the charter and of the ordinances of the city and the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public works. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-43. - Deposit and fees—Generally. 
No permit for street opening shall be issued by the commissioner until the applicant therefor shall have first paid to the commissioner, in cash or by check payable to the city: 
(a)  A deposit to be determined as provided herein and to be furnished by the applicant only, unless otherwise authorized personally by the commissioner; and 
(b)  A fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) or ten (10) per cent of amount of deposit, whichever shall be greater, or in the case of a public service corporation, which shall file a bond in lieu of a deposit, in accordance with section 7-3-46 of this Code, said fee shall be eight dollars ($8.00) per lineal foot of street opening or three hundred dollars ($300.00) whichever is greater; no fee shall be charged a public service corporation for the installation or relocation of poles. Said fee is to cover the cost of issuing and recording the permit and the supervision and inspection of the work done in connection therewith. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 4; Ord. of 5-19-54, § 3; Ord. of 7-5-55, § 1; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 5; Ord. of 11-3-69, § 5; Ord. of 8-7-72, § 3; Ord. of 2-5-73, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 3; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 3; Ord. of > 5-17-16 , § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-44. - Same—Calculation generally, disposition, etc., of deposit. 
(a)  The amount of deposit for street openings shall be computed in accordance with the following unit prices for pavements or other areas to be disturbed or work to be done, as determined by the commissioner, except that no deposit shall be required in the case of an opening made in an area other than a sidewalk, located within the limits of a county road under the jurisdiction of the county commissioner of public works, or within the limits of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the state commissioner of transportation, nor shall a deposit be required for connecting to a storm-water drain or other structure under the jurisdiction of said county commissioner of public works or state commissioner of transportation: 
CONCRETE OR REINFORCED CONCRETE pavement to be disturbed, for each square yard ..... $150.00 
PLANT-MIXED OR HOT-MIXED BITUMINOUS surfaced pavement to be disturbed, for each square yard ..... 125.00 
ASPHALTIC MACADAM pavement to be disturbed, for each square yard ..... 125.00 
BRICK PAVEMENT to be disturbed, for each square yard ..... 125.00 
ALL OTHER TYPES OF PAVEMENT to be disturbed, for each square yard ..... 100.00 
UNPAVED surfaces, of any type, to be disturbed, for each square yard ..... 30.00 
SIDEWALKS, bituminous to be disturbed, for each square foot ..... 20.00 
SIDEWALKS, other types, to be disturbed, other than for the installation of underground storage tanks, for each square foot ..... 25.00 
GUTTERS (brick) to be disturbed, for each square foot ..... 30.00 
GUTTERS (other types) to be disturbed, for each square foot ..... 25.00 
CURBING (bituminous) to be disturbed, for each lineal foot ..... 40.00 
CURBING GRANITE (saw-cut) to be disturbed, for each lineal foot ..... 60.00 
CURBING (other types) to be disturbed, for each lineal foot ..... 40.00 
STRUCTURES—connection to existing manhole, catch basin or other structure, for each separate connection ..... 600.00 
STRUCTURES—construction of new manhole, catch basin or other structure, for each separate structure ..... 3,500.00 
TRENCHING in any type of street surface within street right-of-way (including sidewalk area) and in addition to above specified deposits: 
(a)  Where total depth is five (5) feet or less below pavement surface, for each lineal foot of trench ..... 60.00 
(b)  Where total depth is greater than five (5) feet and not more than twenty (20) feet below pavement surface, for each lineal foot of trench ..... 150.00 
(c)  Where depth is greater than twenty (20) feet below pavement surface, for each lineal foot of trench ..... 200.00 
TEST BORINGS on any public street or other public area, for each boring hole ..... 150.00 
CONNECTION of sewer service line or drainage service to cast iron pipe sanitary sewer or stormwater drain, for each separate connection ..... 350.00 
CONNECTION of sewer service line or drainage service line to other type of sanitary sewer or stormwater drain, for each separate connection ..... 275.00 
INSTALLATION OF UNDERGROUND VAULTS in sidewalk areas, for each square foot of overall horizontal surface disturbed ..... 350.00 
and not less than minimum of ..... 4,000.00 
EXCAVATION RELATED TO BUILDING CONSTRUCTION for foundation work, shoring, etc. 
(a)  for each front foot when maximum depth of excavation below sidewalk grade is five (5) feet or less—for each foot of depth ..... 20.00 
(b)  for each front foot when maximum depth of excavation below side walk grade is greater than five (5) feet and not more than twenty (20) feet—for each foot of depth feet for each foot of depth ..... 25.00 
(c)  for each front foot when maximum depth of excavation is greater than twenty (20) feet-for each foot of depth ..... 75.00 
INSTALLATION OF TIEBACKS (cable or bar types) under pavements or sidewalks for shoring support purposes for each tieback ..... 3,500.00 
TRAFFIC CONTROL ITEMS—Excavation or any construction activity within public rights-of-way which will disrupt, damage, or interfere with any portion of the following: 
(a)  Pavement markings: 
Straight arrow, each ..... 350.00 
Turn arrow, each ..... 400.00 
Combination arrow, each ..... 600.00 
Stop bar—12 feet minimum, each ..... 350.00 
Crosswalk—12 feet minimum, each ..... 300.00 
Pavement message, each ..... 600.00 
(b)  Electronic traffic detection loops (all sides) approximate size: 
*6 feet × 6 feet ..... 3,000.00 
*6 feet × 20 feet ..... 4,000.00 
*6 feet × 50 feet ..... 5,000.00 
*Repairs to or replacements of electronic vehicular detection systems are to be performed by qualified personnel only, using procedures which are approved by the commissioner of traffic 
DRIVING PIPES under pavements or sidewalks (amount of deposit to be based on area which would have been disturbed if work had been performed by open-cut trenching method) 
MINIMUM AMOUNT OF DEPOSIT for each street opening in the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5 and R2-4 districts ..... 500.00 
MINIMUM AMOUNT OF DEPOSIT for each street opening in all other districts ..... 1,250.00 
PLATING between the dates December 1 and March 31 and for each traffic lane affected the daily fee shall be ..... 50.00 
there shall be an additional charge of $10.00 per plate utilized. 
(b)  When excavating machinery or other equipment is to be used on work related to street openings or when such work is to be performed in or contiguous to any district other than the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5 and R2-4 districts, as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city, the commissioner, in his discretion, may increase the amount of deposit to be required over and above the amounts herein above specified to an amount which in the opinion of the commissioner would be sufficient to reimburse the city for any damage to the street or for any expense incurred by the city in maintaining and protecting traffic in a satisfactory and necessary manner. 
(c)  When the permittee exceeds maximum size of opening or work specified in permit, the permittee shall, when so ordered and before proceeding with the work, pay to the commissioner such additional amounts of deposit as the commissioner may require. Failure on the part of the permittee to comply promptly with said order will be considered sufficient cause for revocation of the permit. 
(d)  The amount of deposit shall be retained by the city for the duration of the period of maintenance. 
Upon the failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the permittee's part to be done or performed, said deposit may be used by the city for any expense incurred by the city by reason of such failure or default on the part of the permittee. 
Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as determined and certified by the commissioner, has been paid and deducted from the amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(e)  The period of maintenance shall be considered as a period of six (6) months after the date of final completion, as determined by the commissioner, of the work to be done pursuant to the terms of the permit, except however that, in the event that the termination of the said six (6) months' period shall fall within the months of December, January, February, March or April, then and in that event the period of maintenance shall be considered as extending until the first day of May next thereafter. 
(f)  The permittee shall be responsible for the entire work and shall keep every portion of said work in perfect order and repair during the entire period of maintenance and should the said permittee fail to make the needed repairs to the work or to adequately maintain surfaces disturbed by said permittee, the commissioner reserves the right, in said commissioner's discretion and without prior notice to the permittee, to cause such repairs to be made or such surfaces to be maintained by the city's own forces or by contract or otherwise in which case the city shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred thereby in accordance with the provisions of section 7-3-4 of this Code, and the permittee shall have no claim against the city for loss of anticipated profits or for any losses by reason thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 5; Ord. of 5-19-54, § 4; Ord. of 12-5-55, § 1; Ord. of 7-8-58, § 4; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 6; Ord. of 8-7-72, § 4; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 11-14-96, § 3; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 4; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 4; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 2, eff. 7-1-13)  
Sec. 7-3-45. - Same—Bond as deposit for excavations related to building construction for foundation work, shoring, etc. 
(a)  A permittee in lieu of the deposit herein specified for excavations related to building, construction for foundation work, shoring, etc., and if the amount of such deposit is in excess of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00), may file and keep on file with the commissioner of public works a bond, in the amount equivalent to the required deposit said bond to be approved as to form, amount and sufficiency of surety or other security by the corporation counsel. Such bond shall be retained as security for the faithful performance by the applicant of all the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the applicant's part to be done and performed. 
(b)  Such bond shall be considered as a deposit and the provisions of section 7-3-44 of this Code shall in regard to the disposition of the deposit apply to such permit in the same manner as specified for other permittees in section 7-3-44 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 5-a; Ord. of 2-18-57, § 1; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 7; Ord. of 8-7-72, § 5; Ord. of 6-25-73, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-46. - Same—Bond as deposit from public service corporation. 
(a)  Unless otherwise agreed upon between a public service corporation and the city, a public service corporation may, in lieu of deposit hereinbefore specified for street opening, file and keep on file with the commissioner of public works a bond in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), said bond to be approved as to form, amount and sufficiency of surety by the corporation counsel; said bond to be retained as security for the faithful performance by the applicant of all the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the applicant's part to be done or performed. 
(b)  Such bond shall be considered as a deposit and the provisions of section 7-3-44 of this Code in regard to the disposition of deposits shall apply to a public service corporation in the same manner as specified for other permittees in section 7-3-44 of this Code. 
(c)  The commissioner may, at his discretion, assign a representative to inspect, on behalf of the city, the work to be done under the provisions of any permit granted to a public service corporation, without any fee in addition to the fees provided in section 7-3-43 of this Code, where a bond is filed in lieu of a deposit. 
(d)  A public service corporation may, in lieu of the insurance hereinbefore specified for street opening, file and keep on file with the commissioner of public works an agreement, approved as to form by the corporation counsel to indemnify and save harmless the city from claims, suits, actions, proceedings, losses, injuries, damages and costs of every name and description arising out of or resulting from any act or omission on the part of such public service corporation under any permit granted to it, or from any negligence or fault of such public service corporation, its contractors, agents, servants or employees in connection with sidewalk, curb or driveway work or repairs or street openings or any work related thereto and to also defend on behalf of the city any such suits, actions or proceedings which may be instituted against the city. 
(e)  Such public service corporation shall be billed by the city for any expenses incurred by the city by reason of any failure or default on the part of said corporation, as determined and certified by the commissioner, and any such bill shall be paid within thirty (30) days after same shall have been billed by the city. 
(f)  In case of emergency due to breakage of pipes, etc., street openings may be made by a public service corporation prior to obtaining a permit for street opening, provided however that the public service corporation shall have filed any required bond and evidence of insurance of indemnity agreement, and provided further that the said public service corporation shall make application for the necessary permit not later than twenty-four (24) hours (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays not included) after said opening has been commenced. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 6; Ord. of 5-19-54, § 5; Ord. of 8-7-72, § 6; Ord. of 2-5-73, § 3)  
Sec. 7-3-47. - Protection of existing structures. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person by whom or for whose benefit any street opening is to be made for any purpose whatsoever in the city to give written notice thereof to any company whose pipes, conduits or other structures are laid in the street in which any work is to be done by the permittee under the provisions of a street opening permit not less than twenty-four (24) hours before commencing such opening or work; and such person, firm or corporation doing such work shall, at its own expense, carefully support, maintain in operation and protect from injury such pipes, conduits or other structures and, in case of injury shall restore same, at its own expense, to as good a condition as they were before the beginning of such opening or work. 
(b)  In case of failure of said person to comply with the provisions of subsection (a), then same may be done by the company to whom the pipes, conduits or other structures belong, and the costs thereof, and all damages sustained by the said company thereby shall be paid by said person to said company, and who may in default thereof, maintain an action against such person. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 7)  
Sec. 7-3-48. - Traffic. 
(a)  The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable barricades and fences around all of his or its work while excavation or other work is in progress and shall arrange his or its work in such a manner as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and delay to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The commissioner may require that the work be so arranged as to make possible the complete removal of obstructions to traffic on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays and, at the discretion of the commissioner, during periods of unusually heavy traffic volume. In the event that such requirement is not complied with by the permittee, the commissioner may, in the latter's discretion, cause all or part of the work covered by the permit to be backfilled and temporarily resurfaced by the city's own forces or by contract or otherwise, in which case the city shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred thereby in accordance with the provisions of section 7-3-4 of this Code, and the permittee shall have no claim against the city for loss of anticipated profits or for any other losses by reason thereof. 
(b)  Warning flags or signs and suitably lighted flashing lights shall be provided. In addition, a watchman shall be provided, if so ordered by the commissioner, in accordance with the latter's directions. 
(c)  Where the free flow of traffic is interfered with, the permittee shall designate competent persons to direct and expedite traffic by means of lights or flags. 
(d)  Unless otherwise authorized by the commissioner, vehicular traffic shall be maintained at all times during the progress of the work being performed under the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 8; Ord. of 5-21-51, § 2; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 8; Ord. of 6-25-73, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-49. - Poles and wires. 
No person shall erect or cause to be erected any telephone, telegraph or electric light or electric transmission pole or poles, or install any conduits or change the location thereof or string any wires in, over or upon any street, highway or public place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 9)  
Sec. 7-3-50. - Commencement and completion of work. 
All work done under this permit issued pursuant to this division shall be commenced and completed within thirty (30) days of its issuance, or as may be determined and specified in writing by the commissioner, with the exception that the replacement of the permanent pavement, the restoration of other surfaces disturbed and any necessary work required in connection with the specified "period of maintenance" shall be done in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. III, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-50, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 4)  
Sec. 7-3-51. - Use of plates. 
(a)  Plates shall be used for the minimum possible time and only when specifically requested by the applicant at the time of permit issuance, or as directed at any time by the commissioner. At all times plates shall be anchored adequately to assure covering the street opening. Vertical projecting lifting devices shall not be used. The commissioner reserves the right to direct that temporary pavement be utilized, in lieu of plating, in order to reopen a street to the motoring public. 
(b)  Except if another time period is so indicated, during the period from December 1 up to and including March 31 of each year, the following additional requirements exist: 
(1)  A per diem fee shall be charged as provided for in section 7-3-44(a); 
(2)  Highly reflective signs shall be placed as provided below. Signs shall be orange diamonds, two (2) feet on each side, with black letters and border, and shall be mounted so that the lowest point of the sign is seven (7) feet above the curb or ground surface. The signs shall have a three-eighths inch ( 3/8 ?) margin and a five-eighths inch ( 5/8 ?) border. Signs shall have five-inch (5?) tall letters placed so that one word is centered over the other; 
(3)  A sign shall be placed five (5) feet before the plate, facing oncoming traffic, and read RAISE PLOW; 
(4)  A sign shall also be placed two hundred (200) feet before the plate, or at any side street closer than fifty (50) feet, and read "PLATE AHEAD." This sign may be required at any time during the calendar year, or be waived at the discretion of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 11-14-96, § 2)  
Secs. 7-3-52—7-3-56. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MANNER OF EXCAVATION AND BACKFILLING 
 
Sec. 7-3-57. - Scope. 
Except as specifically provided in this division, the provisions of this division shall apply to all excavations or openings under or in any street, sidewalk or other public place.  
Sec. 7-3-58. - Excavated material. 
Excavated material shall be stored in neat piles, so placed as to cause the least interference with the use of the roadway or sidewalks. If so ordered by the commissioner, such excavated material shall be promptly removed from the site of the work. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. IV, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-59. - Sheathing and shoring. 
(a)  Except where the excavation is in rock and unless otherwise authorized by the commissioner as provided hereinunder, tight sheathing at least two (2) inches in thickness, securely fastened in place with whalers and braces throughout the duration of the work, shall be placed in all trenches having a depth in excess of three (3) feet, shall be driven to the same depth as the lowest part of the pipe, conduit or structure proposed to be installed, and shall be carried down in such a manner that the bottom of the sheathing shall at no time be more than one foot above the bottom of the excavation. 
(b)  Whenever conditions make it necessary, the commissioner may require that the sheathing be driven ahead of the excavation as the latter proceeds. 
(c)  Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the commissioner, sheathing and shoring shall be left in place with a cutoff line eighteen (18) inches below ground surface. 
(d)  The commissioner may, in his discretion, authorize that the use of sheathing and shoring be omitted in whole or in part if the horizontal distance from the edge of the proposed excavation to the nearest edge of the pavement, water main or other surface or subsurface structure is not less than the vertical depth of the proposed excavation as measured from the highest point of such pavement, water main or other surface or subsurface structure. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. IV, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-60. - Rock excavations. 
(a)  A permittee who is conducting rock excavations shall observe all municipal ordinances and all state and federal laws relating to the transportation, storage and use of explosives, and shall obtain all necessary permits and/or licenses pertaining thereto. 
(b)  Any rock excavation within five (5) feet of water or gas main, pavement or other surface or subsurface pipe, conduit or structure shall be done with very slight charges of explosive and the utmost care shall be used to avoid disturbing or injuring said structure. 
(c)  The permittee shall use the utmost caution in properly protecting all surface or subsurface structures from the effects of blasting and any damage done to such structures shall be promptly repaired by the permittee, or by such other parties as the commissioner may direct, at the said permittee's own expense. 
(d)  Sufficient warning shall be given to all persons in the vicinity of the work before blasting. The site of the blast shall be covered with heavy timbers, blasting mats or other devices to prevent damage from flying rock fragments. 
(e)  The time of blasting and the manner and size of charges must be satisfactory to the commissioner. The blasting shall be done only by properly licensed individuals. 
(f)  The permittee shall give adequate notice to the city and to the appropriate public service corporations before proceeding with blasting in the vicinity of water mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater drains or other drains or other public utility lines. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. IV, § 3; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 6)  
Sec. 7-3-61. - Backfilling. 
(a)  No backfilling shall be done by the permittee until the work being done under the permit shall have first been inspected, and backfilling authorized, by the commissioner. In case of nonconformity with this requirement, the commissioner shall have the right to require that the work be uncovered by the permittee at the latter's own expense so that proper inspection may be made. 
(b)  The material used to backfill the bottom of the trench up to a level of two (2) feet above the completed pipe or other structure shall be clean earth, sand or rock dust and shall contain no broken rock, stone or frozen earth. 
(c)  Above a level two (2) feet higher than the top of the completed pipe or other structure, the material used for backfill shall be approved material containing no frozen earth and not more than one-third broken rock and no stone or piece thereof shall exceed one-half (½) cubic foot in size. 
(d)  The space between the pipe or other structure and the bottom and sides of the trench shall be packed full by hand and thoroughly tamped as fast as placed and up to the level of the top of the pipe or other structure, which shall then be covered by hand to a level of at least three (3) feet higher than the top thereof, the backfill material being carefully deposited and tamped in layers not more than six (6) inches thick. 
(e)  Such tamping shall be done with a light tamper weighing from six (6) to eight (8) pounds and shall be conducted in such a manner as to secure compacted backfill without in any way injuring or disturbing the completed pipe or structure. At least one man shall be provided for tamping for each man engaged in backfilling. 
(f)  Backfilling above the level of three (3) feet above the top of the pipe or other structure shall be done in successive horizontal layers not exceeding six (6) inches in depth and each layer shall be thoroughly compacted by means of approved pneumatic tamping equipment or by such other means as may be approved by the commissioner. 
(g)  The use of power equipment or other mechanical means for backfilling will not be allowed unless provision has been made for adequate compacting of backfill material and then only with the prior written authorization of the commissioner. 
(h)  Compacting the backfill by means of flooding or puddling with water will not be allowed except with the prior written authorization of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. IV, § 4; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 9)  
Sec. 7-3-62. - Driving small pipes. 
Tunnelling under pavements or sidewalks will not be allowed but small pipes or conduits having a dimension of six (6) inches or less may be driven beneath pavements or sidewalks in such a manner that the surface shall not be disturbed or injured and provided that: 
(a)  The prior written approval of the commissioner is obtained; 
(b)  No excavation in connection therewith shall be closer than one foot to the edge of a sidewalk or eighteen (18) inches to the edge of a pavement; 
(c)  Such pipes or conduits shall be enclosed in sleeves or larger pipes so that required replacements or repairs may be made in the future without disturbance or injury to the pavement or sidewalk; 
(d)  In the event of damage to a pavement, sidewalk, or subsurface pipe or structure caused by driving such pipe or conduit, the permittee shall repair and make good the damage at the permittee's own expense. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. IV, § 5)  
Secs. 7-3-63—7-3-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESTORATION 
 
Sec. 7-3-71. - Temporary resurfacing. 
(a)  Immediately after backfilling the excavation, the permittee shall place thereon an acceptable temporary resurfacing as provided hereinbelow. Such temporary resurfacing shall be maintained even with the roadway or other surface as directed until permanent restoration of the surface is completed as specified herein and approved by the commissioner. 
(b)  The temporary resurfacing shall consist of not less than two (2) inches of approved premixed bituminous paving material or the commissioner of public works may permit six (6) inches of temporary concrete flush to surface except that, where top soil, seeded areas or sod have been disturbed by the excavation, or by any work related thereto, the permittee shall restore the entire ground area to the same condition as existed before the work began. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VI, § 1; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 11; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 10; Ord. of 6-25-73, § 3)  
Sec. 7-3-72. - Permanent restoration. 
Permanent restoration of the surface over a street opening excavation shall not be made until satisfactory settlement of the backfill has taken place as approved by the commissioner. The permanent pavement must be completed no later than the date indicated on the permit. If said permanent pavement has not been completed within eighteen (18) months from the date of issuance of the permit, such permit shall be in default and the commissioner shall have the right to forfeit the deposit therefor to the city, unless written application for an extension is made to, and granted by, the commissioner, for good and sufficient reason other than neglect by the permittee. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VI, § 1; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 11)  
Sec. 7-3-73. - Concrete pavements. 
(a)  Before proceeding with pavement resurfacing, the existing concrete pavement shall be neatly cut back a distance of not less than eighteen (18) inches beyond the edges of the excavation, care being taken not to remove any existing steel reinforcement. Such distance shall not be reduced without prior approval of the commissioner and may be increased as provided hereinunder. 
(b)  Where the existing pavement has been undermined by the excavation or by any work connected therewith, or where spalled or scaled surface areas of existing pavement adjoin the area to be resurfaced, the permittee shall remove additional pavement beyond the distance stated herein, as ordered by the commissioner. 
(c)  In the event that any portion of the proposed concrete resurfacing, as finally determined by the commissioner as provided hereinabove, is nearer than four (4) feet from a joint, then such removal shall be extended to said joint. The smallest horizontal dimension of the concrete resurfacing shall be not less than four (4) feet. 
(d)  None of the subgrade so exposed shall be disturbed in any way except when, in the opinion of the commissioner, such subgrade is unstable, in which case the unstable material shall be removed as ordered, and replaced with approved stable material in layers not to exceed four (4) inches, each layer being thoroughly compacted and tamped. 
(e)  The upper edges of the existing concrete pavement shall be uniformly plumbed and tooled for a depth not to exceed one inch, the remaining depth being left with straight but rough edges. 
(f)  Reinforcement, consisting of deformed steel bars, not less than three-eighths of an inch in size, spaced as ordered, shall be placed two (2) inches above the subgrade and shall be adequately tied in with the existing reinforcement, if any. 
(g)  The edges of the existing concrete pavement shall be thoroughly washed, wire brushed, dampened and painted with a 1:1 neat cement coating immediately previous to the placing of the new concrete resurfacing. 
(h)  The concrete shall be proportioned, mixed, placed, finished and cured as ordered. The commissioner may, in the latter's discretion, require the use of an approved high early-strength cement placed under approved methods. The use of admixtures, and work in freezing weather will be allowed only with the commissioner's prior approval and as directed. 
(i)  Approved joints shall be installed where directed. 
(j)  The resurfaced area shall not be opened to traffic until so ordered by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VI, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-74. - Bituminous pavements. 
(a)  Prior to the replacement of bituminous pavements, the subgrade shall be properly prepared and a reinforced concrete foundation of required thickness and proportions shall be placed thereon, all in accordance with the requirements for concrete pavements outlined hereinabove. 
(b)  The existing bituminous pavement shall then be neatly cut back a distance of not less than six (6) inches from the edges of the new concrete foundation. The entire foundation so exposed shall be thoroughly cleaned in an acceptable manner and a new bituminous pavement surface of approved type and thickness shall be placed thereon and rolled in an acceptable manner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VI, § 3)  
Sec. 7-3-75. - Macadam pavements. 
(a)  In resurfacing existing macadam pavements, the permittee shall cut back the existing pavement a distance of not less than one foot beyond the edges of the excavation. Such distance shall not be reduced without prior approval of the commissioner and may be increased by the commissioner if the existing pavement has been undermined by the excavation or by any work connected therewith. 
(b)  The permittee shall place on the subgrade four (4) inches of approved crushed stone of required size, properly tamped, and two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete, compacted and finished in an acceptable manner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VI, § 4; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 12)  
Sec. 7-3-76. - Other surfaces. 
Any surfaces not elsewhere provided for in this division disturbed by reason of the work performed under the permit shall be restored by the permittee as directed by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VI, § 5)  
Sec. 7-3-77. - Option of city to do work at permittee's expense. 
The commissioner may, in his discretion, cause any or all of the work contemplated in this division to be done by the city's own forces or by contract or otherwise, in which case the city shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred thereby in accordance with the provisions of section 7-3-4 of this Code, and the permittee shall have no claim against the city for loss of anticipated profits or for any other losses by reason thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VI, § 6)  
Secs. 7-3-78—7-3-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OBSTRUCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Use of public areas for manufacturing, etc., § 5-1-5 et seq. 
 
Sec. 7-3-86. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall obstruct, encumber or occupy in any manner or for any purposes whatsoever any public street, highway or sidewalk area without first obtaining therefor from the commissioner a written permit for street obstruction. 
(b)  The use and operation of construction machinery or equipment in connection with building operations, when such machinery or equipment obstructs, encumbers or occupies any portion of a public street, highway or sidewalk area, will not be allowed unless a written permit for street obstruction has first been obtained from the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 1; Ord. of 5-19-54, § 6)  
Sec. 7-3-87. - Term and expiration. 
Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, to be determined and specified therein by the commissioner. Such period may be extended, if so requested in writing by the permittee prior to expiration thereof, for such additional period as the commissioner, at the latter's discretion, may authorize. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 1; Ord. of 5-19-54, § 6)  
Sec. 7-3-88. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring a permit for street obstruction shall make application therefor to the commissioner upon forms provided for that purpose. Such application shall contain: 
(1)  The names and addresses of the applicant and of the owner of the property in front of which the street obstruction is proposed; 
(2)  The location of such property, the ward, block and lot designation thereof; 
(3)  The extent and nature of the proposed obstruction, and the dates thereof; 
(4)  Such necessary sketches and additional information as may be required by the commissioner; and 
(5)  A signed statement by the applicant that the said applicant agrees to abide by all the conditions of the permit, the provisions of the charter and the ordinances of the city and the applicable rules and regulations of the department of public works. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3-89. - Fees and deposits—Generally. 
(a)  No permit for street obstruction shall be issued by the commissioner until the applicant thereof shall have first paid to the commissioner in cash, or by check payable to the city: 
(1)  A deposit in the amount to be determined as provided herein; and 
(2)  A minimum fee of one hundred-fifty dollars ($150.00) if such obstruction or any part thereof occurs in streets or public rights-of-way within the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5, and R2-4 districts as defined in the zoning ordinance or three hundred dollars ($300.00) if such obstruction occurs elsewhere, or ten (10) per cent of the amount of deposit, whichever is greater. The commissioner in his discretion may issue a temporary short-term permit for street obstruction valid for a period not to exceed three (3) per cent of the amount of the deposit, or thirty dollars ($30.00), whichever is greater, for one (1) day and five (5) per cent of the amount of the deposit or sixty dollars ($60.00), whichever is greater, for two (2) days. 
(b)  No permit for street obstructions shall be extended by the commissioner until the applicant pays to the commissioner in cash or by check payable to the city a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if such obstruction or any part thereof occurs in streets or rights-of-way located in R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5 and R2-4 districts as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city or three hundred dollars ($300.00) if such obstruction occurs elsewhere or ten (10) per cent of the amount of the deposit, whichever is greater of each extension of thirty (30) days or less. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 4; Ord. of 7-8-58, § 5; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 12; Ord. of 11-3-69, § 7; Ord. of 3-15-71, § 1; Ord. of 8-7-72, § 7; Ord. of 6-25-73, § 4; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of > 5-17-16 , § 3) 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-3-90. - Same—Calculation generally and disposition of deposit. 
(a)  The amount of a deposit for street obstructions shall be computed in accordance with the following unit prices for areas to be obstructed, encumbered or occupied as determined by the commissioner: 
FOR THE STORAGE OF MATERIALS, or any operation in connection with the erection, demolition, repair, alteration or reconstruction of a building, other than the loading, unloading and/or operation of construction equipment or machinery, for each square foot ..... $6.00 
FOR THE LOADING, UNLOADING AND/OR OPERATION OF CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT OR MACHINERY, in connection with the erection, demolition, repair, alteration or reconstruction of a building, for each square foot ..... 7.00 
MINIMUM AMOUNT OF DEPOSIT for each street obstruction ..... 600.00 
(b)  The amount of deposit, and minimum amount thereof, prescribed above, shall be doubled when the obstruction, or any part thereof, occurs in streets located in or contiguous to any district other than the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5, R1-5 and R2-4 districts, as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  When permittee exceeds maximum authorized obstruction specified in the permit, the permittee shall, when so ordered, pay to the commissioner such additional amounts of deposit as the commissioner may require. Failure on the part of the permittee to comply promptly with said order shall be considered sufficient cause for revocation of the permit. 
(d)  The deposit shall be retained by the city until expiration of the permit, as security for the faithful performance by the applicant of all the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the applicant's part to be done or performed. 
(e)  Upon the failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on its part to be done and performed, said deposit may be used by the city for any expense incurred by the city by reason of such failure or default on the part of the permittee, and without prior notice thereof to the permittee and the said permittee shall have no claim against the city for loss of anticipated profits or for any losses by reason thereof. 
(f)  Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as determined and certified by the commissioner, which has been paid and deducted from the amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 5; Ord. of 5-19-54, § 9; Ord. of 7-8-58, § 6; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 13; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1; Ord. of > 5-17-16 , § 4) 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 7-3-91. - Permissible area of obstruction. 
(a)  In the case of a permit issued by the commissioner for a street obstruction related to the erection, demolition, repair, alteration or reconstruction of a building, the permissible area of the street, highway or sidewalk to be obstructed, encumbered or occupied shall be determined and specified by the commissioner. 
(b)  Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the commissioner, the permittee shall conduct his operation under the permit for street obstruction in such a manner that not more than one-third of the total width of a street or highway, pavement or other surface shall be obstructed. 
(c)  The permittee shall keep clear and unobstructed, at all times, and shall in no way interfere with prompt access to, or adequate operation of, all manholes, catch-basins, hydrants, valves or fire alarm boxes that may be situated in or near the area obstructed or occupied in accordance with the permit. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the permittee shall also keep clear and unobstructed at all times the sidewalk area and gutter in or near the area occupied under the permit and shall remove promptly therefrom any dirt, rubbish, snow or ice. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 6; Ord. of 4-17-67, § 14; Ord. of 10-2-72, § 13)  
Sec. 7-3-92. - Safeguarding pedestrian and other traffic. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the permittee shall erect and maintain suitable protective barricades and fences around the obstruction or area occupied and shall at all times provide a safe, adequate and unobstructed passageway not less than four (4) feet in clear width for the use of pedestrians. 
(b)  When materials are to be moved over the sidewalk by means of derrick, crane, hoist or chute, the permittee shall provide a safe and adequate sidewalk shed conforming with the requirements of chapter 9-5 of this Code, or when so ordered by the commissioner, shall provide a safe, adequate and unobstructed temporary sidewalk around the obstruction or area occupied. 
(c)  Temporary sidewalks, when so ordered, shall, wherever practicable be built to the same level as the existing sidewalk and in such a manner as not to interfere with the free flow of water in the street or gutter. 
(d)  The permittee shall also make adequate provision for the safe passage of vehicular traffic by day and by night. Where the free flow of traffic is interfered with the permittee shall designate competent persons to direct and expedite traffic by means of lights or flags. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 7)  
Sec. 7-3-93. - Loading and unloading across sidewalk. 
No permit for street obstruction shall be required for the loading or unloading, across a sidewalk area, of goods, wares or merchandise which are in the process of being transferred to or from trucks or other vehicles standing at the curb line provided, however, that such loading or unloading shall be conducted in the most prompt manner possible and shall be subject to such laws and ordinances as may be adopted by the city, and provided further that the commissioner may, at the latter's discretion, require that such loading and unloading shall take place during certain specified hours. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 8)  
Sec. 7-3-94. - Damage resulting from street obstructions. 
Any damage resulting from the obstruction, encumbrance or occupation of a public street, highway or sidewalk area or from the storage of materials or operation of construction equipment or machinery shall be repaired by the permittee to the satisfaction of the commissioner, when so ordered. 
(Ord. of 4-5-48, Art. VII, § 9)  
Secs. 7-3-95—7-3-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CUSTOMER-OWNED OR -LEASED CURRENCY- OR CREDIT-OPERATED TELEPHONES AND PUBLIC TELEPHONES 
 
Sec. 7-3-100. - Intent and purpose. 
The Common Council of the City of White Plains finds and declares that: 
(a)  The uncontrolled placement of customer-owned or -leased currency- or credit-operated telephones ("COCOT") and public telephones in public rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such rights-of-way, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic-control and emergency services. 
(b)  Such telephones so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons using public rights-of-way or improperly maintained or illegally operated in violation of the New York State Public Service Law or regulations promulgated by the New York State Public Service Commission located therein, constitute public nuisances. 
(c)  The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals, and general welfare of persons in City of White Plains in their use of public rights of way. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  City shall mean The City of White Plains. 
(b)  COCOT shall mean any customer-owned or -leased currency- or credit-operated telephone as regulated by the Public Service Commission pursuant to the New York State Public Service Law and applicable regulations promulgated thereunder and only for the purposes of this article, any public currency or credit operated telephone owned by the local exchange company (presently known as New York Telephone). 
(c)  Licensee shall mean the person responsible for placing and maintaining a COCOT in a public right-of-way. 
(d)  Monthly gross usage shall mean the sum total of all charges paid by or billed to customers for use of a COCOT during a calendar month. 
(e)  Public right-of-way shall mean any areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(f)  Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-102. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public right-of-way, or in any place requiring the user to stand or otherwise occupy any public right-of-way, in The City of White Plains, any COCOT without first having obtained a permit from the city specifying the exact location of such COCOT. One (1) permit may be issued to include any number of COCOTs and shall be signed by the applicant and countersigned by the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-103. - Application for permit. 
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the commissioner of public works upon such form as shall be provided by him, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant and the proposed specific location of the COCOT, and shall be signed by the applicant. A fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus thirty dollars ($30.00) for each COCOT for which a permit is sought shall accompany the application, such fees to cover operation for each calendar year, or part thereof. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-104. - Conditions for permit. 
(a)  As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the permittee thereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, officials, employees and volunteers, against any and all claims, actions, loss, damage, injury, liability, cost and expense arising out of or incidental to the installation, use, or maintenance of a COCOT within the city. 
(b)  The applicant shall file with the application for the permit a certificate of commercial general liability insurance in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage with The City of White Plains endorsed as additional insured, such certificate to be approved as to form, correctness and adequacy by the corporation counsel to insure the city against any loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of the permit or from any negligence or fault of the applicant, his agents, servants or employees, in connection with the COCOT or with any work related thereto. Such insurance must remain in force throughout the effective period of the permit as well as any authorized extensions thereof and shall carry an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will give at least thirty (30) days' written notice to the city of any modification or cancellation of any such insurance. 
(c)  Such permits shall be valid for one (1) calendar year, or part thereof, and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original applications referred to in section 7-3-103 and upon payment of the referenced fees. 
(d)  Stickers showing the permit number shall be issued with the permit and must be displayed on the COCOT at all times. 
(e)  The licensee shall pay to the city a quarterly commission for the use of the public right-of-way as provided in section 7-3-110. 
(f)  The licensee shall install, operate and maintain its COCOTs in conformance with all applicable requirements of the New York State Public Service Law and all applicable regulations promulgated by the New York State Public Service Commission. 
(g)  No renewal permit may be granted if any required compliance or other reports or financial statements have not been filed with the city or if the payment of any quarterly commissions are overdue or for any COCOT if the New York State Public Service Commission has ordered the discontinuance of service of a licensee's COCOT at that location. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-105. - Standards for maintenance and installation. 
Any COCOT which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way or which requires the user to stand or otherwise occupy any public right-of-way, shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  No COCOT shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the use of the COCOT itself. 
(b)  Each COCOT shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the COCOT to secure an immediate refund in the event the call paid for by the user is unable to be completed. The coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order. 
(c)  Each COCOT shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the COCOT a notice setting forth all the following: 
(1)  The identity and address of the COCOT licensee. 
(2)  A statement that calls can be made at no charge to the 911 emergency number, the operator, and, where applicable, to local directory assistance. 
(3)  Specific dialing and coin deposit/return information, including instructions for accessing a local exchange telephone company operator and directory assistance. 
(4)  The rates charged for local calls, including the initial charge for a local call and the rates charged for additional time periods. 
(5)  The identity of the interexchange company carrying calls from the COCOT, and instructions for obtaining access to the other interexchange companies. 
(6)  Where applicable, a notice that additional charges are imposed by the COCOT licensee for the use of the telephone or telephone equipment for the placing of a call. 
(7)  A toll-free number which the caller can use to obtain information on the rates, surcharges, terms or conditions applicable to calls placed from the COCOT. 
(8)  The toll-free number to call for resolution by the COCOT of a billing or service complaint and the toll-free number of the Public Service Commission to call for assistance in resolving a complaint. 
(d)  Each COCOT shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each COCOT shall be serviced and maintained so that: 
(1)  It is reasonably free of dirt and grease. 
(2)  It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof. 
(3)  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon. 
(4)  The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration. 
(5)  The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading. 
(6)  The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-106. - Location and placement of COCOTs. 
Any COCOT which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right-of-way or which requires the user to stand in or otherwise occupy any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(a)  No COCOT shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public street or which requires the user to stand in or otherwise occupy any part of the roadway of any public street. 
(b)  A maximum of four (4) COCOTs may be placed next to each other and only by the same licensee. 
(c)  No COCOT shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
(1)  Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk. 
(2)  Within twelve (12) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk. 
(3)  Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility. 
(4)  Within five (5) feet of any driveway. 
(5)  Within three (3) feet ahead or fifteen (15) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop. 
(6)  Within three (3) feet of the outer end of any bus bench. 
(7)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet. 
(8)  Within three (3) feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping. 
(9)  Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any other COCOT (except when two (2) units are installed by the same licensee next to each other). 
(10)  On any handicap access ramp. 
(11)  On the face of any building so that the COCOT intrudes into the public right-of-way unless the COCOT utilizes a support structure as approved by the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-107. - Permits and licenses. 
A COCOT licensee shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by law, rule, regulation, or ordinance, and maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-108. - Construction, fire and safety codes. 
(a)  A COCOT licensee shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove, replace, or restore the COCOT in strict compliance with all current technical codes adopted by the city, the state, or the United States. 
(b)  The codes referred to in paragraph (a) above specifically include, but are not limited to, building, construction, fire and safety, and zoning codes. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-109. - Conditions on use of streets and public ways. 
(a)  During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of the COCOT, the COCOT licensee shall use materials of good and durable quality; and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable manner. 
(b)  All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of a COCOT licensee shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city. 
(c)  In the event a COCOT creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, then, at its own expense, such COCOT licensee shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the city, remove that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition from the subject property. 
(d)  A COCOT licensee shall not place equipment where it will interfere with the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures, or with water hydrants or mains, or with wastewater pump stations, or any other service or facility that benefits the city's or its residents' health, safety, or welfare. 
(e)  A COCOT licensee, at either its own expense or that of a private contractor, shall protect rights-of-way, easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of such COCOT licensee when necessitated by reason of: 
(1)  Traffic conditions; 
(2)  Public safety; 
(3)  A street closing; 
(4)  Street construction or resurfacing; 
(5)  Change or establishment of street grade; 
(6)  Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, pump stations, force mains, power or signal lines; or 
(7)  Any improvement, construction or repair related to the city's or its residents' health, safety or welfare. 
(f)  It shall be the responsibility of a COCOT licensee (acting alone or in conjunction with another person) to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) before employees, agents, or independent contractors of a COCOT licensee install cable in the marked-off area. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-110. - Commissions. 
(a)  A COCOT licensee granted a permit to install or operate a COCOT after the date this article becomes effective [July 6, 1993], shall pay to the city for the continued privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways, and other facilities of the city in the operation of the COCOT, and for supervision thereof by the city during the term of the permit, a quarterly commission based upon the sum of three (3) months' gross usage of the COCOT as follows: 
$150.00 or less—no fee due. 
$150.01 to $300.00—5% of the monthly usage. 
$300.01 to $500.00—7% of the monthly usage. 
Over $500.00—9% of the monthly usage. 
(b)  A COCOT licensee shall file with the commissioner of public works within forty-five (45) days after the expiration of each quarter a detailed financial and revenue statement clearly showing the gross monthly usage of each COCOT during the preceding quarter and certified by a certified public accountant or officer of a COCOT licensee attesting to the accuracy, completeness, and veracity of the usage figures. Such statement shall be in the form and format approved by the Commissioner of Finance of The City of White Plains. 
(c)  Payment of the quarterly commission shall be rendered to the city not later than the first day of March, June, September and December. 
(d)  In the event that payment is not made within thirty (30) days after the date specified in this section, then such COCOT licensee may be declared in violation of this article; and the license granted hereunder may be revoked, terminated, or canceled in the manner prescribed by this article. 
(e)  The right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid as commissions shall always be accorded to the city. 
(f)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an accord, or satisfaction of any claim that the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this article, or for any other performance or obligation of a COCOT licensee. 
(g)  Payments of compensation made by a COCOT licensee to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be considered in addition to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently adopted. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-111. - Furnishing of reports. 
(a)  If at any time, the Federal Communications Commission or New York State Public Service Commission or another federal or state agency requires or requests the submission of reports, data, or other information by a COCOT operator, then such COCOT licensee shall, at the same time, without a separate or specific request, submit those reports, data, or other information to the commissioner of public works. However, unless specifically authorized by the state, a COCOT licensee, shall not be required to submit state or federal tax returns, or any information exempted under federal or state privacy laws. 
(b)  With respect to any enforcement proceedings brought by the New York State Public Service Commission pursuant to its regulations, the licensee shall promptly file with the commissioner of public works any citations issued against the licensee regarding any COCOT located in the city as well as a copy of notification that the citation is being contested and any subsequent determination of the commission. 
(c)  With respect to reports required by this article, it is noted that a COCOT licensee shall timely submit any required report including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  An annual compliance statement in the manner set forth in this article. 
(2)  A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this article. 
(3)  Any other reports or information required by any other section of this article, or by the common council, which are necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-112. - Books and records. 
(a)  A COCOT licensee shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts, and records of the business and operations under, and in connection with, its operation in the city. 
(b)  The Commissioner of Finance of The City of White Plains shall have the right to review (either by mail or at the COCOT licensee's local office) all records pertaining to a COCOT licensee's operations, on seven (7) working days' written notice, which records shall include, but not be limited to, the audited annual financial statements and all pertaining footnotes. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon, or judicially ordered, should occur within the COCOT licensee's normal business hours. 
(c)  The commissioner of finance shall have the right to hire, at the city's expense, an independent certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to review the books and records of a COCOT licensee. If, after a financial audit, it is determined that the COCOT licensee has underpaid amounts owed by more than two (2) percent, then the city may require the COCOT licensee to reimburse the city for the actual cost of the audit. 
(d)  A false entry into the books and/or records of a COCOT licensee made by a COCOT licensee of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a material violation of this article. 
(e)  A COCOT licensee, at its local office, shall keep complete and accurate books and records of the key aspects of the COCOT licensee's operation for at least the preceding three (3) years in such a manner that all matters pertaining to the city can be easily produced and/or verified at the city's request. Also, the COCOT licensee shall keep, at its local office, any other applicable records and information that may be required by any other federal or state agency having jurisdiction over the COCOT licensee. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-113. - Annual compliance statement required. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the compliance statement, the commissioner of public works shall review a COCOT licensee's compliance statement in an effort to determine whether the COCOT licensee is complying with the various provisions and/or requirements of this article. The form or content of the compliance statement may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Prior to December 1 of each calendar year, the commissioner of public works shall furnish to each COCOT licensee a compliance statement form. 
(c)  Prior to December 31 of each calendar year, each COCOT licensee shall file with the commissioner of public works a completed and executed (by the COCOT licensee or an officer thereof) compliance statement. 
(d)  There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual compliance statement. However, if the COCOT licensee supplies incomplete information which requires independent verification by the city or its consultant, then the COCOT licensee may be required to reimburse the city for all costs associated with the independent verification. Moreover, failure to submit a statement by the deadline, or the provision of false information within the statement, may subject an affected COCOT licensee to any and all penalties and fines listed in this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-114. - Violations. 
(a)  Upon a determination by the commissioner of public works that COCOT has been installed, used or maintained in violation of this article, an order to correct the offending condition will be issued. Such order may be telephoned to the licensee and shall be mailed to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition, suggest actions necessary to correct the condition, and inform the COCOT licensee of the right to appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending condition within five (5) days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the order or to appeal the order within three (3) days after its receipt shall result in the offending COCOT's being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the offending COCOT is not properly identified as to owner under provisions of section 7-3-105(c) hereof, it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. 
(b)  Upon a determination by the commissioner of public works that a licensee is operating in violation of this article in that a COCOT licensee has failed to file any report required by section 7-3-111 or has failed to pay any commissions recruited by section 7-3-110 or has failed to allow an audit of the licensee's books and records as required by section 7-3-112 or has made a false entry into its books and/or records pursuant to section 7-3-112(d), an order to correct the violation will be issued. Such order may be telephoned to the licensee and shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the section of this article violated, suggest actions necessary to correct the violations and inform the COCOT licensee of the right to appeal. Failure to properly correct the violation within five (5) days (excluding Saturday, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the order or to appeal the order within three (3) days after its receipt shall result in the licensee's COCOTs being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the licensee's COCOT is not properly identified as to owner under the provisions of section 7-3-105(c) hereof, it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. 
(c)  An impound fee, which shall be measured by the city's cost and expense of impounding, shall be assessed against each COCOT summarily removed. The commissioner of public works shall cause inspections to be made of corrected conditions ordered under subdivision (a) hereof or of a COCOT reinstalled after removal under this section. The COCOT licensee shall be charged a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) inspection fee for each COCOT so inspected. This charge shall be in addition to all other fees and charges required under this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-115. - Appeals. 
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal and shall be advised of his right to appeal to the commissioner of public works. An appeal must be perfected within three (3) days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing with the office of the commissioner of public works a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date no more than ten (10) days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The commissioner of public works shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard. At the conclusion of the hearing, the commissioner of public works shall make a final and conclusive decision. This decision shall be appealable to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to article 78 of the CPLR. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-116. - Commissioner of public works designated representative. 
The term "commissioner of public works" as used in this article shall include his/her designated representative. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-117. - Abandonment. 
In the event a COCOT remains inoperable for a period of thirty (30) continuous days or in the event that the New York State Public Service Commission orders the discontinuance of service of any COCOT, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the manner as provided in section 7-3-114 for COCOTs in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-118. - Existing units. 
Any licensee who erected, placed, maintained or operated a COCOT on any public street or sidewalk or in any public right-of-way or in any place requiring the user to stand or otherwise occupy public right-of-way shall obtain a permit under this article from the commissioner of public works within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article [July 6, 1993]. In the event that any licensee fails to apply for a permit within such time period or a licensee's application for a permit is denied, the COCOT shall be deemed abandoned and may be treated in the manner as provided in section 7-3-114 for COCOTs in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Sec. 7-3-119. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-6-93, § 1)  
Chapter 7-4 - VAULTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Environmental quality review, Ch. 3-2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-4-1. - Definitions. 
The term "vault", when used in this chapter, shall mean every description of opening below the surface of the street that is covered over, in front of any improved or unimproved property, but shall not be construed as meaning storage tanks for flammable liquids referred to in the city's fire prevention code. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 1) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, Ch. 9-6.  
Sec. 7-4-2. - Location restrictions. 
No person shall erect or cause or permit any vault to be made under the pavement of any alley or to within three (3) feet of the face of the curb on any street. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 8)  
Sec. 7-4-3. - Conduit and piping reservations and protection. 
A vault shall not be constructed so as to interfere with any sewer or water pipe, fire hydrant, manhole, gas pipe, tree, lamp post or other public work or improvements nor with any electrical conduit carrying fire alarm or police wires, unless by the written consent of the commissioner of public works especially granted therefor, and no such consent shall be granted until the applicant therefor has paid to the city through the commissioner of public works a sum of money sufficient in the judgment of the commissioner of public works to defray the cost and expense of removing, rebuilding, relaying or replacing such pipes, hydrant, manhole, tree, post, conduit or other public work and making the necessary connection therewith. Every such applicant disturbing any such public work or improvement enumerated above shall, within ten (10) days after so disturbing it, restore the same to such a condition as will meet the approval of the commissioner of public works. When such public work or improvement is so restored by such applicant, the sum so paid to the commissioner of public works shall be refunded by him to such applicant. If the applicant shall fail to restore such public work or improvement within the time prescribed, the commissioner of public works shall cause the work to be done and the cost thereof shall be paid out of the sum deposited by the applicant, and the balance, if any, refunded. The city, in granting a permit for a vault, reserves the right at any time to construct and maintain under, over or through such vault space water or gas pipes, drains, conduits for electric heat or power, sewers or other pipes or underground work needed for the public service that the commissioner of public works may deem necessary to be placed in, below, over or through the space occupied by the vault, without compensation. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 9)  
Sec. 7-4-4. - Restrictions on use. 
Boilers or other heating appliances, gasoline, gas or steam engines, pumps and plumbing fixtures, urinals or water closets, gasoline, petroleum or gas storage tanks, flammable or combustible materials or any pipe or fixture generating or emitting gas, steam or offensive odors shall not be located or permitted in any vault. No fans or pipes ejecting vitiated or super-heated air from the adjoining building or exhaust pipe causing disagreeable noise shall be located in or open into a vault. This section shall not be construed as in any wise affecting storage tanks for flammable liquids, permits for the installation of which have been issued and are in force and effect, under the provisions of the city's fire prevention code. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 13)  
Sec. 7-4-5. - Removal of vault covers. 
No person shall remove or insecurely fix or cause, procure, suffer or permit to be removed or insecurely fixed, so that the same can be moved in its bed, any covering or aperture of any vault. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the owner or occupant of the building with which such vault shall be connected from removing the covering for the purpose of using such vault, providing he encloses such opening or aperture and keeps the same enclosed while such covering shall be removed with a strong box or curb at least three (3) feet high, firmly and securely made; and providing he shall not remove such covering until after sunrise of any day and shall replace it before one-half hour after sunset, unless such opening or aperture is at all times when the same is open adequately illuminated. Such vault openings shall be kept closed when not in use. Where a permit has been issued to a public service corporation in front of real property not owned or leased by it, the provisions of this section shall apply only to such public service corporation. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 14; Ord. of 7-1-57, § 3)  
Sec. 7-4-6. - Defective vault covers. 
Upon notification from the commissioner of public works the owner or occupant of the abutting property in front of which there is a vault under the sidewalk, the cover whereof is broken or has a slippery surface, shall, within the time specified in such notice, adequately repair said cover or remove the same and substitute another cover, so that the cover over said vault will provide secure footing for pedestrians. Where a permit for a vault has been issued to a public service corporation in front of real property not owned or leased by it, the provisions of this section shall apply only to such public service corporation. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 15; Ord. of 7-1-57, § 3)  
Sec. 7-4-7. - Survey before covering vault. 
It shall be the duty of every person for whom a vault may be in process of construction to procure the same to be measured by a competent surveyor and to deliver to the commissioner of public works a certificate of such measurement, signed by the surveyor, before the arching of such vault or cover shall be constructed. The enlargement or increase in size of any such vault shall be construed to be an original, new and independent and separate construction and shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter as in the case of original, new and independent and separate construction thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 18)  
Sec. 7-4-8. - Records and inspection of vaults. 
The commissioner of public works shall keep a complete record of all vaults and from time to time shall make or cause to be made such inspection of all vaults as may be necessary to determine if the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 16)  
Sec. 7-4-9. - Power of commissioner of public works to require repairs. 
Whenever any vault is not covered or secured as herein provided or in the opinion of the commissioner of public works is unsafe or inconvenient for public travel, said commissioner of public works may order the same to be placed in a safe condition satisfactory to him; and, if the same shall not be done within ten (10) days after service of a written notice on the owner or person in possession of the abutting premises, the commissioner of public works may make such change and the expense thereof shall be paid by such owner or person in possession of the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 12; Ord. of 6-21-54, § 4)  
Sec. 7-4-10. - Costs of removal by city. 
(a)  In the event the commissioner of public works causes the removal of all machinery, fixtures and structural parts of or in a vault for which a permit has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon completion of such work the premises in front of which such work shall have been done shall be subject to a charge for the cost thereof, plus ten (10) per cent. During the month of May in each year the commissioner of public works shall make a list of all such charges and file the same in his office, and give public notice of such filing by publication in the official paper, two (2) insertions, that said list has been made and filed and that for ten (10) days from the date of the first publication of said notice said list may be examined by any person interested therein, and that upon a day and hour stated in such notice, and at least ten (10) days after the first publication thereof, he will attend at his office to hear any objections to said list, and pass upon all objections, and, if need be, alter and correct said list. 
(b)  After said hearing and making of the necessary corrections, if any, he shall attach thereto his certificate that such hearing has been had and that said list is now complete, and file the same with the commissioner of finance, whereupon the commissioner of finance shall mail to each owner of real property included in such list whose name and address he is able to ascertain a statement of the amount of charges, composed of said cost plus ten (10) per cent, against his property. Upon the filing of the said list with the commissioner of finance the several sums mentioned in said list shall be deemed to be assessed against the several persons named therein, and the commissioner of finance shall, when extending the next general tax upon the city assessment roll, place unpaid amounts thereon as against the property of the person named in said list, and such amounts shall be collected at the same time, in the same manner and by the same proceedings as other taxes on said roll. 
(c)  The failure to mail any statement or failure of the addressee to receive the same shall not in any manner affect the validity of the assessment or the penalties imposed by law with respect thereto. 
(d)  In the event such work is performed in front of premises for which a permit has been granted to a lessee, the owner of said premises shall be deemed to have consented to such assessment by signing the written consent for the construction of the vault, required under section 7-4-42 of this Code. 
(e)  If the applicant was a public service corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to such public service corporation and not to the owner or lessee of the abutting property. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 4; Ord. of 6-21-54, § 2; Ord. of 7-1-57, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-11. - Reports by commissioner of building; restriction on issuance of building permits. 
When plans for a building filed with the commissioner of building show that any portion of the space underneath any sidewalk or other public place is intended to be used as a vault, he shall report such fact to the commissioner of public works and notify the owner of the abutting property that a separate vault permit must be obtained from the commissioner of public works. The commissioner of building shall not approve such plans nor issue a permit for the construction or alteration of such building until a copy of the required vault permit issued by the commissioner of public works shall have been filed in the office of the commissioner of building. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 17; Ord. of 10-21-57, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-12. - Penalties. 
Any person, who himself or itself or by his or its agents or employees shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any order, rule or regulation made in pursuance thereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days or to both such fine and imprisonment, and each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 20; Ord. of 5-3-93) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 7-4-13—7-4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 7-4-21. - Materials. 
All vaults shall be enclosed with a sufficient concrete, stone or brick wall, or brick arches between iron or steel beams, to retain the roadway of the street, and the side, end or party walls of such building shall extend under the sidewalk of sufficient thickness to sustain such wall or arch. The thickness of such wall shall be determined by the commissioner of building according to the size, shape and depth of the vault but in all cases shall be at least twelve (12) inches thick and of a strength to resist the pressure of the ground with a factor of safety of not less than four (4). 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(1); Ord. of 10-21-57, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-22. - Cover. 
(a)  All vaults shall be covered with a safe and substantial noncombustible cover, capable of sustaining a distributed load of three hundred (300) pounds to the square foot of its surface, or a concentrated load of five (5) tons at any point and such covering shall be flush and kept flush with the sidewalk. When a vault is covered with glass in iron or concrete frames, such glass lights shall not be more than four (4) inches square each and the top surface of the same shall be rough and surfaced in such a manner as to be entirely safe for pedestrians. Such glass lights shall be kept in good repair at all times. Floor lights when used in sidewalks shall not exceed one-third of the width of the sidewalk perpendicular to the curb. 
(b)  The aperture or opening in the sidewalk over a vault shall be covered with a strong glass or substantial iron or steel plate and frame with a second top surface and rabbeted flush with the sidewalk. The dimensions of the door in any direction shall not exceed the dimensions of the opening by more than six (6) inches. All covers shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner of building, and the commissioner of public works. When any such cover is placed in any sidewalk it shall be placed as near as practicable to the building. There shall not be more than one opening for each twenty-five (25) feet of street frontage of any building and such openings shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet to each other, except that openings to transformer vaults shall not be closer than five (5) feet, center to center. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(2, 3); Ord. of 4-5-48, § 1; Ord. of 10-21-57, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-23. - Ventilation, drainage and pavement. 
All vaults shall be thoroughly ventilated, properly drained and paved. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(4)).  
Sec. 7-4-24. - Open gratings and similar openings. 
No open gratings or openings of a similar kind shall be installed in the sidewalk for the purpose of obtaining light or ventilation or for any other purpose. When in the judgment of the commissioner of building and the commissioner of public works sufficient safeguards are provided by proper design they may, by joint approval, permit open gratings or openings of a similar kind to be installed in the sidewalk in the case of transformer installations under such sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(5); Ord. of 3-15-48, § 1; Ord. of 10-21-57, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-25. - Protection of hydrant bends. 
When a hydrant bend exists in connection with a vault it shall be protected by a wall of such dimensions and materials as the commissioner of public works may require. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(6))  
Sec. 7-4-26. - Barricades, lamps, etc. 
Every owner or lessee of any property served by any vault, other than a vault constructed and maintained under a permit issued to a public service corporation in front of real property not owned or leased by it, and every person making or having charge of any such vault shall, during the whole of such time such vault shall be open or uncovered, cause the same to be guarded and enclosed with a strong box or curb at least three (3) feet high, and in addition thereto shall at night cause a lighted lamp or lantern to be placed and kept thereon, so as to cast a light upon such vault during the whole of every night. The provisions of this section, however, shall apply to a public service corporation where it has received a permit to install a vault in front of real property not owned or leased by such public service corporation. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(7); Ord. of 7-1-57, § 2)  
Sec. 7-4-27. - Time limit on work. 
All vaults shall be completed and the ground closed over them within three (3) weeks after their construction has been commenced, unless an extension of time shall be granted by the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(8))  
Sec. 7-4-28. - Sidewalks. 
The sidewalk over a vault shall be laid according to the sidewalk specifications of the city and shall at all times conform with the established grade and be kept in good condition and repair. Whenever the grade is changed the vault must be changed and repaved at the expense of the owner or permittee, as the case may be, of the abutting property, other than a vault constructed and maintained under a permit issued to a public service corporation in front of real property not owned or leased by it. The provisions of this section, however, shall apply to a public service corporation where it has received a permit to install a vault in front of real property not owned or leased by such public service corporation. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(9); Ord. of 7-1-57, § 2)  
Sec. 7-4-29. - Notice when relocation of underground construction is necessary. 
Owners or lessees of abutting property shall notify the public utility companies concerned and the commissioner of public works when the removal or relocation of any underground construction is made necessary by the construction of a vault. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 11(10); Ord. of 6-21-54, § 3)  
Secs. 7-4-30—7-4-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 7-4-41. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any space, or cause any excavation to be made, under the surface of any street, alley or other public place for or to cause or require any vault to be constructed or made in any street, alley or other public place in the city without first having obtained and paid for and having in full force and effect a permit therefor as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 2)  
Sec. 7-4-42. - Application. 
(a)  The owner of the fee of real property in the city or the lessee of such real property holding under a long term lease of ten (10) years or more, desiring to procure a permit for a vault in front of such real property, or a public service corporation, shall make and sign a written application to the commissioner of public works upon forms provided by the city, at least forty-five (45) days before starting the excavation. Such application shall give the name and address of the applicant, the location of the existing or proposed vault, the use made or intended to be made thereof, the nature of all fixtures, machinery and appliances therein or to be placed therein, and such other information as the commissioner of public works may require. If the applicant be the lessee, or a public service corporation, the applicant shall obtain the written consent of the owner of said property for the construction of the vault, which consent shall be attached to and made a part of said application. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the location and dimensions of the existing or proposed vault, the number, size and location of all existing or proposed openings therein from the street, the method or proposed method for protecting such openings, the character of the existing or proposed construction and the existing or proposed method of draining the vault. The commissioner of public works shall forthwith upon receipt thereof refer such application and plans to the commissioner of building for his action. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 3; Ord. of 6-21-54, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-57, § 1; Ord. of 10-21-57, § 1; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-43. - Agreement to abandon vault space, etc. 
(a)  The application for the permit required by the provisions of this article shall be accompanied by a written agreement upon a blank form provided by the city and signed by the owner and lessee, if any, of the abutting property, that: 
(1)  He, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns shall: 
a.  Permit the use of such vault as set forth in section 7-4-3 of this Code; 
b.  Hold the city harmless from any claims for damages to himself or the occupants of such property resulting from gas, sewage or water leaking into such excavation; 
c.  Release, relinquish, vacate and remove without cost to the city all machinery, fixtures and structural parts of or in such vault within ten (10) days after having been ordered in writing to do so by the commissioner of public works or after the revocation of the permit notwithstanding payment of rent or fee; 
(2)  In case of failure to comply with the written order of the commissioner of public works within the time specified the commissioner of public works may cause the same to be done and all expenses incurred or damages paid by the city on account thereof shall be paid to the city by the person to whom the permit is granted upon demand; 
(3)  The city may at any time enter upon the premises for inspection and proper maintenance of anything therein; and 
(4)  The permit is granted with the understanding that the occupancy and use of such space underneath the sidewalk or other public place by the applicant, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns is merely an accommodation and no right, title or interest of the public is in any way waived or abridged thereby. 
(b)  If the applicant for such permit is a public service corporation the provisions of this section shall apply to such public service corporation and not to the owner or lessee of the abutting property. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 4; Ord. of 6-21-54, § 2; Ord. of 7-1-57, § 1) 
Cross reference— Deposit for installation of underground vaults, § 7-3-44.  
Sec. 7-4-44. - Issuance, form, assignment, revocation and record. 
(a)  Upon the filing of the application, bond and agreement as required by the provisions of this article, and upon the written approval of the application and plans by the commissioner of building, the commissioner of public works may, upon his approval of the application and agreement and the payment to the city of the fee hereinafter required, issue to the applicant a permit for one year. 
(b)  No permit shall be refused except for a specific reason and for the protection of the city's interest or the safety of the public. 
(c)  All permits shall state clearly the location and size of the vault, the dates of issuance and expiration of the permit, the fee paid, and the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued. Permits shall be consecutively numbered, nontransferable and nonassignable and revokable by the commissioner of public works upon thirty (30) days' notice at any time the commissioner of public works shall deem revocation advisable for the protection of the city's interest or the safety of the public or for a violation of the provisions of this chapter or any order issued pursuant thereto. 
(d)  A copy of each permit so issued shall be kept on file in the office of the commissioner of public works and copies thereof shall be forthwith upon the issuance of each permit filed by the commissioner of public works with the commissioner of building and the commissioner of finance of the city. 
(e)  In case of the denial of any application or the revocation of any permit, the commissioner of public works shall notify the applicant of the denial of such application or revocation of such permit, as the case may be, in writing, giving his reasons for such denial or revocation. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 5; Ord. of 10-21-57, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-45. - Expiration. 
All permits and renewal permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the thirtieth day of September following the issuance of such permits or any renewals thereof. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 5; Ord. of 5-4-54, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-46. - Fees. 
The person making, using or maintaining any structure as described in section 7-4-41 of this Code shall pay the city such privilege for the first year an amount calculated at the rate of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per square foot for each square foot of ground occupied or required for such vault including the walls and footings thereof. The sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) shall be paid for each subsequent annual renewal of the said permit provided the required bond has been renewed or is still in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 6; Ord. of 8-6-90, § 1; Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 5; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 5; Ord. of 5-30-19, § 3, eff. 7-1-19 )  
Sec. 7-4-47. - Transfer. 
Any person to whom a permit has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this article, who conveys the abutting property, or assigns the lease thereon, may notify the commissioner of public works, in writing, of such conveyance or assignment of such lease, and furnish the commissioner of public works, in writing, with the name and address of the purchaser or assignee thereof. Upon the giving of such notice, in writing, and furnishing the name and address of such purchaser or assignee, such person may procure from the commissioner of public works a permit to close such vault in a manner similar to the balance of the sidewalk in front of such premises, otherwise, such purchaser or assignee shall pay a transfer fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and sign an agreement as provided herein, whereupon a renewal permit will be issued to such purchaser or assignee covering and applying to the same vault space specified in the original permit, and it shall not be necessary for the person to whom the original permit was issued to close such opening. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 3; Ord. of 6-21-54, § 1; Ord. of 7-1-57, § 1)  
Sec. 7-4-48. - Permits issued under previous orders. 
Whenever any person holding a contract or permit for the construction or maintenance or use of any vault, which shall have been issued or made under the terms of any ordinance or legal order heretofore in force, the conditions of which have been and are now being fully complied with, shall apply for a permit hereunder and shall desire to have the permit or contract heretofore entered into cancelled, the commissioner of public works shall cancel the same as regards any liability thereunder arising after the date of the issuance of the new permit hereunder, but such contract or permit and the bond given therewith shall remain in full force and effect as to all rights and liabilities accruing under the same, including all amounts due the city for fees or compensation under the same, up to the time of such cancellation. The fee for the said cancellation and issuance of the new permit shall be the same as the annual renewal fee and shall extend said permit for one year. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 7)  
Sec. 7-4-49. - Removal of unpermitted structures. 
Any person using space underneath any sidewalk or other public place for a vault or any person constructing or commencing the construction of a vault who fails to procure a permit as herein provided, shall, in addition to the other penalties imposed by this chapter, be required by the commissioner of public works to remove every such structure and restore the ground to its original condition within ten (10) days after the service upon him of a written notice so to do. In default thereof, the commissioner of public works shall perform the work and the costs shall constitute a debt of such owner to the city, the same to be recovered in a civil action. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 10)  
Sec. 7-4-50. - Appeals. 
(a)  In case of a denial by the commissioner of public works of an application for any permit required by this chapter or its revocation by him, the applicant or the licensee may within ten (10) days appeal from the decision of such commissioner of public works to the common council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be served personally upon the city clerk. At the same time the appellant shall pay to the city through the city clerk one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such appeal shall include a copy of the application for the permit, with its date of filing in the office of the commissioner of public works, and a copy of such permit, in case a permit shall have been issued, and a copy of the reasons relied on by the commissioner of public works as justifying him in denying the application or in revoking such permit, as the case may be. Such service, with the payment of the said sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), shall act as a stay in preventing the commissioner of public works from filling in and restoring the space occupied by any such vault which shall have been constructed or made pursuant to any such permit or which may have been heretofore constructed or made pursuant to any ordinance heretofore enacted or otherwise in accordance with law, until a decision of the common council of such appeal. 
(b)  The decision of the common council shall be entered on the minutes thereof and a copy thereof, over the signature of the city clerk, mailed to the appellant, the commissioner of public works and the corporation counsel of the city. In case the decision of the common council shall be in favor of the appellant, the said sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) paid by him to the city through the city clerk shall forthwith be returned to him, otherwise said sum shall be retained by the city to cover the cost to the city of such appeal. The decision of the common council shall be final, and, if in favor of the appellant, the commissioner of public works shall forthwith issue the permit or reinstate the permit revoked, as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 10-3-38, § 19; Ord. of 5-3-93)  
Chapter 7-5 - TREES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4. 
Cross reference— Fastening handbills on trees and other public property, § 5-3-2; protection of trees in parks, § 6-2-8; trees removed for construction of driveways, § 7-3-28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to art. II of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 7-5-1. - Authority of commissioner of public works generally. 
(a)  The commissioner of public works shall have the authority to act on all matters pertaining to the planting, maintenance, protection and control of shade trees planted or growing upon the public highways or public places in the city. 
(b)  Within the provisions of the city charter and this chapter and with the approval of the common council, said commissioner shall make proper and necessary rules with reference to such matters: 
(1)  To regulate the work to be done on trees now standing, such as pruning, trimming, spraying and cavity work; 
(2)  To select proper trees to fill in the openings caused by the removal of dead trees and the prohibition of any damage which may tend either to retard the health or growth of the trees and to select the variety to be planted on any street. 
(c)  The records of the commissioner shall be open at all reasonable times to public inspection. The commissioner shall cause to be fully published such regulations as he may adopt relating to tree culture. 
(d)  All planting of shade trees on the public highways or public places of the city shall be done by the commissioner, the employees of the department of public works or by persons or corporations under the control of and responsible to the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 1)  
Sec. 7-5-2. - Planting generally. 
Except as otherwise provided, no person shall hereafter plant any tree within the limits of any parkway, street or public place in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2(a))  
Sec. 7-5-3. - Killing, breaking, trimming, etc.; permit. 
It shall be unlawful, without the written permit of the commissioner of public works, to cut, break or trim any tree, shrub or plant planted or growing in any park or public highway within the city or to remove any device set for the protection of any tree, shrub or plant in any public highway or city park of said city. Any person desiring for any lawful purpose to remove, cut, prune or trim any tree in any park or public highway of the city shall apply to the commissioner of public works and if in the judgment of the commissioner of public works the desired removal, cutting, pruning or trimming shall appear necessary or desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof be such as said commissioner of public works approves, the commissioner of public works shall thereupon issue a written permit for such work, to be done under the supervision of and as directed by the commissioner of public works or his representatives. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, §§ 2(b), (c))  
Sec. 7-5-4. - Trees authorized for street plantings. 
(a)  The following trees only may be used for street tree planting: 
American elm 
Crimean linden 
Silver linden 
European linden 
Tulip tree 
Red maple 
Sugar maple 
Pin oak 
Scarlet oak 
White oak 
Sweet gum 
Red oak 
(b)  The commissioner of public works may from time to time add to or reduce the above list. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2(d))  
Sec. 7-5-5. - Attaching wires to trees; location of poles or posts. 
No person without a written permit from the commissioner of public works shall: 
(1)  Attach or cause to be attached any electric wire, insulator or any device for the holding of any electric wire to any tree growing or planted in any public highway or any public place in the city; or 
(2)  Cause or authorize or permit a wire or other conductor charged with electricity to come in contact with any tree in any public highway or city park in the city; or 
(3)  Locate, place or maintain any pole or post in such a manner as to interfere with any tree or shrub growing upon any public highway, park or public place in the city; or 
(4)  Cause any wire to be attached to any tree in any manner. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2(e))  
Sec. 7-5-6. - Fastening animals. 
No person shall fasten or cause to be fastened or tied a horse or other animal to, or post any bill, card, notice or advertisement of any kind or attach a sign to any tree, bush or shrub in any public highway or public place in the city or allow any horse or other animal owned by him or in his charge to stand so near any such tree, bush or shrub that the same may be gnawed or otherwise injured by such horse or other animal so allowed to stand. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2(f))  
Sec. 7-5-7. - Planting specifications. 
Trees shall be planted at least thirty (30) feet apart, except where special permit is obtained from the commissioner of public works. No tree shall be planted measuring less than two (2) inches in diameter of trunk one foot above ground. The trunk of each tree shall be without branches for not less than seven (7) feet, six (6) inches, nor more than nine (9) feet from the ground. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2)  
Sec. 7-5-8. - Placement of stone, cement, etc., around roots; permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful except with the written permit of the commissioner of public works to place or maintain upon the ground in any public highway or city park within the city any stone, cement or other material or substance in such manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree in any such highway or park. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided for in such written permit as above provided for, there must be maintained about the base of the trunk of each shade tree in the public highway and city parks of the city at least six (6) square feet of open ground for a tree of three (3) inches in diameter. 
(c)  No violation under this section shall occur until thirty (30) days after a specific written notice has been served by the commissioner of public works on the owner or offender. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2(g))  
Sec. 7-5-9. - Dump harmful substances near trees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, authorize or permit any brine, oil, gas, gasoline, liquid dye or other substance deleterious to tree life, to lie, leak, pour, flow, or drip on or into the soil about the base of a tree in any public highway or city park in the city, or upon a sidewalk, road or pavement therein, at a point whence such substance may in any manner whatsoever injure each tree. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2(1))  
Sec. 7-5-10. - Interference with enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere or cause or authorize any interference with the commissioner of public works or any employee, agent or servant of the department of public works engaged in planting, cultivating, pruning, spraying or removing any tree in any public highway in the city or city park or in the removal of any device attached to such a tree. 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 2(i))  
Sec. 7-5-11. - Penalty. 
Any person who does any act or thing or causes or directs any act or thing to be done in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. of 12-31-29, § 3; Ord. of 5-3-93) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 7-5-12—7-5-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROTECTION, PRESERVATION AND MAINTENANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ I—VII of a resolution adopted Nov. 5, 1984, as ch. 7-5, art. II, §§ 7-5-22—7-5-28, was at the discretion of the editor, the resolution being nonamendatory of the Code. The provisions of the existing ch. 7-5, §§ 7-5-1—7-5-11, were designated as art. I, with the word "chapter" changed to "article" where necessary. 
 
Sec. 7-5-22. - Goals and objectives. 
The city's overall goal is to protect and preserve worthwhile healthy trees, and where removal is necessary, to replenish trees for both aesthetic and many environmental benefits. The city's principal objectives are to: 
(a)  Protect and preserve as many trees as possible, particularly specimen trees and/or select or rare species. 
(b)  Begin a program of reforestation and replacement of those trees which must be removed due to disease or development of the site. 
(c)  Ensure an acceptable level of green foliage in intensely developed areas and retain this feature in low-density suburban settings. 
(d)  Ensure that suitable wildlife habitats are maintained and reinforced in all sections of the city. 
(Res. of 11-5-84, § I)  
Sec. 7-5-23. - Definitions. 
(a)  Canopy road tree protection zones: All lands within twenty-five (25) feet of the curbline of major streets and expressways as identified on the land use plan map of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Crown: All portions of a tree excluding the trunk and roots, such as branches, leaves, flowers and other foliage. 
(c)  Disturbances areas: Any area of a site which will be altered from its natural state as a result of development under a permit issued pursuant to an approved building plan, site plan, conservation development or subdivision plan. 
(d)  Environmentally sensitive site or features: A "lot," plot, parcel or portion thereof, or a characteristic or element of or on such land, as described in chapter 3-5 of the Municipal Code and meeting the thresholds set forth at section 3-5 thereof. 
(e)  Pre-construction site development plan: A plan setting forth how the site will be prepared for and impacted by construction and how the trees, tree clusters, environmentally sensitive features and non-disturbance areas will be preserved and protected. 
(f)  Primary tree protection zone: That portion of a lot constituting the front, side and rear yard setbacks, as established by section 5.3 of the Zoning Ordinance; in cases where the special building setbacks appearing on the zoning map are greater, they shall be the controlling dimension. 
(g)  Protected trees: Red and white dogwood; copper beech; black walnut; mulberry; birch. 
(h)  Road right-of-way tree protection zone: 
(1)  Land in which a governmental entity or property owner owns a legal interest in a roadway or has an easement devoted to or required for the use of the land as a road; 
(2)  That land designated as a road right-of-way by records on file in the department of public works. 
(i)  Secondary tree preservation zone: All land not included in the primary tree protection zone except for sidewalks and street rights-of-way. 
(j)  Specimen tree(s): Trees which have a minimum trunk diameter of twelve (12) inches at a point four (4) feet above the natural grade and/or a minimum crown spread of fifteen (15) feet; any other tree or grouping of trees deemed significant by an approving agency. 
(k)  Tree: Any woody plant having at least one (1) well-defined trunk at least four (4) inches in diameter measured at a height of four (4) feet above the natural grade and having a clearly defined crown; 
(l)  Tree preservation committee: The commissioners of planning and public works and the environmental officer. 
(m)  Tree protection, preservation and reforestation plan: A plan identifying and showing the location, type, size and health of trees; stating the ultimate disposition of the trees; showing the type, size and location of any trees to be planted; and setting forth measures to protect trees before, during and after construction. 
(n)  Tree removal: Any act which causes a tree to die within two (2) years after commission of the act, including but not limited to damage inflicted upon the root system or trunk as the result of: 
(1)  The improper use of machinery on the trees; 
(2)  The storage of materials in or around the trees; 
(3)  Soil compaction; 
(4)  Altering the natural grade to expose the roots or to cover the trunk; 
(5)  Permitting the infection or infestation of the tree by pests, fungus or harmful bacteria; 
(6)  Excessive harmful pruning; 
(7)  Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious surface within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree; and 
(8)  Application of herbicides or defoliants to any tree without first obtaining a permit. 
(Res. of 11-5-84, § II; Res. of 2-5-96, § 1)  
Sec. 7-5-24. - Applicability. 
These guidelines shall be applied to pending and future development proposals on undeveloped land or portions of otherwise developed sites; redevelopment projects on land to be cleared of structures; conservation developments and conventional subdivisions; plans for new one- and two-family homes and any other development proposals as determined by an approving agency. 
Approving agencies shall use these guidelines in the review and approval of applications for building plans, site plans, special permits, variances, conservation developments, conventional subdivisions and subdivisions involving environmentally sensitive sites and features. 
The tree preservation committee shall follow these guidelines in reviewing and making recommendations on applications on referral from the approving agency, and in the review and approval of pre-construction site development plans and on-site implementing procedures pursuant to section 7-5-28 of these guidelines. In general, modifications recommended by the tree preservation committee affecting elements of an approved plan which are under the jurisdiction of the commissioner of public works shall have the prior approval of the commissioner of public works. 
Technical assistance will be available from the conservation board, the department of planning, the department of public works, the environmental officer and other staff as needed. 
(Res. of 11-5-84, § III; Res. of 2-5-96, § 2)  
Sec. 7-5-25. - Application requirements. 
An applicant shall provide the approving agency with a tree protection, preservation and reforestation plan containing at least the following information unless deemed not pertinent or necessary by the agency or official approving the plan. 
(a)  An inventory of existing trees, showing type, location, size and condition. The inventory shall include specimen and protected trees, trees or groupings of trees deemed significant, all trees with a minimum trunk diameter of eight (8) inches at a point four (4) feet above the natural grade, and any grouping of twenty (20) or more trees. 
(b)  An integrated site plan showing the trees to be saved and those to be removed, utilities to be installed, grading, the approximate location of all structures, driveways and curb cuts and proposed tree plantings and other landscaping. 
(c)  A detailed plan to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two (2) years after construction. This shall include a written statement setting forth those steps to be taken to protect trees, roots and crowns from damage during site clearance, excavation, grading, installation of utilities, paving and construction. 
The above items may be integrated into the normal application requirements and submittals. 
(Res. of 11-5-84, § IV)  
Sec. 7-5-26. - Standards. 
The approving agency shall apply the following standards in reviewing all development applications and shall attach such conditions and safeguards to any applications as are in its opinion deemed necessary. [4] 
(a)  Healthy specimen and protected trees and other trees deemed significant by the approving agency located in the primary tree protection zone, the canopy tree protection zones and in the road right-of-way tree protection zone shall be preserved where feasible. [5] 
(b)  Healthy specimen and protected trees and other trees deemed significant located in the secondary tree protection zone may be required to be preserved at the discretion of the approving agency. 
(c)  Healthy specimen and protected trees and other trees deemed significant by the planning board located in conservation development required perimeter setback shall be preserved where feasible. Additionally, healthy specimen and protected trees, and other significant trees in other sections of the conservation development may be required to be preserved at the discretion of the planning board. 
(d)  To preserve healthy and specimen trees, particularly in the secondary tree preservation zones, and to maintain the site's unique natural character and environmentally sensitive features as shown on the approved plans including any conditions and attachments thereto, trees and environmentally sensitive features shall be preserved, to the maximum extent feasible, in clusters within their natural setting. 
(e)  Prior to the commencement of any development activity on any part of a site, the tree preservation committee shall meet with the developer, his construction manager or the developer's designee to ensure: 
(1)  That those trees, tree clusters, and environmentally sensitive features designated on the approved plans to be preserved are physically identified on the site so as to be easily recognizable as being protected; and 
(2)  That agreed-to measures to protect trees before, during and for a period of two (2) years after construction are implemented. 
(3)  That areas shown on the approved plans as not to be disturbed shall have no equipment, building, soil or other debris or materials stored on them. These areas of preservation may eventually be enhanced by the planting of additional appropriate trees or other types of landscaping. 
(f)  On any site or part thereof where the approving agency has determined that additional measures are necessary to ensure the protection and preservation of trees, tree clusters and environmentally sensitive features during development of the site, particularly sites with environmentally sensitive features, the approving agency may make issuance of permits required for the development under the approved plan subject to approval by the tree preservation committee of a pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementing procedures pursuant to section 7-5-28 of these guidelines. 
(g)  Reforestation plans shall generally conform to the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Shade and/or decorative trees shall be planted at a ratio of at least one (1) tree per twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet of lot area or major fraction thereof. [6] 
a.  Trees to be planted in one- and two-family residential districts should have a minimum trunk diameter of two and one-half (2½) inches at a point two (2) feet above the finished grade. [7] 
b.  Trees to be planted in all other districts should have a minimum trunk diameter of three and one-half (3½) to four (4) inches at a point two (2) feet above the finished grade. 4 
(2)  In selecting locations to plant trees, priority should be given to that section of the lot within a canopy tree protection zone and the front yard setback. 
(3)  Credit toward the reforestation requirements shall be at a ratio of one (1) preserved healthy specimen or protected tree or other tree deemed significant for one (1) required planting. [8] 
(Res. of 11-5-84, § V; Res. of 2-5-96, §§ 3, 4) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Healthy trees can only be saved through cooperation between the approving agency and the applicant. However, the burden of identifying and selecting those trees to be protected and preserved as well as new trees to be planted rests with the developer. He must comply with the city's standards. This will require better site planning on his part and more thorough review by approving agencies and officials. 

--- (5) --- 
The approving agency should be flexible in applying standard (a). It should not create a safety hazard or be so absolute as to make a project technically and/or financially impossible or burden an owner with trees that severely limit the use or enjoyment of his property. However, the applicant must consider tree preservation in design and site planning and justify the removal of any trees. 

--- (6) --- 
Plantings shall be nursery stock with a minimum one year guarantee. 

--- (7) --- 
The agency or official approving the reforestation plan may modify the minimum standards to accommodate special types of trees which may not conform to these standards. 

--- (8) --- 
Preservation of trees within the road right-of-way protection zone are not eligible for credit. 
 
Sec. 7-5-27. - Review. 
The approving agency shall refer all tree preservation, protection and reforestation plans to the tree preservation committee for review and report prior to taking action on the application. 
Except for development applications involving sites which are environmentally sensitive or contain environmentally sensitive features, as defined in the Municipal Code at section 3-5-2 and section 3-5-3, for development applications involving smaller projects of less than ten (10) required parking spaces, or less than three (3) required parking spaces in the central parking area, approval of the applications may be conditioned upon submitting a plan subject to approval by the tree preservation committee. 
(Res. of 11-5-84, § VI; Res. of 2-5-96, § 5)  
Sec. 7-5-28. - Review and approval of pre-construction site development plans and on-site implementation procedures. 
This section shall apply to development on any site or part thereof under an approved building plan, site plan, conservation development, subdivision plan or other approved plan where the approving agency has made issuance of permits for the development of the site subject to review and approval by the tree preservation committee of a pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementing procedures. 
(a)  For an approved project meeting the above requirement, the developer shall prepare and the tree preservation committee shall review a pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementation procedures for pre-construction phase activities which shall include the following: 
(1)  Pre-construction phase I activities: Activities subject to review in this initial phase include site preparation for rights-of-way, streets, utility easements, and construction equipment and materials storage areas. 
(2)  Pre-construction phase II activities: Activities subject to review in this phase include site preparation for building lots, detention basins, drainage swales and other development activities not included in phase I. 
The basis for preparation of the pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementation procedures, shall be the plan approved by the approving agency including all conditions and attachments thereto. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of any permits for phase I activities, except as may be required to provide limited access to the site for the sole purposes of surveying the site and analyzing trees and site conditions, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  The developer shall prepare a pre-construction site development plan showing boundaries and maximum disturbance areas for the rights-of-way, streets, utility easements and construction equipment and materials storage areas that are proposed to be developed. 
(2)  The maximum disturbance areas for the activities shown on the phase I pre-construction site development plan shall be clearly staked and marked on the site. 
(3)  Any trees, tree clusters and environmentally sensitive features which are required to be preserved according to the approved plan and which are located in or within ten (10) feet of disturbance areas for phase I activities and shown on the pre-construction site development plan, shall be clearly marked, cordoned off and protected in a manner prescribed by the tree preservation committee. 
(4)  After the phase I pre-construction site development plan has been received by the tree preservation committee and all disturbance areas and areas to be protected have been marked and protected on-site according subsections (2) and (3) above, the tree preservation committee shall inspect the site with the developer or his designee and the professional, as required by the approving agency, who developed the pre-construction site development plan, to determine that all trees, tree clusters, and environmentally sensitive features to be preserved according to the approved plan and the proposed pre-construction site development plan have been properly identified and protected on the site. The tree preservation committee may make recommendations to the developer for modifications to the proposed pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementation procedures to better protect trees, tree clusters and environmentally sensitive features. 
(5)  Except as provided in paragraph (b) above, no departments or agencies shall issue any permits for phase I activities until the tree preservation committee has filed a report approving the pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementing procedures with the approving agency and the departments and agencies responsible for issuing said permits. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of any permits for phase II activities, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  The developer shall submit a staged pre-construction development plan for phase II activities for approval by the tree preservation committee. The plan shall designate the clusters of lots to be reviewed in each stage. The plan shall indicate the proposed maximum disturbance area on each lot in each lot cluster and show within the disturbance areas the maximum approved building foot print in a location having the least impact on existing grades, trees, tree clusters, and environmentally sensitive features. Tree clusters and environmentally sensitive features will necessarily cross lot lines and, within the approved lot layout, tree preservation and preservation of environmentally sensitive features shall be achieved irrespective of lot lines. 
(2)  The maximum disturbance areas for the phase II activities and the maximum building footprint as shown on the phase II pre-construction site development plan shall be clearly staked and marked on the site, and the environmentally sensitive features, trees and trees clusters to be preserved shall be properly identified and protected in a manner prescribed by the tree preservation committee. 
(3)  After the phase II pre-construction site development plan has been reviewed by the tree preservation committee and the developer has marked the site and protected trees, the tree clusters and environmentally sensitive features on-site according paragraph (2) above, the tree preservation committee shall inspect the site with the developer and/or his designee and with the professional who developed the pre-construction site development plan, as required by the approving agency, to determine that all trees, tree clusters, and environmentally sensitive features shown to be preserved on the approved plans and the pre-construction site development plan have been properly identified and protected on the site. The tree preservation committee may make recommendations to the developer for modifications to the proposed pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementation procedures to preserve and protect the trees, tree clusters and environmentally sensitive features. 
(4)  No departments or agencies shall issue any permits for phase II activities until the tree preservation committee has filed a report approving the pre-construction site development plan and on-site implementing procedures for the phase II activities with the approving agency and with the departments and agencies responsible for issuing said permits. The tree preservation committee may issue separate approval reports for separate clusters of lots. 
(Res. of 2-5-96, § 5)  
Sec. 7-5-29. - Penalties. 
It is the stated intention of this article to preserve and maintain a sufficient number of trees and a suitable wildlife habitat throughout the city. Therefore, elimination of trees in violation of conditions imposed by the approving agency shall cause the city to seek penalties which lead to the restoration of adequate plantings to meet those goals. 
Upon any violation of the tree preservation, protection and reforestation plan, the commissioner of building shall issue a stop-work order immediately setting forth the grounds for its issuance and may require that remedial actions be taken. In cases where trees are removed or destroyed, or at the discretion of the commissioner of building, the remedial actions shall be agreed to by the approving agency before a stop-work order may be cancelled. 
The approving agency shall apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain whatever penalties are permitted by law. Once legal proceedings are initiated, such proceedings shall not be withdrawn or discontinued unless a reforestation plan has been agreed to by the applicant. 
Removal of healthy specimen and protected trees or other trees deemed significant after the effective date of this article but prior to submitting an application or during the review process shall be considered a violation of this article and all appropriate sanctions may be applied. 
(Res. of 11-5-84, § VII; Res. of 2-5-96, § 5) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 7-6 - SOLID WASTES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Garbage collection, § 117. 
Cross reference— Rubbish and litter in parks, § 6-2-9; maintenance of dwelling units so as to be free from rubbish and garbage, § 9-8-220.7. 
 
Sec. 7-6-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(a)  Business area: The area of the city devoted to stores, office buildings, commercial enterprises, manufacturing or other similar business and commercial endeavors. This area shall include stores, restaurants and other establishments with high-waste productions. 
(b)  Collection: The physical picking up of garbage, refuse or other materials by municipal forces. 
(c)  Commissioner: The commissioner of public works of the city or his duly authorized representative or agent. 
(d)  Garbage: Nonrecyclable wastes resulting from the distribution, preparation and servicing of foods. Garbage may originate from domestic or commercial units. Garbage does not include processing wastes from the food industry or animal wastes from veterinary hospitals and veterinary doctors. 
(e)  Ordinary refuse: The routine solid wastes produced in residences and commercial establishments, including garbage and rubbish, but excluding designated recyclables. 
(f)  Refuse: The general term used to describe the total nonhazardous solid waste originating in a community and requiring physical removal from the place of origin to a place of ultimate disposal. This term includes garbage, rubbish and trash produced by households, commercial establishments, special community activities, manufacturing plants and institutions. Refuse is divided into two (2) general classifications, ordinary refuse and trash. 
(g)  Rubbish: The general dry material produced routinely and consists of such waste material as nonrecyclable paper, non- recyclable cans, nonrecyclable bottles, other nonrecyclable and nonhazardous containers and ashes. 
(h)  Street: Any public street, highway, road, lane, alley, way, park, parking area, grounds or other public areas. 
(i)  Trash: All other kinds of nonhazardous solid waste material originating in a community. Trash is distinguished from refuse by special or seasonal characteristics which place it outside the ordinary refuse that is produced in the community and collected and disposed of as a regularly scheduled feature of refuse operations. Trash, therefore, shall include all nonhazardous objects requiring special consideration and handling in refuse operations, such as: 
(1)  Leaves, brush, branches, Christmas trees, lawn rakings and similar waste material produced on a seasonable basis and representing intermittent or seasonal collection problems. 
(2)  Bulky objects such as discarded refrigerators or furniture, which are discarded occasionally and which do not fit into regular refuse collection vehicles. 
(3)  Specialized waste material presenting a special handling problem either in collection or disposal. 
(j)  Nonresidence: A building or parcel of land not used primarily as a residential dwelling unit. 
(k)  Recyclables and designated recyclables: Items designated for recycling, to be separated from ordinary refuse and collected for reuse, reduction or remanufacturing. 
(l)  Source separated: The separation of designated recyclables from ordinary refuse at the point of waste generation for separate collection or other disposition. 
(m)  Commingled recyclables: Designated food and liquid/beverage containers, bottles, jars and cans, which have been rinsed of food residue, and mixed together in the same container for recycling collection. 
(n)  Contaminated recyclables: Recyclables not in a condition acceptable for reuse, reduction or remanufacturing. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1, Ord. of 3-6-95)  
Sec. 7-6-2. - Unlawful deposits. 
No person shall throw, cast or lay, or direct, suffer or permit any servant, agent or employee to throw, cast or lay any ashes, offal, vegetables, garbage, dross, cinders, shells, straw, shaving, paper, dirt, swill, brine, filth, broken glassware, crockery, bottles, or any offensive animal matter, or any bad smelling or noxious liquid or refuse of any kind whatsoever in any street of the city, either upon the roadway or sidewalk thereof or in any public place. All loose material shall be put in proper containers or receptacles as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1) 
Charter reference— Police power of city, § 4.  
Sec. 7-6-3. - Containers. 
(a)  Owners or occupants of private houses, apartment houses, business or commercial buildings, or lots, desiring to have ashes, garbage, paper, boxes, light refuse or rubbish removed by the city, shall place such material in metal or substantial plastic containers equipped with adequate handles for lifting and suitable lids or covers for keeping the contents protected from vermin and animals and from scattering by wind. The city will not be responsible for damage to any containers, covers or private property necessary for access to refuse collections sites. 
(b)  Each manually unloaded container shall have a capacity not exceeding thirty (30) gallons or three (3) bushels, shall be filled to a level no higher than four (4) inches below the top and shall not exceed seventy-five (75) pounds total weight, including contents. 
(c)  Such containers shall be placed on the premises at a location readily accessible, at ground level, outside of any building or other enclosure. Material from buried or recessed cans in the ground will not be collected unless such cans have been cleared of ice and snow and made accessible. Any damage to any buried or recessed appliance or can will not be the responsibility of the city. 
(d)  Automated loading containers must be compatible with the city's refuse collection vehicles, and shall contain suitable cover(s) and shall be constructed of reinforced heavy gauge steel or molded polyolefin cross-linked plastic. These containers must meet all applicable U.S. Federal Safety Standards and C.P.S.E. (U.S. Consumer Product Safety Standards). Additionally, "Tipping Resistance Specification ANSI Z.275.3" shall be exceeded. All such containers must be located on a reinforced concrete pad with suitable collection vehicle access and screening, according to city specifications. They shall be filled to a level no higher than four (4) inches below the top. 
(e)  Rear-loading type containers shall be equipped with a minimum of four (4) heavy-duty wheel assemblies two (2) fixed and two (2) caster type having a minimum tire diameter of six (6) inches. These containers are to be equipped with side handles/hooks, and a center hook, to be compatible with the city's winch unloading mechanism. No container shall have a manufacturer's rated capacity of more than three (3) cubic yards, nor a total gross weight, including contents, of more than three thousand (3,000) pounds. 
(f)  Front-loading type containers shall be equipped with side receptacles capable of accepting the "Flipper Arms" of the city's refuse vehicles. The containers must be reinforced with ribbing to maintain rigidity and shape during rugged loading and unloading operations, and any access doors shall be self-closing during dumping. No container shall have a manufacturer's rated capacity of more than eight (8) cubic yards, nor a total gross weight, including contents, of more than six thousand (6,000) pounds. 
(g)  Side-loading type containers will not be permitted. 
(h)  The municipal collection of recyclables shall be in containers prescribed by the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 3(a)—(c); Ord. of 12-1-86, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-4. - Rubbish not placed in containers; unbundled refuse; corrugated cardboard. 
(a)  Rubbish of such nature and size that it cannot be placed in metal containers shall be compactly bundled, covered and securely tied. Rugs and carpeting shall be tightly rolled and tied with rope or twine. Such rolls shall not exceed six (6) feet in length. Corrugated cardboard cartons and boxes shall be broken and tied in bundles not larger than forty-eight (48) inches long, eighteen (18) inches wide and eighteen (18) inches high. All other material shall be properly secured to prevent scattering thereof by animals or wind. Refuse not properly bundled or tied up will not be picked up by the city. 
(b)  If the average quantity of standard sized cardboard boxes placed for collection at each nonresidence exceeds twenty-five (25) per week, then such nonresidence is required to privately recycle such corrugated cardboard. 
(c)  Loose-piled leaves will be picked up at curbside only during the period from October 1 through December 10. Leaves are not to be stored in or along the gutter of the pavement or within ten (10) feet of catch basins. At all other times, they must be placed in sealed, biodegradable bags at the curb. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 3(d); Ord. of 12-1-86, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 9-9-92, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-5. - Transportation of garbage or refuse originating outside city. 
No person shall transport into the city any garbage or refuse which originated outside of the city without the permission of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 3(e); Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-6. - Placement of materials in public trash receptacles. 
No person shall place in a public trash receptacle maintained by the city in any public place, including but not limited to sidewalks, streets, public parking areas, parking garages and public buildings, any garbage or refuse, that originates from a house, place of business or elsewhere. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 3(f); Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-7. - Disposal of dead animals. 
Dead animals shall be disposed of as directed by the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-8. - Removal of litter receptacles. 
No person shall remove a public litter receptacle maintained by the city on a pubic sidewalk or at a publicly-owned place or city-owned building from the position established by the commissioner to another position without the express permission of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 3(g); Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-9. - Placement for collection; removal of containers after collection. 
(a)  In the business area, all ashes, garbage, light refuse recyclables or rubbish shall be placed at the curb except Saturday, Sunday and holidays. No refuse or recyclables shall be placed on the curb or on the sidewalk or in the doorway of a store prior to 6:00 a.m.. In all other areas, any refuse, rubbish, bulk trash, or recyclable materials positioned at the curb shall be so placed only on a designated collection day between 6:00 a.m. and the time of collection. 
(b)  Empty metal containers shall be removed by the owner, tenant or occupant within one-half hour after the collection by municipal forces. 
(c)  Doors shall be removed from the hinges of all ice boxes, refrigerators, freezers, gas or electric stoves, or other major metal appliances with doors affixed, prior to being placed on the curb for collection. 
(d)  In the event of ice or a snowfall of more than three (3) inches in depth, a suitable pathway from the curb to the refuse container shall be provided; and said path shall be strewn with sand, de-icer pellets or some other approved abrasive material as necessary. Failure to comply with this requirement for residential as well as commercial properties may result in temporary suspension of refuse collection, until container access is improved. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 4(a), (b); Ord. of 12-1-86, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 10-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-10. - Placement of newspapers and commingled recyclables. 
(a)  The owners, lessees or occupants of single- and multi-family dwellings and nonresidences are responsible to separate recyclables from municipally collected ordinary refuse and shall separately place newspapers and commingled recyclables for collection and recycling by the department of public works or its duly authorized agent. 
(b)  No person shall place recyclables in a receptacle designated for ordinary refuse pickup, but rather, such recyclables shall be source separated and these packages shall be placed within the vicinity of the curb, edge of pavement, or in other authorized location, for collection on days specified by the commissioner. 
(c)  When recyclables are placed within the vicinity of the curb or edge of pavement for pickup collection and recycling, they shall become the property of the department of public works and it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation other than the owner, lessee or occupant of the residential dwelling or a duly authorized agent of the department of public works, to disturb or pick up such packages or bags of newspapers and/or recyclables for his own use. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 4(d); Ord. of 9-3-74, § 1; Ord. of 2-1-86, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 9-9-92, § 2; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-11. - Items city will not collect. 
(a)  The following materials will not be picked up by municipal forces: corrugated cardboard in excess of twenty-five (25) standard size boxes per week from any location or establishment, designated recyclable office paper, wood over three (3) inches in diameter or over four (4) feet long, including tree stumps, tree trunks, branches and other wood; railroad ties, telephone poles, discarded automobiles and trucks, house renovation discards, construction debris such as lumber, concrete, plaster, dirt, rock, brick, black-top or large wooden crates or boxes, stones or quantities of sod, flammable or highly combustible matter such as cleaning establishment wastes or other industrial and household hazardous wastes found to contain varnish, paint, thinner or other dangerous materials, sawdust, explosives, ammunition, oil drums either full or empty, cans or barrels containing combustible liquids, rubber tires, rubber wastes, batterycases, tar paper roofing, tar cans or any large metal products or abandoned machinery and television tubes. 
(b)  The city will not pick up burned out or used television, X-ray, fluorescent, neon or cathode tubes, unless such tubes have been broken to release the vacuum present inside. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 5; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-12. - Authority of commissioner to regulate city's collection. 
(a)  The commissioner shall have the authority to regulate the amount of material to be removed and the method of removal by the city, in accordance with the city's ability to effect such removal. 
(b)  Up to six (6) metal or plastic containers, each having a maximum capacity of thirty (30) gallons, shall be collected at each general location or establishment. As an alternative, up to three (3) automated type, rear-loading containers may be used in lieu of the smaller thirty-gallon manual loading containers. 
(c)  Effective July 1, 1987, the city will provide the additional alternative of collection of a maximum of two (2) automated type, front-loading containers. 
(d)  All containers at a particular location or establishment must be of the same configuration. For example, automated, front-loading and smaller manual loading containers cannot be presented at the same stop. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 6; Ord. of 12-1-86, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-13. - Covering vehicles. 
All refuse transported on a city street in trucks or other vehicles shall be covered with suitable covers to prevent scattering or dropping on said street. 
(Ord. of 2-3-69, § 7)  
Sec. 7-6-14. - Sale of scrap metal, etc., found in refuse collections. 
The commissioner of public works is hereby authorized, from time to time, to sell on the open market or at private sale, scrap metal and other waste materials of any kind found or contained in the refuse collection of the city at the best price obtainable or at a price which will be for the best interests of the city, or to make contracts for periods not exceeding one year, for such sale of such scrap metal and other waste materials. 
(Ord. of 4-1-57, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-95)  
Sec. 7-6-15. - Landscape gardener permits for dumping of compostable material. 
(a)  Compostable material consisting solely of leaves, or lawn rakings produced on a seasonal basis, shall be accepted, at the city's Gedney Way Recycling Yard from landscape gardeners having a valid permit issued by the commissioner. Such permit shall be issued to landscape gardeners who have been retained on behalf of city residents for the purpose of yard care of their respective property within the city limits. A permit shall consist of a coupon book, containing twenty (20) perforated coupons, which shall be issued to a landscape gardener after payment of a one thousand and five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) dumping fee and submission of a completed application form listing the city resident's name and address, and bearing the signature of said resident. Only one (1) coupon book will be issued per resident at any given time. Upon utilization of all coupons in a book, or the expiration of the book (which shall expire two (2) years from the issuance date), said permit shall be invalidated and another must be obtained to continue the landscape gardener's dumping privileges for that particular resident. 
(b)  Compostable material which has absolutely no grass or lawn rakings in it shall be accepted by using a special "No Grass" coupon book, which shall be issued after a payment of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and submission of a completed application form. All other standard coupon book rules and requirements shall apply to this book. 
(c)  Each truckload of up to four (4) cubic yards of acceptable material shall require the landscape gardener to present the coupon book to the Gedney Yard gatekeeper, who shall remove one (1) coupon and return the book. Trucks with more than four (4) cubic yards of material shall result in multiple removal of coupons for every successive four (4) cubic yards of material, or portion thereof. 
(d)  The commissioner shall have the authority to revoke the Gedney Yard permit from any landscape gardener at any time, based upon the city's ability to accept material at the Gedney Yard. In this event, the city shall refund any remaining fee on a pro rata basis according to the number of coupons left in the coupon book. Further, the commissioner shall have the authority to immediately revoke a landscape gardener permit, without reimbursement, or ban subsequent issuance of permits to the subject landscape gardener, or any combination thereof when abuse of said permit has occurred, i.e. attempts to dump material which is not attributable to the property location listed on permits, or nonacceptable material such as hazardous waste, garbage, rubbish, or any materials listed in section 7-6-11. 
(Ord. of 5-7-90, § 2; Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-4-07, § 1; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 6; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 6; Ord. of 5-21-12, § 1)  
Sec. 7-6-16. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, except for section 7-6-10, shall upon conviction thereof be subject to a fine which shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) in amount, nor exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in amount and on any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not be less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in amount, nor exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in amount, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days or both such fine and imprisonment for each such violation. 
(b)  Refuse receptacles which contain recyclables mixed with other refuse may not be collected or serviced until such recyclables have been removed therefrom. Any person violating any of the provisions of section 7-6-10 shall in the first instance be warned and shall, in the case of any subsequent violation, either be solely responsible for the separation of recyclables from the offending refuse containing recyclables or upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine which shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) in amount, or both such separation of refuse and fine for each such violation. 
(Ord. of 4-5-76, § 1; Ord. of 12-1-86, § 1; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 5-7-90, § 1; Ord. of 9-9-92, § 3; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1; Ord. of 10-4-10, § 10) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Sec. 7-6-17. - Compliance to Westchester County Source Separation Law. 
Pursuant to Chapter 825 of the Laws of Westchester County, the "Westchester County Source Separation Law," the city designates the commissioner of public works as the local enforcement official for said county law. 
(Ord. of 3-6-95, § 1)  
Chapter 7-7 - PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES, ACTIVITIES AND 
[1]
Footnotes: 
 
Sec. 7-7-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this amendment to the Municipal Code is to provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of White Plains through the regulation of connections to the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the regulation of nonstorm water discharges to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation's (NYSDEC) SPDES General Permit (GP-02-02) for municipal separate storm sewer systems. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(a)  To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised; 
(b)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge nonstorm water wastes; 
(c)  To prohibit unauthorized and illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4; 
(d)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; and 
(e)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(1)  Approving agency shall mean the City of White Plains governing body, board or officer charged by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of White Plains with the authority to approve a land use application, such as a special permit, site plan, subdivision, conservation development, area variance, or use variance. 
(2)  Best management practices (BMPs) shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
(3)  City shall mean the City of White Plains, New York. 
(4)  City engineer shall mean the Commissioner of Public Works of the City of White Plains. 
(5)  Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(6)  Code shall mean the Municipal Code of the City of White Plains. 
(7)  Commissioner shall mean the Commissioner of Public Works of the City of White Plains, or his duly authorized representative. 
(8)  Connection permit shall mean an authorization for connection as well as a discharge permitted under section 7-7-14 of this chapter, as well as a discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the NYSDEC. This permit is subject to special terms and conditions by the city engineer. The permit will expire on or before the expiration of the NYSDEC SPDES permit, waiver or order or upon change of ownership or use of the property. 
(9)  Construction activity shall mean activities requiring authorization under a NYSDEC SPDES permit for storm water discharges from construction activity, GP-02-01, as amended or revised, or activities covered by erosion and sediment control or pollution prevention plan laws, ordinances or regulations of the city. These activities include construction projects resulting in land disturbance equal to or greater than the area stipulated in statutes or regulations of the state, county or the city, whichever is most restrictive. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
(10)  County shall mean the County of Westchester. 
(11)  Design professional shall mean New York State licensed professional engineer or licensed architect. 
(12)  The words "directed," required," "permitted," "ordered," "designated," "selected," "prescribed," "determined," "certified," "specified," "or words of like import used in this chapter shall mean, respectively, the direction, requirement, permission, order, designation, selection, prescription, determination, certification or specification of the commissioner of public works. 
(13)  Drainage service line shall refer to the pipe or conduit laid between his connection point on a storm water drain and a building or property for the purpose of conducting waste other than domestic sewage and other than injurious water liquids from the said building or property into the said storm water drain. 
(14)  General permit shall mean an authorization for the connection as well as the discharge of storm water or authorized nonstorm water (per section 7-7-4(d)(1) of this chapter), from properties occupied by private dwellings. 
(15)  Hazardous materials shall mean any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(16)  Illicit activity shall mean any action or condition, active or passive, that results in nonstorm water entering the city's MS4. 
(17)  Illicit connection shall mean any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4 including, but not limited to: 
(a) Any conveyances which allow any nonstorm water discharge including treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the MS4, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(b) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency; 
(c) Any building or structure floor drain or trench drain; and 
(d) Any unauthorized connection as defined elsewhere in this section. 
(18)  Illicit discharge shall mean any discharge through an unauthorized connection, and any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the MS4, except as exempted in section 7-7-4 of this chapter. 
(19)  Individual sewage treatment system shall mean a facility serving one or more parcels of land or residential households, or a private, commercial or institutional facility that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge into the ground waters of New York State, except where a permit for such a facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the Environmental Conservation Law. 
(20)  Industrial activity shall mean activities requiring the SPDES permit for discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as amended or revised. 
(21)  Invert shall mean the lowest point in the internal cross section of a sanitary sewer, storm water drain, house sewer or drain. 
(22)  MS4 shall mean municipal separate storm sewer system owned by the city or another municipal entity. 
(23)  Municipal separate storm sewer system shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances and retention and infiltration facilities; (including roads with drainage systems, curbs and gutters on municipal streets, manholes, catch basins, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains, storm water basins, drainage reserve areas, drywells or any other component of a storm water system) that is: 
(a) Owned or operated by the city or another municipal entity; 
(b) Designed or used for collecting or conveying or storing or infiltrating or managing storm water; 
(c) Which is not a combined sewer; and 
(d) Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.2. 
(24)  Municipality shall mean a county, town, city, village or other unit of government. 
(25)  Nonstorm water discharge shall mean any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
(26)  NYSDEC shall mean the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. 
(27)  Office of the city engineer shall mean the Office of the City Engineer of the City of White Plains or office of the commissioner of public works. 
(28)  Person shall mean any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
(29)  Pollutant shall mean anything, which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, hazardous materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural waste and ballast discharged into water; which may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in contravention of the standards. Also, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; hazardous or nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes, yard wastes including branches, grass clippings and leaves; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; and discharges of soaps, detergents, or floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; sewage, fecal coliforms and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building, structure or site improvements; cement, gravel, sand, silt, mud, other soils, and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
(30)  Premises shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
(31)  Sanitary sewer shall refer to the lateral or street sewer or manhole built thereon in public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or other public area and under the control of the city. 
(32)  Sewer service line shall mean the pipe or conduit laid between its connection point on a sanitary sewer and a building for the purpose of conducting domestic sewage and on-injurious water liquids from the said building into the said sanitary sewer. 
(33)  Sidewalk drain and curb drain shall refer to the pipe or other conduit laid under or across the sidewalk area between the curb or curb line and the property line for the purpose of conducting roof and surface water from buildings and ground into the gutter. 
(34)  Special conditions shall mean: 
(a) Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that applies where the city's MS4 has been notified that the discharge of storm water authorized under the city's MS4 SPDES permit may have caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition the MS4 must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards. 
(b) 303(d) listed waters. The condition in an MS4 SPDES permit that applies where the MS4 discharges to a NYSDEC 303(d) listed water. Under this condition the MS4's storm water management program must ensure no increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water. 
(c) Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in an MS4 SPDES permit where a TMDL including requirements for control of storm water discharges has been approved by EPA for a water body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL storm water allocations prior to September 10, 2003, the MS4 was required to modify its storm water management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved. 
(d) The condition in an MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the city must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements for control of storm water discharges. If the city's MS4 is not meeting the TMDL storm water allocations, the city must, within six (6) months of the TMDLs approval, modify its storm water management program to ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved. 
(35)  Special permit shall mean an authorization for the connection as well as the discharge of storm water or authorized nonstorm water (per section 7-7-4(d)(1) of this chapter), from all properties occupied by other than private dwellings. 
(36)  State shall mean the State of New York. 
(37)  State pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) storm water discharge permit shall mean a permit issued by the NYSDEC that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state. 
(38)  Storm water shall mean rainwater, surface runoff, subsurface drainage and snowmelt. 
(39)  Storm water drain shall refer to the lateral or main storm water drain in public street, highway, sidewalk area, easement or other public area, and under the control of the city. 
(40)  Storm water management officer (SMO) shall mean the Commissioner of Public Works of the City of White Plains (or the person serving in the capacity of the city engineer) or his/her authorized deputies, agents or representatives, including employees of other city departments, as appropriate. The SMO is to enforce this code, review storm water pollution prevention plans, cause the forwarding of the plans to the applicable approving agency and inspect storm water management practices. 
(41)  303(d) list shall mean a list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use) are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the NYSDEC as required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards and are not expected to improve within the next two (2) years. 
(42)  TMDL shall mean Total Maximum Daily Load. 
(43)  Total maximum daily load shall mean the maximum amount of a pollutant allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant. 
(44)  Unauthorized connection shall mean a permanent or temporary unapproved direct or indirect conveyance to the city's MS4. Any connection, pipe, hose, or other conveyance that is not documented on plans, maps, or equivalent records signed by the city engineer or that is not approved by a permit issued by the city engineer, is considered unauthorized regardless of whether the discharge is otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
(45)  Uncontaminated shall mean "free of pollutants" (see definition of "pollutant"). 
(46)  Wastewater shall mean water that is not storm water is contaminated with pollutants and is or will be discarded. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-3(a). - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to discharged connections to the city's MS4. This includes activities that result in discharge, seepage or deposition into the city's MS4, and all water entering the MS4 generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency and allowed by a discharge or connection permit or other document approved by the city engineer. This chapter shall also apply to discharges and connections entering another MS4 that is tributary to the city's MS4. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-3b. - Responsibility for administration. 
The commissioner of public works, as the storm water management officer (SMO) for the city, or duly authorized deputies, agents or representatives, including employees of other city departments, as appropriate, shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-3c. - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-4. - Restriction as to type or amount of discharge. 
(a)  No domestic sewage, industrial wastes or injurious waste substance shall be discharged into a storm water drain, watercourse or body of water through any connection thereto. 
(b)  No industrial wastes or any injurious waste substances shall be discharged into a sanitary sewer unless the method and degree of treatment, prior to discharge, have been approved by the Commissioner of Health of the County of Westchester, the Commissioner of Public Works of the County of Westchester and the Commissioner of Public Safety of the County of Westchester, and unless such method and degree of treatment continues at all times to meet with such approval. 
(c)  Subject to the prior approval of the city's commissioner of public works, waste lines from a swimming pool shall be connected into a sanitary sewer and discharge of waste water from a swimming pool into the sanitary sewer shall be restricted to the period between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. The size of the discharge line at the point of connection shall not, in general, exceed four (4) inches, and may be further reduced by the city's commissioner of public works at his or her discretion. 
(d)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city's MS4 any materials other than storm water except as provided in subsection 7-7-4(d)(1). The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit (illegal) discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this Code, unless they are subsequently determined to be substantial contributors of pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources, uncontaminated landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising ground water, uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains, uncontaminated crawl space or basement sump pump discharges, air conditioning condensate, uncontaminated irrigation water, springs, water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, residential street wash water, water from fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan for reducing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges approved in writing by the city engineer to protect life or property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other applicable laws, codes and requirements, and further provided that such discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under such conditions as the city engineer may deem appropriate to protect such life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and intent of this Code. 
(3)  Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws or codes is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the city engineer prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the NYSDEC, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws, codes and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4 by the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-5. - Service lines, taps, etc., generally. 
(a)  The installation and repair of sewer or drainage service lines within the limits of any public street, highway or easement or other public property, and the connections of such lines to the sanitary sewers or storm water drains of the city shall be done in accordance with the provision of the rules and regulations of the city's department of public works and shall also conform to such specifications as may be promulgated by the commissioner. The tapping of water mains and the installation and repair of water service lines, in addition to such herein above rules, regulations and specifications, shall also conform with the rules and regulations for the water bureau of the department of public works. 
(b)  A sewer service line between its connection point at the sanitary sewer and a point at least two (2) feet back of existing curb or established or proposed curb line, shall be of heavy cast iron pipe with lead joints or such other approved types of joints as may be allowed by the Department of Building of the City of White Plains and shall be laid by a licensed plumber. 
(c)  A drainage service line, between its connection point at the storm water drain and a point at least two (2) feet back of existing curb or established or proposed curb line, shall be of heavy cast iron pipe or other material as approved by the commissioner. 
(d)  Such service lines shall be laid on a straight alignment and uniform gradient of not less than one-fourth (¼) of an inch per foot unless otherwise specifically authorized by the commissioner, and having all changes in direction made with approved fittings. 
(e)  Connections to the city's MS4 without a permit are prohibited. 
(1)  Any connection to the city's MS4 is considered to be an unauthorized connection unless it has been approved by a permit issued by the city engineer or documented on a plan, or map that has been approved by the city engineer. This constraint applies to all connections, permanent or temporary, regardless of whether the discharge is otherwise permitted by this chapter. 
(2)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of unauthorized connections to the city's MS4 is prohibited. 
(3)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law, code or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(4)  A person is considered to be in violation of this Code if the person connects a line conveying sewage or other pollutants to the city's MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(5)  The connection of interior floor drains and trench drains at the entrances to buildings or other structures is prohibited. 
(f)  Remedy unauthorized connections. Where the city engineer has identified an unauthorized connection as defined in section 7-7-2 of this chapter, the city engineer may require that a proper permit be obtained or that the connection be removed at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 1)  
Sec. 7-7-5.1. - Owner's maintenance responsibility. 
The property owner shall, at his own expense, keep in good order, repair and shall maintain in a proper operating condition, all sanitary sewer and storm water drain service lines and associated appurtenances serving his property from and including the point of connection at the public municipal sanitary sewer or storm water drain to the building or structure serviced. 
The commissioner of public works may direct the owner to repair or replace any or all portions of said service lines to prevent leaks or to eliminate illegal or improper connections. All repairs to sanitary sewer and/or storm water drain service lines shall be done in an approved manner by a plumber licensed in the city in accordance with the applicable requirements of the department of public works and the department of building. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-6. - Connection specifications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, connections to sanitary sewers and storm water drains shall be made by means of forty-five (45) degree or ninety (90) degree M-D cut-in connections of approved size, as manufactured by Joseph G. Pollard Co., Inc., or approved equal. 
(b)  The use of an existing Y-branch, or other existing fitting, for the purpose of connecting a service line thereto, shall be allowed only when such branch or fitting is already available and in place as part of sanitary sewer or storm water drain, is in satisfactory condition and at an acceptable location, and is of adequate size to receive said service line. 
(c)  A manhole shall be built over a sanitary sewer or storm water drain at the point of connection, whenever the proposed service line to be connected is five (5) inches or greater and the sanitary sewer or storm water drain is eight (8) inches or less, or when the proposed service line is greater than six (6) inches and the sanitary sewer or storm water drain is ten (10) inches or more, unless otherwise specifically authorized. The above sizes refer to the internal diameter of the pipes or conduits. 
(d)  M-D cut-in connections and other approved types of connections shall be installed in such a manner that the invert of said connection shall be higher than the invert of sanitary sewer or storm water drain by an amount not less than one-half (½) the vertical diameter of said sanitary sewer or not less than three-fourths (¾) the vertical diameter of said storm water drain unless otherwise authorized by the commissioner of public works. 
(e)  Connections to an existing cast iron pipe sanitary sewer or storm water drain shall be made by burning an opening in said pipe in an approved manner or by such other means as may be authorized by the commissioner of public works. 
(f)  When a connection is made into an existing manhole or when a manhole is required to be built at the point of connection, as specified herein above, the invert of the service line at the point of connection shall be higher than the invert of the sanitary sewer or storm water drain by an amount not less than the vertical diameter of said sanitary sewer or storm water drain, unless otherwise authorized by the commissioner of public works. 
(g)  When the difference in invert elevation in the manhole at the point of connection exceeds three (3) feet, a drop connection shall be installed in said manhole. 
(h)  Adequate provision shall be made so that the discharge from a service line within a manhole shall be conducted smoothly into, and in the direction of flow of, the main channel of the sanitary sewer or storm water drain by means of a built-up channel or by extending said service line partly into the manhole as may be necessary and in such manner as may be approved by the commissioner of public works. 
(i)  Construction of new manholes, drop connections and any other necessary structures and connections to existing structures, shall conform with such specifications as may be promulgated by the commissioner. In general, the current standard specifications and construction details of the department of public works shall be followed, subject to the prior approval of the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-7. - Building drainage. 
(a)  Roof and other drainage from properties on which buildings are hereinafter constructed shall be discharged through drainage service lines directly into a storm water drain through an approved connection thereto when such a storm water drain is available and unless such connection, in the opinion of the commission, is deemed impracticable. 
(b)  Discharge of such drainage through sidewalk or curb drains and discharge or roof or other drainage from any privately owned buildings or properties into a catch basin will not be allowed, except with the prior approval of the commissioner and provided that the owner of said property has filed with the commissioner a signed statement by said owner that the city is to be saved harmless from any loss, injury or damage arising out of the approval of the commissioner of public works of the discharge of drainage into a catch basin or through sidewalk or curb drains. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-7A - Manner of discharge of unpolluted water. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, including sump pumps, to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet or as approved by the commissioner. Exceptions to this requirements are any discharges for which the discharger must apply for a SPDES permit and those discharges subject to direct state and federal regulation. 
(Ord of 3-7-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 7-7-8. - Sidewalk and curb drains. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the commissioner of public works, drainage outlets laid under or across the sidewalk area between the property line and the curb line, and discharging into the gutter or into a catch basin or curb inlet, shall be of approved cast iron or steel construction. 
(b)  When holes are cut through curbs, for the purpose of providing drainage outlets, care shall be taken not to damage curb and any damage or injury to said curb shall be repaired by the permittee at the latter's own expense and to the satisfaction of the commissioner of public works. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-9. - Prohibition against failing individual sewage treatment systems. 
No persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system in areas tributary to the city's MS4. A failing individual sewage treatment system is one which has one or more of the following conditions: 
(a)  The backup of sewage into a structure. 
(b)  Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface. 
(c)  A connection or connections to a separate storm water sewer system. 
(d)  Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert. 
(e)  Structural failure of any components of the individual sewage treatment system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in this section. 
(f)  Contamination of off-site groundwater. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-10. - Prohibition against activities contaminating storm water or maintaining or using an unauthorized connection to the city's MS4. 
(a)  Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those types of activities that: 
(1)  Cause or contribute to a violation of the city's MS4 SPDES permit. 
(2)  Cause or contribute to the city being subject to the special conditions as defined in section 7-7-2 of this chapter. 
(3)  Cause or contribute to the city's MS4 receiving pollutants as defined in section 7-7-2 of this chapter. 
(4)  Cause or contribute to the city's MS4 receiving discharges from an undocumented or unauthorized connection (whether permanent or temporary). 
(b)  Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as defined in section 7-7-2 of this chapter, improper management of pet waste or any other activity that causes or contributes to violations of the city's MS4 SPDES permit authorization. 
(c)  Upon notification to a person that same is engaged in activities that cause or contribute to violations of the city's MS4 SPDES permit authorization or causes or contributes to pollutants being discharged to the city's MS4, that person shall take all reasonable actions to correct such activities such that same no longer causes or contributes to violations of the city's MS4 SPDES permit authorization, or causes or contributes to pollutants to be discharged or deposited into the city's MS4. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-11. - Requirement to prevent, control and reduce storm water pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
(a)  Best management practices. Where the city engineer has identified illicit discharges as defined in section 7-7-2 of this chapter or activities contaminating storm water as defined in section 7-7-4 of this chapter, the city engineer may require implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges and activities. 
(1)  The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at its own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials, pollutants or other wastes into the MS4 through the use of structural and non-structural BMPs. 
(2)  Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in section 7-7-2 of this chapter or an activity contaminating storm water as defined in section 7-7-9 of this chapter, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to the MS4. 
(3)  Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Individual sewage treatment systems. Response to special conditions requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of pollutants: 
Where individual sewage treatment systems are contributing to the city's MS4 being subject to the special conditions as defined in section 7-7-2 of this chapter, the owner or operator of such individual sewage treatment systems shall be required to: 
(1)  Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as follows: 
a.  Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the bottom of the scum layer is within three (3) inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is within ten (10) inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary tee. 
b.  Avoid the use of septic tank additives. 
c.  Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents, kitchen wastes, laundry wastes and household chemicals; and 
d.  Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers, sanitary napkins, trash and other such items. 
(5)  Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows: 
a.  In accordance with 10 NYCRR Appendix 75A to the maximum extent practicable. 
b.  A design professional licensed to practice in New York State shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption field that involves: 
1.  Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location not previously approved for such. 
2.  Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the same location. 
3.  Use of alternate system or innovative system design or technology. 
c.  A written certificate of compliance shall be submitted by the design professional to the city at the completion of construction of the repair or replacement system. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-12. - Suspension of access to MS4. 
(a)  The city engineer may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The city engineer shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city engineer may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge or unauthorized connection. Any person discharging to the city's MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge or result in the remedy of an unauthorized connection. The city engineer or his or her duly authorized representative will notify a violator in writing of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefore. The violator may petition the city engineer for a reconsideration and hearing. Access may be granted by the city engineer if he/she finds that the illicit discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its recurrence, or that the discharger has obtained proper permission for the connection. Access may be denied if the city engineer determines in writing that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur or the unauthorized connection has not been remedied. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-13. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city engineer prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-14. - Connection permits. 
(a)  General. Any discharge or connection to the city's MS4 requires a permit issued by the Commissioner of Public Works. Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the department of public works. Permit applications shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, analyses, calculations or other information considered pertinent by the city engineer. The city considers any discharge to its MS4 as a last resort to solve flooding problems. Before approving any direct connection, the city will require that Applicants use on-site best management practices to handle storm water and other authorized non-storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable. The department of public works will assess the adequacy of the applicant's on-site storm water disposal management practices. 
(b)  Permit types: 
(1)  General permit. An authorization for the connection as well as the discharge of storm water or authorized non-storm water (per section 7-7-4(d)(1) of this chapter), from properties occupied by private dwellings. 
(2)  Discharge permit . An authorization for connection as well as discharge authorized under section 7-7-14 of this chapter, as well as for a discharge permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the NYSDEC. This permit is subject to special terms and conditions by the city engineer. The permit will expire on or before the expiration of the NYSDEC SPDES permit, waiver or order or upon change of ownership or use of the property. 
(3)  Special permit . An authorization for the connection as well as any discharge of storm water or authorized non-storm water (per section 7-7-4(d)(1) of this chapter), from all properties occupied by other than private dwellings. 
(c)  Permit fees. The following fee schedule: 
(1)  General permit: Application and filing fee: ..... $250.00 
Inspection fee: ..... 350.00 
(2)  Section 7-7-2(d)(4) permit: Application and filing fee: ..... 2,000.00 
Inspection fee: ..... 3,000.00 
(3)  Special permit: Application and filing fee: ..... 1,750.00* 
Inspection fee: ..... 2,250.00* 
*At no time shall the total cost of a Special Permit Application fee and Inspection Fee exceed 50% of the cost of the storm water construction costs. The cost of construction will be determined by the Commissioner of Public Works after reviewing information submitted by the permitee. All determinations by the Commissioner will be final. 
In the case where any of the aforementioned permits shall be under review for a third time or more, the city may require the applicant to pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of such permits. 
(d)  Inspection. Any physical connections to the city's MS4 shall be subject to the approval and inspection by the city. The applicant must notify the department of public works at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencing work and at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to final restoration. 
(e)  Indemnification. The property owner shall indemnify and save the city harmless from any loss, damage or expense, including reasonable attorneys fees and costs, claims or suits arising out of and in connection with the installation and connection to the city's MS4. In addition, the city makes no guarantee that its MS4 will not become surcharged or otherwise overburdened and that water from the MS4 will not back-up through the connection onto the owner's property. By making a connection, the applicant/owner assumes all of the risk and liability that may arise from it. 
(f)  Permit transfers. General permits may be transferred with the sale of a residential property, provided the use does not change. The new property owner shall comply with the terms and conditions of the transferred permit. Special permits are not transferable without approval of the commissioner of public works. 
(g)  Work within city roads. Any connection made within or involving work within a city road will also comply and be subject to any and all applicable codes and regulations pertaining to permits for work on and within city streets and roads. A permit under this chapter does not relieve the applicant from the permits under the foregoing codes and regulations. 
(h)  Other permits required. A connection permit issued pursuant to this Code does not relieve the applicant from any and all other permits, permissions, or compliance with rules and regulations that may be required by federal, state, county, town, city government agencies or other public or private parties. This permit does not supersede any of the above. 
(i)  Permit rules and regulations. The commissioner of public works may promulgate rules and regulations for the permitting process within the constraints of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2; Ord. of 6-1-09, § 2; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 7; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 7; Ord. of 5-30-13, § 3, eff. 7-1-13; Ord. of 8-5-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 7-7-15. - Access and monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the city engineer must inspect to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition that constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities public and private subject to regulation under this Code as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this Code. If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records as may be required to implement this chapter. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to this chapter such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city engineer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge. 
(4)  The city engineer has the right to require the facilities subject to this chapter to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility subject to this chapter are a violation of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility subject to this chapter commits an offense if the person denies the city reasonable access to the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter. 
(6)  If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-16. - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and clean up of such release. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city engineer in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city engineer within three (3) business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-17. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation: When the city engineer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, he/she may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation any or all of the actions listed below: 
(1)  The elimination of illicit or unauthorized connections or discharges; 
(2)  That violating discharges, practices, operations, activities, or connections shall cease and desist; 
(3)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(4)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(5)  Payment of a fine; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(b)  Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed two (2) months, or both for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed two (2) months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within a period of five (5) years, punishable by a fine not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed two (2) months, or both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional violation. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-18. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal within fifteen (15) calendar days of its issuance. The city engineer shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days after the filing of the appeal, and within five (5) days of making his/her decision, issue a decision by certified mail to the discharger. The city engineer may conduct the hearing and take evidence or may designate in writing a hearing officer to do so. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-19. - Corrective measures after appeal. 
(a)  If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five (5) business days of the decision of the city engineer, then the city engineer shall request the owner's permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. 
(b)  If refused access to the subject private property, the city engineer may seek a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the city engineer may seek a court order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the discharger. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-20. - Injunctive relief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-21. - Alternative remedies. 
(a)  Where a person has violated a provision of this Code, same may be eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon recommendation of the corporation counsel and concurrence of the city engineer, where: 
(1)  The violation was unintentional. 
(2)  The violator has no history of previous violations of this chapter. 
(3)  Environmental damage was minimal. 
(4)  Violator acted quickly to remedy violation. 
(5)  Violator cooperated in investigation and resolution. 
(b)  Alternative remedies may consist of, but are not limited to, one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Attendance at compliance workshops. 
(2)  Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking. 
(3)  River, stream or creek cleanup activities; and 
(4)  Such other and further remedial actions which reasonably will promote environmental awareness and best management practices. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-22. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-23. - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies listed in this chapter and any regulations promulgated thereto, are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. of 12-20-07, § 2)  
Sec. 7-7-24. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  The city may issue a stop work order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop work order shall be required to halt all land development or redevelopment activities, except those activities that address the violations leading to the stop work order. The stop work order shall be in effect until the city confirms that the land development or redevelopment activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop work order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  Any work done without a required permit shall be subject to a five hundred dollar ($500.00) additional fee in addition to all applicable permit fees. 
(Ord. of 5-30-13, § 4, eff. 7-1-13)  
Chapter 7-8 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Water generally, § 182 et seq.; damaging water system, § 194; connecting supply pipes, § 196; water rates and charges, § 197. 
Cross reference— Enclosure of notices of newspaper pickup and glass salvaging in water and tax bill, § 2-1-6; contamination of watershed, § 3-1-1; restriction on activities in wetlands, § 3-5-3; prohibition of illicit discharges, activities and connections to the City of White Plains' municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) Ch. 7-7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-8-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in this section: 
(a)  City shall mean the City of White Plains, New York. 
(b)  Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of public works of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Rules and regulations shall refer to the herein contained rules and regulations approved and ratified by the common council, including any further rules and regulations or amendments that may be approved and ratified by the common council. 
(d)  Bureau of water shall mean the bureau of water of the department of public works of the city and the employees thereof. 
(e)  Water main shall mean the water pipe laid in a street, right-of-way, easement or other public ground and forming part of the water distribution system of the city. 
(f)  Fire main shall refer to the piping laid from a water main, including the connection to the main, for the purpose of conveying water for fire use from the city's water distribution system to fire hydrants not located on city property. 
(g)  Domestic service line shall refer to the piping laid from a water main other than a fire main or fire service line, including the connection to the main for the purpose of conveying water from the city's water distribution system into a building or property, to and including the official water meter, and shall include the gate valve with gate box, or corporation stop and curb stop with curb box. 
(h)  Fire service line shall refer to the piping laid from a water main or fire main, including the connection to the water main or fire main for the purpose of conveying water for fire protection from the water main or fire main into a building, and shall include the gate valve with gate box. 
(i)  House piping shall refer to all plumbing, including pipe, fixtures and other devices on the house side of the official water meter of the domestic service line. 
(j)  Official water meter shall mean a meter designated by the commissioner as being the water meter used to register the water consumption and shall include the remote register attached thereto complete with wiring and seals. 
(k)  Cross connection shall mean a physical connection through which a supply of potable water could be contaminated or polluted, or a connection between a supervised potable water supply and an unsupervised supply of unknown potability. 
(l)  Interconnection shall mean a physical connection between two (2) or more supervised water supply systems. 
(m)  Acceptable backflow prevention device shall mean an acceptable air gap, reduced pressure zone device or double check valve assembly as used to contain potential contamination within a facility. These devices shall meet the following criteria and shall be on the latest approved list of the New York State Department of Health as being acceptable for containment control in New York State. 
(1)  Air gap separation: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap be less than one (1) inch. 
(2)  Reduced pressure zone device (RPZ): A minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the upstream (supply) pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly (DCV): Two (2) single independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable test cocks for testing the water tightness of each check valve. 
(n)  Degree of hazard shall mean the classification of a facility as hazardous, aesthetically objectionable or nonhazardous in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Hazardous facility: A facility in which substances may be present which if introduced into the city's water supply system would or may endanger or have an adverse effect on the health of other water consumers. The city's water supply system shall be protected from potential contamination from the facility by means of an acceptable air gap or a reduced pressure zone device. 
(2)  Aesthetically objectionable facility: A facility in which substances are present, which if introduced into the city's water supply system could be a nuisance to other water consumers, but would not adversely affect human health. The city's water supply system shall be protected from potential contamination from the facility by means of an acceptable air gap, reduced pressure zone device or double check valve assembly. 
(3)  Nonhazardous facility: A facility which does not necessarily require the installation of an acceptable air gap, reduced pressure zone device or double check valve assembly but will require the installation of other types of devices to prevent backflow such as dual check backflow preventers to be used in conjunction with internal plumbing control. 
(o)  Containment shall mean cross-connection control which isolates the consumer's entire facility from the city's water supply system so as to provide the protection necessary to prevent contamination of the city's water supply system in the event of backflow from the consumer's facility. 
(p)  Contamination shall mean the presence in water of a substance that tends to degrade its quality. 
(q)  Plumbing control is prevention and elimination of cross connections within the consumer's water system by enforcement of building and plumbing codes. 
(r)  City's water supply system or city's water distribution system shall mean the water system of the city, including the source, treatment works, pumping stations, transmission mains, distribution system and storage facilities serving the public. 
(s)  Supplementary water supply shall mean any water source or system, other than the water supply of the city, that is available within the water consumer's facility. 
(t)  Outside consumer shall be a consumer who utilizes water supplied by the city to an improvement outside the city limits. 
(u)  Licensed plumber shall mean a plumber licensed by the city. 
(v)  Certified backflow prevention device tester shall mean a person who is certified by the New York State Department of Health as a backflow prevention device tester. 
(w)  Basic schedule shall mean the water rate schedule that applies to all per capita users and those non-per capita users who consume less than two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) cubic feet (cf) of water in any six-month period of the previous two six-month periods. 
(x)  Excess non-per capita schedule shall mean the water rate scheduled that applies to all non-per capita users with water consumption in excess of one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) cubic feet (cf) of water in any quarter of the previous four quarters. The commissioner of public works shall have the final authority to determine users in this class. 
(y)  Reserved. 
(z)  Meter transmission unit (MTU) shall mean the battery powered meter reading radio transmitter wired to a water meter used to record hourly, interval water usage data. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.01; Regs. of 4-27-81; Regs. of 7-3-85; Ord. of 4-7-04, § 1; Ord. of 12-6-10, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-11, § 1; Ord. of 11-7-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 7-8-2. - Applications for taps, service, etc. 
(a)  All applications for tapping and making connection to the water mains, fire mains or other water pipes of the city shall be made at the office of the commissioner by the property owner who shall sign the tap book and pay in advance the specified charges for such tap connection. 
(b)  The owner's duly authorized agent may sign the tap book in lieu of the owner provided the owner's written delegation of authority to said agent for such purpose has first been filed with the commissioner. 
(c)  The signature of the owner, or his duly authorized agent, to the tap book shall be evidence: 
(1)  That the owner subscribes to these rules and regulations; 
(2)  That the said owner will abide thereby; 
(3)  That the owner also agrees to abide by any rules and regulations that may hereafter be established by the commissioner; and 
(4)  That the owner further agrees that he will be responsible for any failure on the part of all or any of his tenants to abide by these or future water rules and regulations. 
(d)  Applications for installation of refrigeration and/or air conditioning equipment requiring the use of water from the municipal water supply must be made at the office of the commissioner of building, in conformance with section 7-8-35 of this Code. 
(e)  Prior to starting any work within a street, right-of-way, easement or any other public ground, the owner or his duly authorized agent shall be required to obtain and pay for all necessary permits as specified in chapter 7-3 of this Code. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.02)  
Sec. 7-8-3. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7-8-4. - Fire hydrants and valves. 
No person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity other than the commissioner or those acting with the written permission, or under the direction of the commissioner, or authorized employees of the bureau of water, or authorized members of the fire department performing their official duties, shall open or close, obstruct or interfere with any hydrant, gate valve, or curb stop connected to the water distribution system of the city. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.034)  
Sec. 7-8-5. - Cross-connections. 
No person owning or occupying premises that is receiving water service from the city's water distribution system shall make, or allow to be made, any connection, either of a direct or of an indirect nature between his piping system and a water supply from any other source, or install, or allow to be installed, any fixture or appliance of waste or soil pipe from which water may flow, be siphoned or to be pumped into the city's water distribution system. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.033)  
Sec. 7-8-6. - City's control of tap's mains, etc.; liability of city for shutting off water. 
(a)  The commissioner reserves to himself full control of all taps, mains, valves, valve boxes, meters and other fixtures and the commissioner also reserves to himself the right to take charge of, and fully control, valves, and service lines whenever, in the opinion of the commissioner, a violation of these rules and regulations is believed to have occurred. 
(b)  The city will not be liable for any damage which may result to any person or property from shutting off the water supply for any purpose whatsoever, even in cases where no notice has been given by the city, and no deduction will be allowed from the water bill in consequence of such shutting off or such damage. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.04)  
Sec. 7-8-7. - Notice of excavations. 
(a)  The excavator shall notify the bureau of water at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of his intent to perform any excavations. The bureau of water will locate the existing water main and/or service lines in the vicinity of the proposed excavation. Any information provided by the city as to the size, type, location and depth is to be considered as only approximate, and the city shall not be held responsible for any information that may not be accurate or correct. After the city has completed their location work, the excavator should verify the location of the existing water main or service lines by hand dug test holes. 
(b)  The excavator shall use extreme caution when excavating with heavy equipment and only hand excavation will be permitted when excavating within eighteen (18) inches of a water main or service line. If an excavator damages a water main or service line he shall, at his own expense, have the water main or service line replaced or repaired, whichever may be directed by the commissioner. Water main repairs shall be done only by the bureau of water; service line repairs and/or replacement shall be done only by a licensed plumber. Unless otherwise permitted by the commissioner, damaged galvanized iron service lines must be replaced in accordance with the requirements specified in sections 7-8-51 through 7-8-75 of this Code. The cost of shutting down and restoring water service by the bureau of water shall be borne by the excavator whenever the shutdown is a result of damage caused by the excavator. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.05)  
Sec. 7-8-8. - City's right to shut off or restrict use of water. 
(a)  At any time the commissioner is of the opinion that there is an actual shortage of water or insufficiency of water pressure, or that such shortage or pressure is anticipated, the commissioner shall have the right to prohibit or restrict the use of water, or to curtail the supply of water to a property owner or consumer, or in the case of emergency to shut off the water supply in any water main, fire main or service line without notice. 
(b)  In the event that any of these rules or regulations are violated by a property owner, tenant, contractor, or other consumer, the commissioner shall have the right, at the said commissioner's option and upon twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the property owner to shut off the supply of water to the property where such violation has occurred, and the water shall not be turned on again until such violation has been corrected and this chapter has been complied with. 
(c)  The city shall not be held liable for failure or inability to supply water to any property owner or consumer on account of unforeseen circumstances beyond the city's control, catastrophes or "Acts of God," nor for any damages which may be caused to persons or property as a result of the shutting off of the water supply from any water main, fire main or service line for any purpose whatsoever, and no deduction will be made from water bills at any time in consequence thereof. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.031; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-8.1. - Prevention of watershed contamination. 
(a)  No person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall enter upon the area known as the White Plains Watershed, shown on the Tax Assessment Map of the city as Ward 5, Block 66, Lot 9, without express written permission of the commissioner. Orchard Street, Old Road to Kensico, Reservoir Road, Hall Avenue and Nethermont Avenue, being public streets, are not affected hereby. Lawful existing easements and rights-of-way are not affected hereby. 
(b)  No person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall discharge or drain into, throw, cast, deposit or lay, or direct, suffer or permit any servant, agent, or employee to discharge or drain into, cast, deposit or lay any substances or materials of any kind whatsoever upon the said White Plains Watershed without the express written permission of the commissioner. 
(c)  Section 7-8-10 of this article notwithstanding, the violation of this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable on conviction for a first offense by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both, and for a second or subsequent offense by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding one (1) year, or both. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.032; Regs. of 7-3-86)  
Sec. 7-8-9. - Liability of city for water discoloration or improper pressure. 
The city shall not be liable to the owner or his tenants for any inconvenience or damage resulting from water discoloration or low or excessive pressure. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 6.01(b))  
Sec. 7-8-10. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, doing or permitting to be done or causing to be done, any act or thing contrary to the provisions of these rules and regulations, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or to imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both fine and imprisonment, and on any subsequent conviction thereof shall be guilty of a violation and subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both fine and imprisonment for each such violation. Every violation of any provision of these rules and regulations shall be a separate and distinct offense; and, in case of continuing violation, every day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 1.06; Regs. of 7-3-86) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Sec. 7-8-11. - Amendments. 
The commissioner reserves the right to make such changes in the water rules and regulations as he may from time to time deem desirable. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 6.01(a)) 
Charter reference— Power of commission to promulgate rules and regulations governing the use of water, § 197.  
Sec. 7-8-12. - Conflicting ordinances, rules or regulations. 
All ordinances, or rules or regulations, or any part thereof, inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed and rescinded. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 6.02)  
Sec. 7-8-13. - Validity. 
If any section, article, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of these rules and regulations shall be adjudged invalid, or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of these rules and regulations as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part finally determined to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 6.03)  
Sec. 7-8-14. - Effective date. 
These rules and regulations shall take effect March 20, 1979. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 6.04)  
Secs. 7-8-15—7-8-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER USAGE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 7-8-27. - Generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the commissioner in writing as provided hereinunder, no person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, shall use, cause to be used, or permit to be used, any water of the city unless such water shall first pass through an official water meter and the amount of such water shall be properly measured and recorded. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.01)  
Sec. 7-8-28. - Water for construction purposes. 
(a)  Persons desiring use of water for construction purposes shall make all necessary arrangements with the property owner. Application for a service line shall be made by the property owner or his duly authorized agent as prescribed in sections 7-8-51 through 7-8-75 of this Code. 
(b)  In general, all water used for construction shall be metered, unless prior written permission of the commissioner is obtained as described herein. The commissioner may authorize the use of water for construction purposes without metering when deemed advisable by the commissioner and when suitable arrangements, satisfactory to the commissioner, have been made for payment for said water. In general, payment for unmetered water will be made at a daily flat rate, as determined by the commissioner. 
(c)  All service lines which are to be used to supply water for construction purposes shall be protected from backflow of water from the premises into the city's water supply system by means of an approved backflow prevention device. 
(d)  Deposits and fees as determined by the commissioner shall be paid in advance for the meter and backflow prevention device used during construction as outlined in section 7-8-121. The deposits shall be refunded upon return of the meter and backflow prevention device less the cost of repairs, if any. If the meter and/or backflow prevention device is not returned, the full deposit for the item or items not returned shall be forfeited. 
(e)  After the meter has been set and sealed by the city, it shall not be removed or relocated, except by authorized water bureau personnel. 
(f)  The owner and the contractor must arrange between themselves as to the method of payment, and the owner will be held responsible for payment for any water used during construction and also for ensuring that the user of the water abides by the herewith rules and regulations. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.02; Regs. of 7-3-86)  
Sec. 7-8-29. - Use of fire hydrant or fire service lines. 
No person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall be permitted to take water from a fire hydrant or fire service line for any purpose whatsoever other than fire protection without first having obtained a written permit from the commissioner, in accordance with the procedure specified in section 7-8-104 of this Code. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.03; Regs. of 7-3-86)  
Sec. 7-8-30. - Discontinuance or resumption of water service. 
(a)  Water service lines shall not be turned on or off by any person except authorized employees of the bureau of water or those acting with the written permission or under the direction of the commissioner. The request of a tenant for the discontinuance or resumption of the use of water shall not be recognized or acted upon by the commissioner except on the written authorization of the property owner. 
(b)  A property owner desiring to temporarily discontinue the use of water for an extended period of time shall give forty-eight (48) hours prior written notice thereof to the commissioner. The bureau of water shall then shut off the service line at the curb stop or gate valve, read the official water meter and render a bill for water consumed. A property owner desiring to resume the use of water shall give written notice thereof to the commissioner in order to have the water turned on. 
(c)  The property owner desiring to permanently discontinue the use of water shall give forty-eight (48) hours prior written notice to the commissioner and secure all necessary permits. The bureau of water shall temporarily shut off the service line at the curb stop or gate valve, read and remove all city-owned meters and render a bill for water consumed. Upon notification by the commissioner that a temporary shut-off has been made, the permittee shall perform the necessary excavation for a permanent discontinuance at the main. The bureau of water shall disconnect the service at the main and the permittee shall backfill and restore all disturbed surfaces at his own expense. 
(d)  A property owner desiring to temporarily shut off the water to make repairs or replacement shall notify the bureau of water forty-eight (48) hours in advance (except in emergencies), and the service line shall be shut off by the bureau of water at the curb stop or gate valve and the official water meter read. The owner or his duly authorized agent shall obtain all permits required, to effect the necessary repairs or replacements in accordance with these rules and regulations. 
(e)  In the event of a leak on a service line, city forces may excavate to control and/or disconnect the service line if necessary. Upon notification by the commissioner that an emergency shut-off has been made, the owner or his duly authorized agent shall obtain all required permits and do all work to effect the necessary repairs or replacements, including backfilling and restoring all disturbed surfaces at his own expense. 
(f)  If, in the opinion of the commissioner, a service line has been abandoned, he may order the property owner to excavate to have the service permanently discontinued in accordance with these rules and regulations. In such case the commissioner shall send notice by certified mail to the owner as shown on the current tax assessment roll of the city affording the owner ten (10) days opportunity to show cause why the service should not be permanently disconnected. The owner shall be afforded a hearing on the facts and if the line in question is determined to be abandoned by the commissioner, he may order the property owner to do the work necessary for a permanent discontinuance. If after thirty (30) days such work is not performed by the owner, the commissioner may have the work performed by contract or by city employees and charge same to owner as water service in the manner provided by sections 7-8-31 and 7-8-32 of this Code as a miscellaneous charge. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.04)  
Sec. 7-8-31. - Rates and charges. 
(a)  All water rates and charges shall be determined by the commissioner with the approval of the common council. 
(b)  Water rates to be paid by property owners or other consumers shall be as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(c)  Availability/demand charges based on the size of the domestic service connection at the main shall be as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(d)  Fire service lines and fire mains, when unmetered, shall be subject to an annual stand-by charge as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(e)  Charges for maintaining hydrants used for fire protection on private property within easements shall be as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(f)  All charges are a lien on the property and the property owner shall in all cases be held liable for all charges. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.06; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-32. - Billings generally. 
(a)  In general an account is established for each official metered domestic service line. However, where there is more than one (1) official metered domestic service line serving a building or structure, the meter readings will be combined and billed as one (1) account. 
(b)  Water bills shall be due and payable at the office of the commissioner of finance at the end of each billing period, as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(c)  For premises receiving water service through an official water meter, where a reading of said meter serving the premises is not available for a billing period, an estimated bill based on available information, may be rendered, charged and collected, as for water actually consumed, subject to adjustment when a reading becomes available. In the event that a reading is unavailable for two (2) successive billing periods, the commissioner shall then serve a notice to the owner of record, by certified mail, that water service to the premises may be discontinued ten (10) days after mailing of the notice unless the official water meter is made available for reading by the bureau of water within said ten-day period. Thereafter, the commissioner may discontinue the service if the official water meter is not made available during the stated period. Once discontinued, the water service will not be resumed until the meter is read, and accrued water charges paid in full. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.05; Regs. of 7-3-85; Ord. of 5-25-05, § 1) 
Cross reference— Notice of newspaper pickup and glass salvaging to be placed in water bill, § 2-1-6.  
Sec. 7-8-33. - Special meter readings and billings. 
A property owner or his duly authorized agent may request a special reading and water statement to be made and rendered at a time other than the normal reading schedule. Said request must be made to the bureau of water at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance. A service charge as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code shall be added to the water charges for the property affected in the same manner as provided by these rules and regulations and the law for the collection of water consumed. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.07)  
Sec. 7-8-34. - Special provisions for service outside city. 
(a)  The commissioner, with the approval of the Common Council of the City of White Plains, may enter into contracts for the sale of water to individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations, or municipalities outside the limits of the City of White Plains. Such contracts shall provide that the water sold shall be metered at the city line through a meter approved by the commissioner. Said meter shall be provided and maintained by the individual, firm, partnership, corporation or municipality purchasing said water provided, however, that all such contracts which, by their terms exceed a period of one year, shall contain a provision that the same may be terminated by the city, at its option, upon one year's notice of its intention to do so. 
(b)  All outside consumers shall be required to comply with all of these rules and regulations. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.08)  
Sec. 7-8-35. - Water for refrigeration and air conditioning. 
(a)  No refrigeration and/or air conditioning equipment requiring the use of water shall be installed on any premise supplied from the municipal system until a permit authorizing such installation has been issued to the installer by the commissioner of building. 
(b)  All installations of any individual or collective system of refrigeration and/or air conditioning equipment of over six (6) tons shall be equipped with a water conserving device such as economizer, evaporative condenser, water cooling tower or similar apparatus, which device shall not consume for makeup purposes, in excess of five (5) per cent of the consumption that would normally be used without such device. 
(c)  All installations of refrigeration and/or air conditioning equipment under six (6) tons shall be provided with an automatic water supply regulating device so as to limit the flow of water in relation to the condenser temperature reduction requirements of the apparatus. In no case shall the equipment use in excess of two (2) gallons per minute per ton capacity. 
(d)  All water conserving or regulating devices shall be subject to the approval of the Building Department of the City of White Plains. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 2.09)  
Secs. 7-8-36—7-8-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE LINE AND FIRE MAIN REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 7-8-51. - Generally. 
(a)  Prior to the installation of service lines and/or fire mains, the property owner shall make the necessary application to the commissioner. Upon approval of the application, the property owner shall pay all required charges, fees, deposits and obtain the necessary street opening and other required permits. 
(b)  Tapping and making connections to the water mains or fire mains, shall in all cases be done by authorized employees of the bureau of water, and shall not be done by any other persons, unless acting with the written permission or direction of the commissioner. 
(c)  Unless otherwise directed, no new service line shall be made available for the use of water until all inactive service lines have been shut off and permanently disconnected in accordance with section 7-8-30 of this Code. 
(d)  Unless otherwise directed, no new service line shall be made available for the use of water until the new line has been tested and disinfected in accordance with chapter 9-7 of this Code (the plumbing code) and as approved by the commissioner. The property owner shall pay the charges as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 3.01)  
Sec. 7-8-52. - Installation. 
(a)  In general, and unless otherwise specified, new service lines and replacement of existing service lines shall be a minimum of one inch in diameter. Service lines up to and including two (2) inches in diameter shall be of copper tubing (type K) with flared joints and service lines greater than two (2) inches in diameter shall be of cast iron or ductile iron cement lined pipe. All materials and methods of installation shall conform to the latest requirements as specified in the "Standard Construction Specifications" and "Standard Construction Details" of the city. 
(b)  The property owner shall do all work necessary for the installation of the service line and/or fire main, including but not limited to excavation, shoring, backfilling, dewatering, rodding, concrete thrust blocks and surface restoration in a manner satisfactory to the commissioner except for tapping and making connections to the water main and furnishing and laying service lines as may be provided for and specified in section 7-8-53 of this Code. 
(c)  In general the trenches excavated for service lines and/or fire mains shall be straight and perpendicular to the water main, opposite the owner's property and to a sufficient depth so that said service lines and/or fire mains can be laid with not less than four and one-half (4½) feet of cover and not more than six and one-half (6½) feet of cover below the existing or future street surface as established by the commissioner, whichever is lowest. If the main is in an unusual location or because of solid rock, the commissioner may grant permission to lay the line in another generally accepted manner. If the conditions are such that the service line and/or fire main will have less than four and one-half (4½) feet cover, it shall be insulated with an approved protective covering. 
(d)  No tap shall be made by the bureau of water until the depth of the trench and dimensions of excavation are such as will allow adequate room for tapping the main and for laying the service line and/or fire main as shown in section 7-8-124 of this Code, and/or as may be determined and required by the commissioner. The permittee shall notify the commissioner not less than twenty-four (24) hours in advance, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, that the trench is ready for the tap and installation of the service line and/or fire main. 
(e)  Not more than one (1) building shall be connected to any one (1) tap and service line. The commissioner may, however, at his option, grant permission to connect with accessory buildings on the same building lot. 
(f)  There shall be no alterations made in the service line and/or fire main or appurtenances, and no additional appurtenances shall be installed on the street or inlet side of the official water meter unless approved in writing by the commissioner. 
(g)  Domestic service lines in all cases shall be separate from fire service lines and fire mains. Unless otherwise approved by the commissioner, fire service lines and fire mains shall not be less than four (4) inches in diameter. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 3.02; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-53. - Tap fees and pipe charges. 
(a)  All charges for tapping and making connections with the water mains of the city and furnishing and laying service lines, shall be as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(b)  The charge for taps three-fourths inch to two (2) inch inclusive in diameter shall include the cost of tapping the water main, furnishing and installing a corporation stop, furnishing and laying a copper service line equal to the size of the tap, from the water main to a point approximately two (2) feet beyond the curb line or edge of pavement, furnishing and installing a curb stop and furnishing a curb box. The curb box shall be installed at the property owner's expense in accordance with these rules and regulations and the directions of the commissioner. Where necessary, a meter shall be furnished by the city and shall be the official water meter for that tap. If more than one meter is desired by the property owner, such additional meters shall be furnished and installed at the owner's expense on the house or outlet side of the official water meter. 
(c)  The charge for taps greater than two (2) inches in diameter shall cover the cost of tapping the water main, installing a tap sleeve and gate valve and furnishing a gate box. The gate box shall be installed at the property owner's expense in accordance with these rules and regulations and the directions of the commissioner. When requested by the owner, the city may furnish and install cast iron or ductile iron pipe from the water main in a public street to a point approximately two (2) feet beyond the curb line or edge of pavement or from a water main or fire main located in a city easement to the edge of the easement. The charge for furnishing and laying the pipe shall be as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. Where necessary, the owner shall furnish and install the official water meter at his own expense and in accordance with these rules and regulations and the directions of the commissioner. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 3.03; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-54. - Special taps and valves. 
(a)  Where the property owner requests a tap on a water main which is of a material other than cast iron or ductile iron, special equipment and materials may be required. The city shall not be held liable for any delay in obtaining special equipment and materials needed to complete the work. The tap fee shall be as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(b)  Where isolation and/or insertion valves are to be installed on a water main or fire main, the property owner shall request such work in writing. The charges for the installation shall be as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 3.04; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-55. - Repair, maintenance, etc., of lines. 
(a)  The property owner shall, at his expense, maintain and keep in good order, repair and proper operating condition all service lines serving his property. The commissioner may direct the owner to replace and/or repair as directed, any and all parts of the service lines or house piping serving said property, which in his opinion may be necessary to prevent leakage and/or waste of water or damage to property. When directed by the commissioner, a leaky or damaged service line shall be replaced and/or repaired in accordance with the requirements specified under section 7-8-52 of this Code. All repairs to water service lines shall be made in an approved manner by a licensed plumber. 
(b)  The property owner shall at his own expense, keep service line boxes readily accessible to the bureau of water for the purpose of turning water off or on. He shall also maintain the boxes level with the surface of the adjoining ground, pavement, walk or driveway, for the safety of pedestrians or other traffic. In the event that the commissioner shall deem it necessary to raise or lower the service line water box so as to make the top of the said box level with the surface of the adjoining ground, pavement, walk or driveway for the safety of pedestrians or other traffic, all such work including the removal and replacement of portions of the adjoining ground, pavements, sidewalks or driveways, as necessary, shall be done by the property owner upon written order of the commissioner and at the said property owner's expense. Upon failure of the property owner to conform with such written order within the time specified, the commissioner may proceed with any such work as may be required to assure the safety of pedestrians and other traffic, at the property owner's expense, in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the charter and ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The city shall not be responsible for their inability to turn water off or on in the event that the water service valve is inaccessible or inoperable, nor shall they be held liable on account of injury to persons, or damage to property, by reason of the fact that the gate box or gate valve, curb box or curb stop, or any part of the service line was not properly maintained in accordance with these rules and regulations. 
(d)  The city shall not be liable in any way for injury to persons or damage to property, by reasons of breaks, obstructions, leaks in service lines and house piping or any part thereof, as the result of frost or necessary maintenance operations of the bureau of water or any other cause. 
(e)  Any service line, house piping, or any part thereof which may become frozen shall be thawed, repaired or replaced by the property owner at his own expense, as directed by the commissioner. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 3.05)  
Sec. 7-8-56. - Easements and agreements. 
(a)  The property owner shall grant and provide easements of a width not less than six (6) feet on each side of water mains, fire mains and hydrants and the city will undertake to maintain and repair same when and as long as the commissioner may deem it necessary. The adequacy and form of the easement grant, easement map and written agreement shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner and the corporation counsel of the city. The owner shall agree that said easement area is to be kept free and clear of buildings, structures or other encumbrances in order to avoid interference with the proper maintenance and operation of said water main, fire main or hydrant by the city. 
(b)  The easement map shall be prepared by a land surveyor licensed in the State of New York, and shall indicate all as-built information, including but not limited to accurate location of gate valves, hydrants, water meter vaults and angle points along the line of pipe. In general the scale of the easement map shall not exceed fifty (50) feet to one inch. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 3.06)  
Secs. 7-8-57—7-8-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER METERS 
 
Sec. 7-8-76. - Generally. 
(a)  All water meters shall be of a type approved by the commissioner and unless otherwise specified shall be in accordance with section 7-8-78 of this Code. 
(b)  The city shall furnish the official water meter for each tap up to and including two (2) inches in diameter. This meter shall remain the property of the city and shall be installed and protected by the property owner at his own expense. Normal wear and tear maintenance on this official water meter shall be provided by the city. All other maintenance shall be provided at the property owner's expense. 
(c)  Where taps are greater than two (2) inches in diameter, the official water meter shall be furnished, installed, protected and maintained by the property owner at his own expense. 
(d)  In the case of all taps, of any size whatsoever, only one official water meter shall be used to record water consumption for each tap. The official water meter shall be the only one read by the bureau of water. Any and all additional meters desired by the property owner shall be installed on the house, or outlet, side of the official water meter and all such additional meters shall be furnished, installed and maintained by the property owner at his own expense. 
(e)  Gate valves, check valves and approved backflow prevention devices shall be installed at the official water meter in accordance with the "Detail of Meter and Backflow Prevention Device Installation" as shown in section 7-8-122 of this Code and as required by the plumbing code of the city. Only those devices and appurtenances as shown herein in section 7-8-122 and as required by the plumbing code shall be installed on the street or inlet side of the official water meter. No other devices or appurtenances shall be installed on the street or inlet side of the official water meter unless approved in writing by the commissioner. 
(f)  When a backflow prevention device is to be installed on the outlet or house side of the official water meter, no connections, taps, fixtures, devices or other appurtenances shall be allowed between the backflow prevention device and the official water meter. 
(g)  All valves, check valves, backflow preventors and other fixtures must be of a type approved by the commissioner. 
(h)  Whenever heating or other water using systems are supplied with water from the city mains, a suitable valve or other suitable device must be installed so as to prevent damage from collapse or explosion in case it is necessary to shut off the supply of water from the city mains. 
(i)  No person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall interfere, tamper with or remove the official water meter after it has been inspected, approved and sealed by the bureau of water, by order and under the authority of the commissioner. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the provisions of 7-8-76(d), the Commissioner may authorize the installation of two water meters from a single tap for a single building for which a vertical subdivision map has been filed with the Westchester County Clerk's Office, and approved by the City of White Plains Planning Board prior to January 1, 2017, which have a primarily commercial subdivided unit and a primarily residential subdivided unit, each unit having a separate owner and having at least 100,000 square feet of rentable floor area, provided the Commissioner finds that the plumbing on each unit's side of the tap services only the separate commercial and residential subdivided units of the building. The meter size, manufacturer and model type shall be approved by the Commissioner of Public Works prior to installation. 
Applicants shall prepare and submit to the City, acceptable to the Commissioner and the Corporation Counsel, an agreement between the two owners stating who is responsible for the service line up to each respective meter which must include a hold harmless clause from each owner to hold the City harmless for loss of service from the joint service line because of a shutdown due to a problem with either one of the unit service lines in the building. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 4.01; Regs. of 4-19-82; Regs. of 7-3-85; Ord. of 6-5-17, § 1 )  
Sec. 7-8-77. - Installation. 
(a)  The official water meter shall be set in a horizontal position as close as practical to the point where the water service line enters the building or meter vault as shown in section 7-8-122 of this Code. 
(b)  In general, the official water meter shall not be located in excess of fifty (50) feet from the property line. The commissioner may require the owner to install the meter in a vault which shall be located within the owner's property at the property line as directed. The vault shall be constructed in accordance with the detail as shown in section 7-8-123 of this Code. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain a dry vault and where necessary dewater and protect the official water meter as directed. 
(c)  Unless otherwise directed by the commissioner, the rated size of the official water meter shall be equal to or less than the diameter of the domestic service line. A minimum of a three (3) inch meter will be required for domestic service lines four (4) inches in diameter or larger. 
(d)  In the case of domestic service lines greater than two (2) inches in diameter a valved by-pass shall be installed to facilitate testing and meter repair. The valve on the "by-pass" shall be an approved lockable type valve, which shall be sealed by the bureau of water. 
(e)  After installation, the official water meter shall be tested in place in accordance with section 7-8-125 of this Code, by an acceptable meter testing company in the presence of the commissioner's authorized representative. A certificate of accuracy shall be furnished to the commissioner before the line will be put into service. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this section herein, the commissioner reserves the right to modify the requirements set forth in sections 7-8-122, 7-8-123 and 7-8-124 so as to protect the integrity of the public water supply and minimize disruption of service to existing water consumers. This authority shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements for a dry or wet connection and the need for insertion valves and/or line stops at the sole expense of the applicant requesting the connection(s). 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 4.02; Regs. of 7-3-85; Ord. of 12-2-13, § 1)  
Sec. 7-8-78. - Specifications. 
(a)  All official water meters furnished by the city shall be magnetically driven nutating disc type straight reading in cubic feet and shall comply with the latest A.W.W.A. Standard C-700 entitled "Cold Water Meter Displacement Type," and shall be equipped with an electrically operated remote register, which shall be direct reading in cubic feet and connected by a two-wire connection to the generator. The generator shall be self-powered (by the energy of the water passing through the meter), waterproof, and equipped with an indoor totalizer and test circle, and shall meet the latest A.W.W.A. Standard C-706. 
(b)  Unless otherwise directed by the commissioner, all official water meters furnished by the property owner shall be new magnetic drive cold water meters, compound type, straight reading in cubic feet equipped with separate strainer and tapped boss for testing and shall meet the latest A.W.W.A. Standard C-702 entitled "Cold Water Meters—Compound Type," and shall be equipped with electrically operated remote register, which shall be direct reading in cubic feet and connected by a two-wire connection to the generator. The generator shall be self-powered (by the energy of the water passing through the meter), waterproof, and equipped with an indoor totalizer and test circle, and shall meet the latest A.W.W.A. Standard C-706. An affidavit of compliance that the meter and remote register complies with all applicable requirements of these standards shall be furnished to the commissioner for his approval prior to the meter installation. 
(c)  The location of all remote registers shall be approved by the commissioner prior to installation. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 4.06; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-79. - Accessibility. 
(a)  The property owner shall keep the official water meter, backflow prevention devices and other fixtures readily accessible and unobstructed for inspection, testing and repair. Where meters, backflow prevention devices and/or other required devices and fixtures are in locations which are inaccessible or unsafe due to water or other obstructions, as determined by the commissioner, the property owner shall be responsible for the removal of water or obstructions at his own expense. 
(b)  The commissioner and/or any authorized employee of the bureau of water shall have the right to enter the premises or property of any property owner, tenant or other consumer where city water is being supplied, at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for the purpose of installing, inspecting, reading, removing, testing or repairing the official water meter or for inspecting the backflow prevention devices and house piping. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 4.04; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-80. - Accuracy and testing. 
(a)  An official water meter which ceases to register shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the commissioner within thirty (30) days upon written notification. In the case of taps two (2) inches or less in diameter, repair or replacement of the official water meter will be made by the bureau of water. In the case of taps larger than two (2) inches in diameter, such repair or replacement shall be made by the owner at the owner's expense. In general a meter which cannot be repaired to function properly for twelve (12) consecutive months and has been in service over ten (10) years shall be replaced in accordance with these Rules and Regulations. 
(b)  The property owner's account for water consumed during the period when the meter ceased to register shall be calculated by taking either the average amount of water consumed, as recorded by the new meter, or the average amount of water consumed during a previous similar period, at the option of the commissioner. 
(c)  In the event the property owner questions the accuracy of the official water meter owned by the city (two (2) inches or less in size), the bureau of water shall, upon written request, test the meter in the presence of the owner or his authorized representative. If the meter tested is found to be registering less than one hundred three (103) percent of the amount of water actually passing through the various test flows, the property owner shall pay a testing charge as outlined in section 7-8-121 of this Code. If the meter tested is found to register in excess of the allowable one hundred three (103) percent, then the owner will not be required to pay the testing charge and an adjustment may be made to the consumption shown on the latest bill rendered for the difference between the allowable one hundred three (103) percent and the actual registration found, as determined by the commissioner. 
(d)  All official water meters shall be tested in accordance with section 7-8-125 of this Code. The test interval shall be as indicated in the following table: 
Size of Meter 
(inches) 	Test Interval 
(years) 
 ¾ and less 	15 
1 	10 
1½ and 2 	 6 
3 	 4 
4 	 3 
6 and larger 	 2 
 
The commissioner reserves the right, however, to require a meter test at any time, if, in his opinion, it appears the official meter has been tampered with, the seal broken or removed, or when there is a significant change in recorded consumption. 
Where the official water meter is furnished by the city, the water meter shall be tested for accuracy by the bureau of water, and if necessary, the meter shall be recalibrated or replaced at the commissioner's option. 
Where the official water meter is furnished by the property owner, the meter shall be field tested for accuracy at the owner's expense, by a meter testing company acceptable to the commissioner and in the presence of the commissioner's authorized representative. In the event the meter does not register within the accuracy limits specified for said meter in the aforementioned section 7-8-125, it shall be repaired and then retested to determine if it registers within the accuracy limits. The results of all meter tests shall be furnished to the commissioner in writing on the forms provided within ten (10) days after the tests. If the meter cannot be repaired to the required degree of accuracy, it shall be replaced at the owner's expense in accordance with these rules and regulations. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 4.05; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-81. - Responsibility for damage. 
(a)  An official water meter damaged by frost or damaged through negligence or misuse by the property owner or any other person shall be replaced or repaired at the property owner's expense. For taps up to and including two (2) inches, meter repairs shall be made by the city in accordance with the charges as outlined in section 7-8-121 of this Code. For taps greater than two (2) inches, the owner shall retain the services of an approved meter repair company. 
(b)  The city will not be held responsible in any way for damage to service lines, meters, house piping, valves, or any other fixtures as a result of frost or for any other reasons, nor shall the city be responsible in any way for damage to property from the above causes or from leakage of water from any part of the service lines or house piping. 
(c)  In the event that it becomes necessary for the city to remove or replace the official water meter, and the commissioner is of the opinion that such removal or replacement cannot be effected or is inadvisable until repairs have been made by the property owner to the service line or house piping, the commissioner may, at his option, order such repairs to be made by the property owner or he may discontinue and turn off the supply of water to said property until such repairs have been satisfactorily made. 
(d)  In any event the city shall not be liable for any damage to service lines, house piping or property caused by removal, replacement or testing of the official water meter, or for any cause whatsoever. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 4.03; Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-82. - Penalties. 
Any person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, doing or permitting to be done or causing to be done, any act or thing contrary to the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) in amount, nor exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in amount, and on any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not be less than two hundred fifty dollars in amount, nor exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in amount, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days or both such fine and imprisonment for each such violation. 
(Ord. of 4-7-04, § 1)  
Secs. 7-8-83—7-8-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 7-8-91. - General. 
(a)  All service lines from the city's water supply system shall be protected from backflow of water by means of an approved backflow prevention device to prevent contamination from the premises into the city's water supply system. 
(b)  Each service line to a facility shall be protected in a manner commensurate with the degree of hazard of the facility. The degree of hazard and type of backflow prevention device to be used to achieve containment shall be based on use of the facility and availability of contaminants. 
(c)  The tabulation in section 7-8-126 shows the degree of hazard for various facilities and the required type of backflow prevention device. For those types of facilities not shown on the tabulation in section 7-8-126, the commissioner shall determine the type of backflow prevention device to be installed based upon his determination of the degree of actual or potential hazard. 
(d)  All reduced pressure zone devices (RPZ) and double check valve assemblies (DCV) must be on the current listing of acceptable devices issued by New York State Department of Health. The design of all backflow prevention device installations shall be approved by the New York State Department of Health or Westchester County Department of Health. 
(e)  All backflow prevention devices shall be acceptable to the commissioner of public works. 
(f)  No cross connections are permitted between a supplementary water supply and the city's water supply. 
(Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-92. - Installation. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified, backflow prevention device(s) shall be installed at the official water meter in accordance with section 7-8-122 and as required by the plumbing code of the city. 
(b)  No RPZ or DCV backflow prevention device shall be placed in service until such time as a completed works approval has been issued by the New York State Department of Health or the Westchester County Department of Health. 
(c)  All backflow prevention devices shall be furnished, installed, tested, protected and maintained by the property owner at his own expense. 
(Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-93. - Testing. 
(a)  After installation, all backflow prevention devices shall be tested in place, by a certified backflow prevention device tester in the presence of the commissioner's authorized representative. The tester's written certification shall be furnished to the commissioner within ten (10) days after the test has been performed. A new service line will not be put into service before certification is received and approved by the commissioner of public works. 
(b)  Yearly tests shall be performed on each RPZ and DCV backflow prevention device by a certified backflow prevention device tester to ensure continued reliability. The tester's written report shall be forwarded to the commissioner within ten (10) days after the test has been performed. 
(c)  Any backflow prevention device which fails to function properly shall be repaired or replaced within thirty (30) days, or as directed by the commissioner, and tested after the repair or replacement by a certified backflow prevention device tester. The tester's written report shall be forwarded to the commissioner within ten (10) days after the test has been performed. 
(d)  The results of all tests, as specified herein under this section, shall also be forwarded to the Westchester County Department of Health by the tester within ten (10) days after the test has been performed. 
(Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-94. - Penalties. 
Any person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, doing or permitting to be done or causing to be done, any act or thing contrary to the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) in amount, nor exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in amount, and on any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not be less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in amount, nor exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in amount, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days or both such fine and imprisonment for each such violation. 
(Ord. of 4-7-04, § 2)  
Secs. 7-8-95—7-8-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE HYDRANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— To allow for the inclusion of a new Art. V, an amendment to these regulations adopted July 3, 1985, renumbered former Art. V as Art. VI. The section numbers remain the same. 
 
Sec. 7-8-101. - Generally. 
(a)  All hydrants shall be of a type approved by the commissioner and in accordance with the latest "Standard Construction Specifications" and "Standard Construction Details" of the department of public works. 
(b)  No person or persons other than the commissioner or those acting with the written permission, or under the direction of the commissioner, or authorized employees of the bureau of water, or authorized members of the fire department performing official duties, shall open or close, obstruct or interfere with any hydrant. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 5.01)  
Sec. 7-8-102. - Installation. 
(a)  All hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the latest "Standard Construction Specifications" and "Standard Construction Details" of the department of public works. 
(b)  The spacing and location of the hydrants shall be approved by the commissioner. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 5.02)  
Sec. 7-8-103. - Resetting or relocating fire hydrant. 
(a)  A property owner desiring to have a hydrant reset or relocated shall make the necessary request to the commissioner on the form provided and upon approval, obtain the necessary Street Opening and other required permits, and pay the charges as specified in section 7-8-121 of this Code. 
(b)  The property owner shall do all work necessary to permit the removal and relocation of the hydrant and laying of pipe, valves, including but not limited to excavating, shoring, thrust blocks, dewatering, backfilling and surface restoration. 
(c)  The work to be performed by city forces shall include removal of the existing hydrant, furnishing and installing all necessary fittings, pipe and rodding and the resetting of the hydrant. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 5.03)  
Sec. 7-8-104. - Permit for use of fire hydrant or fire service line. 
(a)  No person, persons, corporation or other entity shall be permitted to take water from a fire hydrant or fire service line for any purpose whatsoever other than fire protection without first having obtained a written permit from the commissioner, which permit shall be good only for the period of time named in said permit but not to exceed thirty (30) days, and having paid the deposit and fees; as outlined in section 7-8-121 of this Code. A permit may be renewed or extended for one or more periods of thirty (30) days or less upon payment of additional fees as specified herein, subject to the approval of the commissioner. 
(b)  The permit shall contain a hold-harmless clause whereby the applicant agrees to save the city harmless from any loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of the permit and that the applicant further agrees that failure to comply with the conditions for proper use of the hydrant or fire service line may be cause for immediate revocation of the permit and forfeiture of any deposits and that the applicant further agrees to abide by the conditions as stated below: 
(1)  The permit must be kept at site of work at all times and exhibited, whenever requested, to the commissioner or his authorized representative or to any other official or police officer of the city. 
(2)  The permit is applicable only for the hydrant at the location specified on the permit. 
(3)  Only the wrench and connection issued may be used on the hydrant. 
(4)  All hydrant connections shall be removed between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays, and on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, unless approved by the commissioner. 
(5)  When in use, the hydrant shall be fully opened and the flow controlled by a valve operated connection to be furnished by the city. 
(6)  The wrench and connection shall be returned to the issuing office on or before the expiration date of this permit, (unless additional fee is paid for approved extension), otherwise all deposits may be forfeited. 
(7)  The permittee shall be liable for all damage caused by his improper use of hydrant. 
(c)  The aforesaid fee and deposits shall be doubled for permits issued, renewed during the period from December 1 to April 1 or if any part of the effective life of such permit is or extends into said calendar period. The commissioner may at his discretion waive the deposits when the use of a hydrant is required in connection with a city contract, that is under his direct supervision and control and where a percentage of payment for the work is retained. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 5.04)  
Sec. 7-8-105. - Fire hydrants on private property. 
All fire hydrants on private property to be maintained by the city shall be installed in accordance with the requirements specified in section 7-8-56 of this Code. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, § 5.05)  
Secs. 7-8-106—7-8-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TABLES, DIAGRAMS, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. VI was renumbered Art. VII by an amendment adopted July 3, 1985. Section numbers remain the same. 
 
Sec. 7-8-121. - Appendix A, charges, fees and deposits. 
The following charges, fees and deposits shall be applicable as indicated to this article: 
(a)  Construction Meters: 
Meter Size 
(inches) 	Deposit 	Fee 
5/8 to ¾ 	$200.00 	$20.00 
1 	300.00 	30.00 
1½ 	500.00 	50.00 
2 	600.00 	60.00 
 
Size of Backflow 
Preventer 
(inches) 	Deposit 	Fee 
 ¾ 	$100.00 	$10.00 
1  	150.00 	15.00 
1½ 	450.00 	45.00 
2  	550.00 	55.00 
 
(b)  Hydrant Permits: 
1.  Deposits: 
per Hydrant ..... $250.00 
per Wrench ..... 50.00 
per Backflow Preventor (¾?) ..... 250.00 
per Backflow Preventor (1?) ..... 350.00 
per Backflow Preventor (1½?) ..... 450.00 
per Backflow Preventor (2?) ..... 550.00 
2.  Fees: (30 consecutive calendar days or less): 
per ¾? Connection ..... 100.00 
per 1? Connection ..... 200.00 
per 1½? Connection ..... 250.00 
per 2? Connection ..... 350.00 
The above fees and deposits shall be doubled for permits issued and/or renewed during the period from December 1 to April 1 or if any part of the effective life of such permit is or extends into said calendar period. 
(c)  Tap Fee and Pipe Charge: 
Tap Size 	Fee 	Pipe Charge (per lineal ft.) 
  ¾? 	$1,800.00 	included in tap fee 
 1?  	2,100.00 	included in tap fee 
 1½? 	2,850.00 	included in tap fee 
 2?  	3,500.00 	included in tap fee 
 4?  	see table below 	$20.00 
 6?  	see table below 	25.00 
 8?  	see table below 	30.00 
10?  	see table below 	35.00 
12?  	see table below 	40.00 
 
Tap Size 
Main 
Size 	4? 	6? 	8? 	10? 	12? 
4? 	$1,600.00 	—   	—   	—   	—   
6? 	1,700.00 	1,800.00 	—   	—   	—   
8? 	1,800.00 	1,900.00 	2,900.00 	—   	—   
10? 	2,300.00 	2,500.00 	2,800.00 	3,300.00 	—   
12? 	2,400.00 	2,600.00 	2,900.00 	3,400.00 	4,000.00 
14? 	2,800.00 	2,900.00 	3,100.00 	3,400.00 	4,200.00 
16? 	2,900.00 	3,000.00 	3,200.00 	3,500.00 	4,400.00 
18? 	3,400.00 	3,400.00 	3,600.00 	3,900.00 	4,800.00 
20? 	3,400.00 	3,400.00 	3,600.00 	3,900.00 	5,000.00 
24? 	4,000.00 	4,200.00 	4,400.00 	4,500.00 	5,200.00 
 
Note: Tapping of pipe which is of a material other than cast iron or ductile iron, or of a size not indicated above, shall require a special tap fee. This special fee shall be determined by the commissioner. 
(d)  Meter Test Fee (Requested by Owner): 
Size 
(inches) 	Fee 
  5/8 to 1 	$25.00 
1½ to 2 	 90.00 
 
(e)  Charges for Missing, Frozen or Damaged Meters: 
(1)  Material replacement charge: 
Item 	Size 
(inches) 	Charge 
Meter Base 	5/8 to ¾ 	$ 150.00 
Meter Base 	1 	200.00 
Meter Base 	1½ 	400.00 
Meter Base 	2 	550.00 
Generator Head 	5/8 to 2 	50.00 
Remote Register 	5/8 to 2 	20.00 
Meter Transmission Unit (MTU) 	5/8 to 2 	75.00 
 
(2)  Labor and equipment reinstallation charge: 
Item 	Size 
(inches) 	Charge 
Meter Base 	5/8 to 2 	$100.00 
Generator Head and/or Remote Register including Sealing 	5/8 to 2 	20.00 
 
(3)  Resealing Only: 
Meter and/or Remote Register ..... $ 10.00 
(f)  Water Rates: 
Consumption 
(Semi-annual) 	Basic Schedule 
(Semi-annual) 	Excess Non-Per 
Capita Users 
Schedule 
120,000cf 
and over (Quarterly as defined in this Chapter herein) 
First 2,500cf 	——- 	$5.24/100cf 
First 5,000cf 	$2.77/100cf 	—— 
Next 5,000cf 	——- 	5.87/100cf 
Next 10,000cf 	3.09/100cf 	—— 
Next 10,000cf 	—— 	6.55/100cf 
Next 20,000cf 	3.49/100cf 	—— 
Next 15,000cf 	—— 	7.83/100cf 
Next 30,000cf 	5.04/100cf 	—— 
Next 27,500cf 	—— 	10.34/100cf 
Next 55,000cf 	5.54/100cf 	—— 
Next 60,000cf 	—— 	13.23/100cf 
Next 130,000cf 	—— 	16.46/100cf 
Next 380,000cf 	7.69/100cf 	—— 
Next 250,000cf 	—— 	18.92/100cf 
Next 500,000cf 	9.79/100cf 	—— 
Over 500,000cf 	—— 	22.04/100cf 
Over 1,000,000cf 	11.44/100cf 	—— 
 
(g)  Special Meter Reading and Billing: $75.00. For those who choose not to participate in the City's Automated Meter Reading Program (AMR), a fee of $75 will be assessed for every meter reading required for normal billing purposes. 
(h)  Water Availability/Demand Charge : These charges are applicable to the domestic service from the date the tap or connection made to the city's water supply system is placed in service until such time as the same tap or connection is permanently discontinued in accordance with section 7-8-30(c) of this Code: 
WITHIN CITY LIMITS: 
Basic Schedule 	Excess Non Per Capita 
Schedule 
Size of 
Connection 	Charge 
(semi- 
annual) 	Size of 
Connection 	Charge 
(quarterly) 
1" & less 	$38.85 	1" & less 	$19.44 
1 ½" 	89.31 	1 ½" 	44.71 
2" 	155.40 	2" 	77.72 
3" 	349.67 	3" 	174.84 
4" 	633.44 	4" 	316.71 
6" 	1,484.63 	6" 	742.31 
8" & over 	2,553.53 	8" & over 	1,276.81 
 
OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS: Double the "within city limits" charge. 
(i)  Fire Service Line Stand-By Charge: 
These charges are applicable to the fire service line from the date the tap or connection made to the city's water supply system or fire main is placed in service until such time as the same tap or connection is permanently discontinued in accordance with section 7-8-30(c) of this Code. 
Pipe Size 
(inches) 	Charge 
(semi-annual) 
Up to 6 	$100.00 
8 and up 	 500.00 
 
(j)  Private Hydrant Stand-By Charge (Semi-Annual): These charges, for unmetered hydrants on private property, are applicable from the date the tap or connection made to the city's water supply system or fire main is placed in service until such time as same tap or connection is permanently discontinued in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
Hydrant $150.00 each (semi-annual). 
(k)  Special Valve Installations: The charge shall be based upon the actual cost of labor, equipment and materials necessary to complete the work as determined by the commissioner. 
(l)  Resetting and/or Relocating Hydrants: 
(1)  Hydrant (removed and reset), $1,500.00 each; 
(2)  Pipe (including fittings), $25.00 per L.F. installed. 
(m)  New Hydrant Installed (excluding tap): 
(1)  Hydrant furnished and installed, $2,000.00 each; 
(2)  Pipe (including fittings), $25.00 per L.F. installed. 
(n)  Billing Schedule: Water bills are to be rendered quarterly for applicable excess non-per capita users and semi-annually for basic schedule users as to individual accounts and are due and payable at the office of the commissioner of finance within thirty (30) days after being rendered. The city may be divided into control areas by the commissioner of public works to provide prompt reading and billing with different due dates for control areas. Arrears are subject to penalties as stated in section 200 of the Charter of the city. 
(o)  Miscellaneous Charges: The charges for any work requested which is approved by the commissioner and performed by the bureau of water, not specified herein above, shall be based upon the cost of labor, equipment and materials necessary to complete the work as determined by the commissioner. 
(p)  Water Fill Station (Orchard Street Pump Station): $50.00 per fill-up to a maximum of 2,500 gallons. 
(q)  Chlorination Assistance Charge: These charges are payable in advance and cover the operation of valves, sampling and flushing the service line four (4) inches or greater in size. Weekdays 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., holidays excluded. 
$250.00 each line 
(r)  Backflow Preventor Charge: These charges are payable in advance and cover the cost of labor and equipment for observing the test of the approved backflow prevention device. Weekdays 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., holidays excluded. 
$25.00 each device up to and including two (2) inches in size. 
$50.00 each device above two (2) inches in size. 
Application fee: This charge is payable in advance and covers the cost of administrative functions to review and inspect all new backflow device applications and installations, $200 each application. 
(s)  Observation of Meter Tests: $25.00 each test. 
(t)  Municipal main connections done by an applicant's outside contractor charge. When directed by the commissioner, municipal water main connections done by an applicant's outside contractor under the direct observation of the commissioner or a designated representative will result in a charge to the applicant in the amount of 40% of the applicable tap fee and pipe charge, as set forth in section 7-8-121(c) herein. 
(Regs. of 3-5-79, App. A; Regs. of 5-7-79; Regs. of 4-27-81; Regs. of 4-19-82; Regs. of 7-3-85; Ord. of 11-3-86, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-3-93; Ord. of 5-25-95; Ord. of 5-20-99, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 4-7-04, §§ 2—5; Ord. of 5-25-05, §§ 2—4; Ord. of 5-25-06, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-24-07, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-22-08, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-28-09, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-6-10, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 12-5-11, § 2; Ord. of 12-3-12, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 12-2-13, §§ 2—5; Ord. of 10-28-14, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-2-15, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 11-7-16 , §§ 2—7; Ord. of 12-4-17, §§ 1, 2 ; Ord. of 12-3-18, §§ 1—3 ; Ord. of 11-4-19, § 2 ) 
Charter reference— Water rates and charges, §§ 197—200.  
Sec. 7-8-122. - Appendix B, detail of meter and backflow prevention device installation. 
 
(Ord. of 12-2-13, § 6(Att. 1))  
Sec. 7-8-123. - Appendix C, detail of water meter vault. 
 
(Ord. of 12-2-13, § 7(Att. 2))  
Sec. 7-8-124. - Appendix D, typical trench details for tapping mains. 
 
 
 
(Ord. of 12-2-13, § 8(Att. 3))  
Sec. 7-8-125. - Appendix E, meter testing requirements. 
Tests for Cold Water Meters 
Maximum Rate 	Intermediate Rate 	Minimum Rate 
	Rate 				Rate 				Rate 			Accuracy Limits 
	of 			Accuracy 	of 			Accuracy 	of 			per cent 
Size 	Flow 	Test Quantity 	Limits* 	Flow 	Test Quantity 	Limits* 	Flow 	Test Quantity 	New 	Repaired 
in. 	gpm 	gal. 	cu. ft. 	per cent 	gpm 	gal. 	cu. ft. 	per cent 	gpm 	gal. 	cu. ft. 	Meters 	Meters† 
Positive Displacement Meters 
   5/8 	   15 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	  2 	    10 	    1 	98.5—101.5 	   ¼ 	   10 	  1 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
  ¾ 	   25 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	  3 	    10 	    1 	98.5—101.5 	   ½ 	   10 	  1 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
 1 	   40 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	  4 	    10 	    1 	98.5—101.5 	   ¾ 	   10 	  1 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
 1½ 	   80 	 1,000 	  100 	98.5—101.5 	  8 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	  1½ 	  100 	 10 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
 2 	  120 	 1,000 	  100 	98.5—101.5 	 15 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	  2  	  100 	 10 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
 3 	  250 	 1,000 	  100 	98.5—101.5 	 20 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	  4  	  100 	 10 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
 4 	  350 	1,000 	  100 	98.5—101.5 	 40 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	  7  	  100 	 10 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
 6 	  700 	1,000 	  100 	98.5—101.5 	 60 	   100 	   10 	98.5—101.5 	 12  	  100 	 10 	95—101.5 	90—101.5 
Current Meters 
 1½ 	   80 	 1,000 	  10 	  97—103  	 15 	   100 	   10 	  97—103  	  7  	  100 	 10 	95—103  	90—103  
 2 	  120 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	 20 	   100 	   10 	  97—103  	 10  	  100 	 10 	95—103  	90—103  
 3 	  250 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	 30 	   100 	   10 	  97—103  	 15  	  100 	 10 	95—103  	90—103  
 4 	  400 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	 50 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	 20  	1,000 	100 	95—103  	90—103  
 6 	1,000 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	100 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	 30  	1,000 	100 	95—103  	90—103  
 8 	1,600 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	200 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	 50  	1,000 	100 	95—103  	90—103  
10 	2,500 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	300 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	 75  	1,000 	100 	95—103  	90—103  
12 	4,000 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	400 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	100  	1,000 	100 	95—103  	90—103  
16 	7,000 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	600 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	150  	1,000 	100 	95—103  	90—103  
Compound Meters‡ 
 1½ 	   80 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	 15 	   100 	   10 	  97—103  	   ¼ 	   10 	  1 	95—103  	90—103  
 2 	  120 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	 20 	   100 	   10 	  97—103  	   ¼ 	   10 	  1 	95—103  	90—103  
 3 	  250 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	 30 	   100 	   10 	  97—103  	   ½ 	   10 	  1 	95—103  	90—103  
 4 	  350 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	 50 	 1,000 	  100 	  97—103  	   ¾ 	   10 	  1 	95—103  	90—103  
 6 	  700 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	100 	 1,000 	 100 	  97—103  	  1½ 	  100 	 10 	95—103  	>90—103  
 8 	1,200 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	200 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	  2  	  100 	 10 	95—103  	90—103  
10 	1,600 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	300 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	  4  	  100 	 10 	95—103  	90—103  
12 	2,400 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	400 	10,000 	1,000 	  97—103  	  7  	  100 	 10 	95—103  	90—103  
 
_______ 
*Accuracy limits recommended for repaired, as well as new, meters. 
†Tabulated minimum-rate accuracy limits for repaired meters are those which can be achieved with most meters and good meter repair procedures. Any meter, regardless of age, which cannot be repaired to test 80 per cent or better on the minimum flow test should not be placed in service. 
‡If larger than 2 in., these meters should preferably be tested in the field by comparison with a test meter. Compound meters should also be tested at a rate within the "changeover" range of flows. As this range is variable, depending on make of meter and sizes of bypass (or small) meter unit, no one set of definitive rates can be established. Minimum required accuracy at any rate within such "changeover" range of flows is 85 per cent. The bypass (or small) meter unit of compound meters should also be tested at a rate as near as possible to the maximum test rate listed for disc meters of the same size (without causing the compounding valve to open). Accuracy limits on this test are 98.5—101.5 per cent. Specific rates cannot be readily tabulated for this test, as various makes of compound meters have different sizes of small meter units and are designed so that different rates of flow open the compounding valve.  
Sec. 7-8-126. - Appendix F, backflow prevention control requirements. 
Decree of 
Hazard 	Type of Facility 	Type of Protection 
(Minimum Requirement) 
Hazardous 	Industrial plants, metal plating industries, hospitals, nursing homes, medical buildings, sanitariums, laboratories, veterinary facilities, irrigation or lawn sprinkler systems using chemicals, morgues, mortuaries, funeral homes, chemical plants, film processing facilities, food processing plants, meat processing plants, ice manufacturing facilities, exterminators, commercial car washers, commercial greenhouses, clinics, printing plant, dry cleaning establishments, laundries, schools/colleges/universities with laboratories, fire lines with chemical additives, recreational swimming pools, chemically protected heating and cooling systems, water lines needing maximum protection. 	Acceptable air gap 
  
or 
  
Reduced pressure zone device (RPZ) 
Aesthetically 
Objectionable 	Fire lines without chemical additives, construction sites, barber/beauty salons, supermarkets, apartment buildings 	Double check valve assembly (DCV) 
Nonhazardous 	Residential domestic water service 	Dual check backflow preventer 
 
(Regs. of 7-3-85)  
Sec. 7-8-127. - Appendix G, water billing cycle schedule. 
(a)  Basic schedule (semi-annual billing): 
Control Area* 	Jan. 	Feb. 	March 	April 	May 	June 	July 	Aug. 	Sept. 	Oct. 	Nov. 	Dec. 
01 	Bill 						Bill 					
02 	Bill 						Bill 					
03 	Bill 						Bill 					
04 		Bill 						Bill 				
05 		Bill 						Bill 				
06 		Bill 						Bill 				
07 			Bill 						Bill 			
08 			Bill 						Bill 			
09 			Bill 						Bill 			
10 				Bill 						Bill 		
11 				Bill 						Bill 		
12 				Bill 						Bill 		
13 					Bill 						Bill 	
14 					Bill 						Bill 	
15 					Bill 						Bill 	
16 						Bill 						Bill 
 
*First two digits of water account number 
(b)  Excess non-per capita schedule (quarterly): 
Billing Month 	Consumption Period 
October 	July to September 
January 	October to December 
April 	January to March 
July 	April to June 
 
(Regs. Of 7-3-85; Ord. of 4-7-04, § 6)  
Chapter 7-9 - SIDEWALK CAFES 
 
Sec. 7-9-1. - Purposes. 
The sidewalk cafe regulations as established in this chapter are designed to allow sidewalk cafes on public property in locations where they are determined to be appropriate by the commissioner of public works and to promote and protect the public health, safety, general welfare and amenity. These general goals include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide adequate space for pedestrians on the sidewalk adjacent to sidewalk cafes, and to insure access to adjacent commercial and retail uses. 
(2)  To promote sidewalk cafes as useful and properly planned visual amenities which better relate to the streetscape. 
(3)  To promote the most desirable use of land and buildings and thereby protect the city's tax revenues. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 1)  
Sec. 7-9-2. - Definition. 
A "sidewalk cafe" is an outdoor dining area, located on a public street, which is public through dedication or easement, or public right-of-way that provides waiter or waitress service and contains readily removable tables, chairs, railings and may contain planters. It is otherwise unenclosed by fixed walls and open to the air, except that it may have a retractable awning or umbrellas, or other nonpermanent covers. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 2)  
Sec. 7-9-3. - License, site plan, etc. 
(a)  The commission of public works is authorized to issue a seasonal license to operate a sidewalk cafe on public property provided that the standards set forth in section 7-9-4 have been complied with by the applicant. 
(b)  The seasonal license shall permit the operation of a sidewalk cafe from April 15 up to and including November 1 of any calendar year. This license may be renewed annually. 
(c)  An eight dollar ($8.00) per square foot license and administrative fee is required upon the issuance or renewal of the license. The fee shall be based on the area of the public street actually used for sidewalk café purposes. The square footage shall be based on the site development plan required by this chapter. If within the designated sidewalk café area, there exists any bench affixed to the sidewalk and owned by the city so situated that, in setting the perimeters of the sidewalk café in accord with section 7-9-4 of this Code, the general public would be precluded from the use of the bench, then an additional license fee of two hundred and twenty-five dollars ($225.00) per bench per annum shall be charged to the applicant. 
(d)  In addition, a refundable deposit of eight dollars per square foot, or two thousand two-hundred and fifty dollars ($2,250.00), whichever amount is greater, shall be required prior to the issuance of the license. The deposit shall be retained by the city until expiration of the license, as security for the faithful performance by the applicant of all the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the license on the applicant's part to be done or performed. Upon the failure or default by the licensee of any of the terms, agreements, covenants and conditions of the license on its part to be done and performed, said deposit may be used by the city for any expense incurred by the city by reason of such failure or default on the part of the licensee, and without prior notice thereof to the licensee and the said licensee shall have no claim against the city for loss of anticipated profits or for any losses by reason thereof. Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as determined and certified by the commissioner, which has been paid and deducted from the amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the licensee. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall file with the commissioner of public works, on a form to be provided by the commissioner of public works, an agreement to indemnity and save harmless the city, its officers and employees against any loss or liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily injury, and for property damage, sustained by any person as a result of the applicant's operation of a sidewalk cafe on public property. 
(f)  Prior to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall also file with the commissioner of public works a certificate of insurance demonstrating that the applicant has a satisfactory amount of public liability and property damage insurance and naming the city and the commissioner of public works as co-insured for such insurance covering the operation of a sidewalk cafe. 
(g)  No outdoor dining in the form of a sidewalk cafe shall be established on public property, except in conformance with a site development plan approved by the commissioner of public works. 
A letter of application for site development plan approval shall be submitted along with ten copies of the site development plan to the commissioner of public works. The letter of application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the property owner if other than the applicant, and of the planner, engineer, architect, surveyor and/or other professionals engaged to work on the project. Written authorization from the owner of the property to submit the application shall be required when the applicant is not the owner of the affected property. 
The site development plan shall be prepared by a state licensed architect, landscape architect or professional engineer, and this plan or the letter of application shall show the following: 
(1)  The applicant's entire property and adjacent properties on a location map with streets for a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet, at a scale of one inch equals ten (10) feet. 
(2)  A detail plan at a scale of one-half inch equals one foot showing the design and location of all temporary structures such as retractable awnings, planters, landscaping, tables, chairs and other equipment, as well as lighting and electrical outlet locations. This plan shall include side and front elevation drawings of the proposed sidewalk cafe and of the restaurant's facade as well as at least ten (10) feet of the first story facade of the adjoining properties. 
(3)  Capacity of existing restaurant; capacity of proposed outdoor dining; a statement of the months, days and hours of intended operation. 
(4)  All exterior lighting shall be shown on the site development plan and shall be of such type and location and shall have such shading as will prevent the source of the light from being seen from any adjacent residential property, nor shall it cause illumination beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located in excess of 0.5 footcandle, nor shall it have an adverse impact on the flow of traffic nor shall its design and color be such as may easily be confused with a traffic signal. Hours of lighting may be limited by the commissioner of public works in acting on any site development plan. 
(5)  If the use of a musical instrument is planned, the letter of application shall state the number and types of instrument for each sidewalk cafe. In acting on any site development plan, the commissioner of public works shall prohibit or limit the hours of the use of such musical instrument, as necessary. In any event, the use of a musical instrument shall be governed by Chapter 3-4 of this Code, and in no event may a sidewalk cafe permit music that is of a source such as a radio or any other type of recorded music. 
The commissioner of public works shall distribute copies of the site development plan to the commissioners of public safety, traffic, building and planning for review and comments in relation to compliance with this chapter. If a retractable awning is proposed, then the commissioner of building shall have jurisdiction over this part of the plan and shall require the applicant to comply with the provisions of the ordinance relating to the erection and maintenance of outdoor signs and awnings. 
Based upon the review comments as listed above, the commissioner may issue the license approving the site development plan as submitted or with modifications or any conditions he deems necessary to implement the intent of the ordinance. In the case where a retractable awning has been proposed, the applicant must obtain a permit under Chapter 9-10 of this Code from the commissioner of building before the awning may become part of the sidewalk cafe. 
If the commissioner of public works disapproves the site development plan or determines not to issue the license, he shall state his reason for his determination in a letter to the applicant. The applicant may then petition the common council to be heard. 
(h)  Any license granted under the provisions of this section may be suspended or revoked by the commissioner of public works, for cause, upon the recommendation of any of the city departments that participated in the license review process on his own initiative. The licensee may request a hearing before the commissioner of public works within five (5) days of receipt of notice of suspension or revocation. Any such hearing shall be held after reasonable written notice by the commissioner of public works to the licensee of the violations, and the licensee shall have the right to be represented by counsel, present evidence in his behalf and confront the evidence against him. Cause for the revocation or suspension of a license shall be any violation that may endanger the health and safety of the public or any series of violations that may have been prosecuted separately, pursuant to section 7-9-6, or any violation that may not have been timely resolved, or any series of violations. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, §§ 3, 6; Ord. of 6-20-83, § 1; Ord. of 4-2-84, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 3-2-87, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 4-6-09, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 8; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 8; Ord. of 5-21-12, § 3; Ord. of 5-19-14(1), § 1; Ord. of > 5-17-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 7-9-4. - Standards. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes shall close operations by 12:30 a.m. on Monday through Thursday mornings and by 2:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday and Sunday mornings. Notwithstanding the above, hours of operation of a sidewalk cafe permit may be restricted as necessary by the commissioner of public works in accordance with the standards set forth in section 7-9-4. 
(b)  There shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet of clear distance, exclusive of the area occupied by the sidewalk cafe, free of all obstructions (such as trees, parking meters, utility poles, etc.) in order to allow adequate pedestrian movement. Cafes within less than twenty (20) feet of the extended building line at corner locations shall only be permitted when it is determined that the use will not create a hazard, a sight distance obstruction for motor vehicle operators nor unduly impede pedestrian traffic. 
(c)  Sidewalk cafes may only be located directly in front of the restaurant with which they are associated. These requirements may however be waived by appropriate written permission from the owner and the tenant of the affected adjacent building and store. In the event that a sidewalk cafe is extended to an area in front of an adjacent store, an extra fee of three dollars ($3.00) per square foot for said area shall be charged by the commissioner of public works. Sidewalk cafes shall be placed at the building line, except that they may be placed at the curb line where a fixed traffic barrier, such as a permanent planting area exists at the curb line and where pavement which is of such width and design that in the judgment of the commissioner of public works such location is feasible. 
(d)  The perimeter of the cafe area shall be highlighted with an erasable or removable marking. Such marking upon approval of the commissioner of public works shall be applied by the licensee at his sole cost. The licensee shall be fully responsible for the proper application and removal of any such marking and shall be liable for any subsequent damage or permanent indication of such marking on the public sidewalk. 
(e)  In addition to the above perimeter marking, the applicant shall also be responsible for delineating the cafe area by setting up a barrier such as planters or a railing to physically separate patrons from pedestrian traffic. 
(f)  Furnishing of a sidewalk cafe shall consist solely of readily removable awnings, covers, railings, tables, chairs, planters containing live plants and accessories. Furnishings may not be attached, even in a temporary manner, to the sidewalk or other public property, except that covers and railings may be secured by means of flush mounted anchors in a manner to be approved by the commissioner of public works. No objects which are part of a sidewalk cafe, except lighting fixtures, railings, awnings or other non-permanent covers, may be attached, even in a temporary manner, to any building or structure on which the sidewalk cafe abuts. When the associated restaurant is not open and/or the sidewalk cafe is not in daily use, all furnishings shall be removed from public property or stored in an approved manner, which shall not cause a public hazard. The commissioner of public works shall determine when a hazardous condition exists in the public right-of-way. 
(g)  No structure or enclosure to accommodate the storage of accumulated garbage may be erected or placed adjacent to or separate from the sidewalk cafe on public property. 
(h)  A sidewalk cafe shall not interfere with any public service facility, such as a telephone, mailbox or bench, located on a sidewalk. 
(i)  Operation of a sidewalk cafe shall not adversely impact on adjacent or nearby residential, religious, educational or commercial properties, and shall be in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations. 
(j)  To assure accessibility to commercial, retail and residential premises, sidewalk cafes located on the same side of the street shall be separated by two (2) store fronts or uses, or forty (40) feet along the frontage, whichever is the lesser, unless the operator of the sidewalk cafe obtains the written consent of the owners and tenants of the premises which are located between the restaurants proposing sidewalk cafes. Where the aforementioned situation is created, the applicant who must obtain this permission shall be the applicant who last filed his application or the applicant seeking to locate near an existing sidewalk cafe. Restaurants located next to each other, without intervening uses or entranceways to buildings however, may have sidewalk cafes that abut each other. 
(k)  All electrical wiring and fixtures associated with or part of the sidewalk cafe shall be installed by a licensed electrician and shall be in conformance with the appropriate city ordinances. 
(l)  Where the use of umbrellas is planned, advertising on the umbrellas shall be limited to the name of the restaurant. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 4; Ord. of 5-6-96, § 1; Ord. of 8-5-96, § 1; Ord. of 9-5-00, § 1; Ord. of 6-2-03, § 1; Ord. of 4-6-09, § 3; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 9; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 9; Ord. of 5-21-12, § 4)  
Sec. 7-9-5. - Operating restrictions. 
(a)  Sidewalk cafes may be located on public property in nonresidential and business/residential zoning districts in which restaurants are permitted principal uses upon issuance of a license by the commissioner of public works pursuant to chapter 7-9 of this Code, or in conjunction with a restaurant where a special permit for a restaurant has been approved by the planning board and upon issuance of a license by the commissioner of public works pursuant to chapter 7-9 of this Code in zoning districts where restaurants are special permit uses. 
(b)  All alcoholic beverages to be served at sidewalk cafes shall be prepared within the existing restaurant, and alcoholic drinks shall only be served to patrons seated at tables. The drinking of alcoholic beverages by a member of the public while a patron at a sidewalk cafe, within the confines of the sidewalk cafe area, shall not be construed as a violation of any ordinance controlling open containers in a public area. The operator of the sidewalk cafe shall take whatever steps are necessary to procure the appropriate license from the state liquor authority if he intends to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk cafe area and shall comply with all other laws and regulations concerning the serving of alcoholic beverages in this state. 
(c)  The letter from the commissioner of public works licensing the sidewalk cafe in accord with this chapter shall be prominently displayed next to the liquor license for the restaurant. 
(d)  The restaurant shall not serve food or beverage to a patron at a sidewalk cafe area unless that patron is seated at a table. 
(e)  Sidewalk cafes and the public property on which they are located shall be kept neat and clean at all times and free from any substance that may damage the sidewalk or cause pedestrian injury. 
(Ord. of 7-6-81, § 5; Ord. of 9-9-96, § 1)  
Sec. 7-9-6. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to prosecution in the city court and/or any court of competent jurisdiction and shall upon conviction thereof, be liable for a fine of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Each and everyday such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. of 4-6-09, § 4; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 10; Ord. of 5-26-11, § 10) 
Charter reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, § 37.  
Chapter 7-10 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE 7-10.1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION AND PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 7-10-1.1. - Findings. 
The Common Council of the City of White Plains finds that the potential and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the residents of the City of White Plains and that such damages may include: destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities, both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes and objectives hereinafter set forth, this local law is adopted. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-1.2. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this local law to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damages; 
(5)  Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands, and; 
(6)  Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-1.3. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this local law are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and, 
(8)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
ARTICLE 7-10-2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 7-10-2. - Title. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this local law shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this local law its most reasonable application. 
(1)  Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this local law or a request for a variance. 
(2)  Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
(3)  Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base floodplain or 100-year floodplain. For purposes of this local law, the term "special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special flood hazard." 
(4)  Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(5)  Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
(6)  Building see "Structure". 
(7)  Cellar has the same meaning as "Basement". 
(8)  Crawl space means an enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, eighteen (18) inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of flooding. 
(9)  Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
(10)  Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal standards. 
(11)  Federal Emergency Management Agency means the Federal agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(12)  Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1) above. 
(13)  Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as part of a riverine community's flood insurance study. The FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along water courses studied in detail in the flood insurance study. 
(14)  Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards. 
(15)  Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A but no flood elevations are provided. 
(16)  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
(17)  Flood insurance study see "flood elevation study". 
(18)  Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
(19)  Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
(20)  Floodway - has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway". 
(21)  Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or service facilities. 
(22)  Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(23)  Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
(24)  Local administrator is the person appointed by the community to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is often the building inspector, code enforcement officer, or employee of an engineering department. For the purposes of this local law, the local administrator is the commissioner of public works. 
(25)  Lowest floor means lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this local law. 
(26)  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
(27)  Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
(28)  Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
(29)  Mobile home has the same meaning as "manufactured home". 
(30)  New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
(31)  One hundred-year flood or 100-year flood has the same meaning as "base flood". 
(32)  Principally above ground means that at least fifty-one (51) percent of the actual cash value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground. 
(33)  Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(34)  Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a flood insurance study or by other agencies as provided in section 7-10.4.4-2 of this law. 
(35)  Start of construction means the date of permit issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. 
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(36)  Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
(37)  Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(38)  Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. The term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions: or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
(39)  Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this local law which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this local law. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
ARTICLE 7-10-3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 7-10-3.1. - Lands to which this local law applies. 
This local law shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of White Plains, Westchester County. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-3.2. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard for the City of White Plains, Community Number 360935, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency: 
(1)  Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 
36119C0259F, 36119C0266F, 36119C0267F, 36119C0268F, 
36119C0269F, 36119C0286F, 36119C0288F, 36119C0332F, 
36119C0351F, whose effective date is September 28, 2007, and any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas under our community's jurisdiction. 
(2)  A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study, Westchester County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated September 28, 2007. 
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this local law. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at: the Office of the City Clerk, the Office of the Commissioner of Public Works, and the Library of the City of White Plains. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-3.3. - Interpretation and conflict with other laws. 
This local law includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance Program through March 20, 1997, and shall supersede all previous laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this local law shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of this local law are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or local laws, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-3.4. - Severability. 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this local law shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-3.5. - Penalties for non-compliance. 
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this local law and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of this local law by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this local law or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned for not more than fifteen (15) days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of White Plains from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the requirements of this local law for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for and received an approved variance under section 7-10-6.0 will be declared non-compliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-3.6. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this local law is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This local law does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This local law shall not create liability on the part of the City of White Plains, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this local law or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
ARTICLE 7-10-4. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 7-10-4.1. - Designation of the local administrator. 
The commissioner of public works is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and implement this local law by granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
DIVISION 7-10-4.2. - THE FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 
 
Sec. 7-10-4.2-1. - Purpose. 
A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the flood insurance rate map enumerated in section 7-10-3.2, without a valid floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing.  
Sec. 7-10-4.2-2. - Fees. 
All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by an application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). In addition, the applicant shall be responsible for reimbursing the City of White Plains for any additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than five hundred follars ($500.00) to cover these additional costs.  
Sec. 7-10-4.3. - Application for a permit. 
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate. Additional information may be required on the permit application form. 
(1)  The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved structure to be located in zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved non-residential structure will be floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor. 
(3)  A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in section 7-10-5.2-3, utilities. 
(4)  A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any non-residential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 7-10-5.4, non-residential structures. 
(5)  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the documents enumerated in section 7-10-3.2, when notified by the local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be maintained. 
(6)  A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property. 
(7)  In zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4. - Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. 
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-1. - Permit application review. 
The local administrator shall conduct the following permit application review before issuing a floodplain development permit: 
(1)  Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the requirements of subsection 7-10-4.3, application for a permit, and for compliance with the provisions and standards of this law. 
(2)  Review subdivision and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the applicable standards of section 7-10-5.0, construction standards and, in particular, sub-section 10-7.5.1-1, subdivision proposals. 
(3)  Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property (e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local administrator may require the applicant to submit additional technical analyses and data necessary to complete the determination. 
If the proposed development may result in physical damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of section 7-10-5.0, construction standards, no permit shall be issued. The applicant may revise the application to include measures that mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and re-submit the application. 
(4)  Determine that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by state or federal law. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-2. - Use of other flood data. 
(1)  When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated areas of special flood hazard on the community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data (these areas are designated zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed pursuant to subsection 7-10-4.3(7), as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed development meet the requirements of this law. 
(2)  When base flood elevation data are not available, the local administrator may use flood information from any other authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes of this law. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-3. - Alteration of watercourses. 
(1)  Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence of such notification to the Regional Director, Region II, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-4. - Construction stage. 
(1)  In zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the as-built elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it remains on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer (unless it is fully licensed and ready for highway use). 
(2)  Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project unless immediately corrected. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-5. - Inspections. 
The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested, that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-6. - Stop work orders. 
(1)  The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop work order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a development permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 7-10-3.5 of this local law. 
(2)  The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stop work order for any floodplain development found non-compliant with the provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the development permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 7-10-3.5 of this local law. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-7. - Certificate of compliance. 
(1)  In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents enumerated in section 7-10-3.2, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this local law. 
(2)  A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in areas of special flood hazard. 
(3)  Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections conducted as prescribed in section 7-10-4.4-5, inspections, and/or any certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been required as a condition of the approved permit. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-4.4-8. - Information to be retained. 
The local administrator shall retain and make available for inspection, copies of the following: 
(1)  Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance; 
(2)  Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures, required pursuant to subsections 7-10-4.4-4(1) and 7-10-4.4-4(2), and whether or not the structures contain a basement; 
(3)  Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to subsection 7-10-4.4-4(1), and whether or not the structures contain a basement; 
(4)  Variances issued pursuant to section 7-10-6.0, variance procedures; and, 
(5)  Notices required under subsection 7-10-4.4-3, alteration of watercourses. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
ARTICLE 7-10-5. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 7-10-5.1. - General standards. 
The following standards apply to new development, including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard shown on the flood insurance rate map designated in section 7-10-3.2. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-5.1-1. - Subdivision proposals. 
The following standards apply to all new subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions): 
(1)  Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize flood damage; and, 
(3)  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-5.1-2. - Encroachments. 
(1)  Within zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted unless: 
(i)  The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any location, or, 
(ii)  The City of White Plains agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the City of White Plains for all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the City of White Plains for all costs related to the final map revision. 
(2)  On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map or the flood insurance rate map adopted in section 7-10-3.2, no new construction, substantial improvements or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be permitted unless: 
(i)  A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood, or, 
(ii)  The City of White Plains agrees to apply to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the City of White Plains for all fees and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the City of White Plains for all costs related to the final map revisions. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
DIVISION 7-10-5.2. - STANDARDS FOR ALL STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 7-10-5.2-1. - Anchoring. 
New structures and substantial improvement to structures in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-5.2-2. - Construction materials and methods. 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(3)  For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and 
(ii)  The bottom of all such openings no higher than one (1) foot above the lowest adjacent finished grade. 
Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all sides are considered basements and are not permitted. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-5.2-3. - Utilities. 
(1)  New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service equipment shall be located at or above the base flood elevation. Electrical wiring and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such items in wet locations; 
(2)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(3)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters. Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and, 
(4)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
DIVISION 7-10-5.3. - RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 7-10-5.3-1. - Elevation. 
The following standards, in addition to the standards in subsections 7-10-5.1-1, subdivision proposals, and 7-10-5.1-2, encroachments, and 7-10-5.2, standards for all structures, apply to structures located in areas of special flood hazard as indicated. 
(1)  Within zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above two (2) feet above the base flood level. 
(2)  Within zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(3)  Within zone AO, new and substantially improved structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as two (2) feet above the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map enumerated in section 7-10-3.2 (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(4)  Within zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures on slopes. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-5.4. - Non-residential structures. 
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved commercial, industrial and other non-residential structures, in addition to the requirements in subsections 7-10-5.1-1, subdivision proposals, and section 7-10-5.1-2, encroachments, and section 7-10-5.2, standards for all structures. 
(1)  Within zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also zone A if base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvements of any non-residential structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall either: 
(i)  Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)  Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two (2) feet above the base flood level with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. All structural components located below the base flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Within zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
(i)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as two (2) feet above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified), or 
(ii)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in subsection 7-10-5.4(1)(ii). 
(3)  If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of section 7-10-5.4(1)(ii), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed. 
(4)  Within zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures on slopes. 
(5)  Within zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-5.5. - Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
The following standards in addition to the standards in section 7-10-5.1, general standards, and section 7-10-5.2, standards for all structures apply, as indicated, in areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard. 
(1)  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall either: 
(i)  Be on site fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or 
(iii)  Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in subsections 7-10-5.5(2), (3) and (4). 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(2)  A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in zones A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(3)  Within zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
(4)  Within zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map enumerated in section 7-10-3.2 (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
ARTICLE 7-10-6.0. - VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 7-10-6.1. - Appeals board. 
(1)  The appeals board (zoning board of appeals) as established by the Common Council of the City of White Plains shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this local law. 
(2)  The board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this local law. 
(3)  Those aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. 
(4)  In passing upon such applications, the board of appeals, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this local law and: 
(i)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(ii)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(iii)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(iv)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(v)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(vi)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(vii)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(viii)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area; 
(ix)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(x)  The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with conducting search and rescue operations during periods of flooding; 
(xi)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(xii)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including search and rescue operations, maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(5)  Upon consideration of the factors of section 7-10-6.1(4) and the purposes of this local law, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this local law. 
(6)  The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions including technical information and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 7-10-6.2. - Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (i—xii) in section 7-10-6.1(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon determination that: 
(i)  The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
(ii)  The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(3)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(i)  The criteria of subparagraphs (1), (4), (5), and (6) of this section are met: 
(ii)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to public safety. 
(4)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(5)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(6)  Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of: 
(i)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(7)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(i)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and 
(ii)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. 
Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance actions as required in section 7-10-4.4-8 of this local law. 
(L.L. No. 3-2007, § 2)  
TITLE VIII. - TRAFFIC AND STREET REGULATION[1] 
CHAPTER 
 8-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 8-2  TRAFFIC ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS 
 8-3  BICYCLES 
 8-4  PARADES 
 8-5  VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS 
 8-6  WRECKERS AND TOWING OF VEHICLES 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ambulances, Ch. 4-2; residential zone commercial vehicle parking restrictions, Ch. 4-12; licensing and regulation of taxicabs, Ch. 4-15; fowl running at large, § 5-2-1; livestock running at large, § 5-2-2; driving vehicles on closed streets, § 7-2-2; skateboards or playing ball on streets, § 7-2-3. 
 
Chapter 8-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 8-1-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 3, 1995, § 1, repealed § 8-1-1, highway safety committee, derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 5, 1968, §§ 1—3.  
Sec. 8-1-2. - Traffic violations bureau. 
(a)  The city court of the City of White Plains is hereby authorized to establish a traffic violations bureau to assist the court in the disposition of offenses in relation to traffic violations. 
(b)  The bureau is hereby authorized to dispose of violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations when such offenses shall not constitute the traffic infraction known as speeding or a misdemeanor or felony, by permitting a person charged with an offense within the limitations stated in section 371 of the General Municipal Law to answer within ten (10) days at the traffic violations bureau either in person or by written power of attorney in substantially the form prescribed in this section by paying a prescribed fine and in writing waiving a hearing in court, pleading guilty to the charge and authorizing the person in charge of the bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine in court. 
(c)  Such power of attorney shall be in substantially the following form: 
"I, the undersigned, hereby waive a hearing in the city court of The City of White Plains, New York and plead guilty to the charge specified in the annexed summons. I authorize the person in charge of the traffic violations bureau of said court to make such a plea and pay the prescribed fine in court. 
Dated the _____ day of ________, 19___. 
_______" 
(Ord. of 9-4-52, §§ 1—3) 
State Law reference— Power of council to authorize traffic violations bureau, General Municipal Law, § 370.  
Chapter 8-2 - TRAFFIC ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— With the permission of the city, the editor has used the compiled traffic ordinance (Ord. of 9-3-46, as amended) prepared by the city as the basis for this chapter. 
Cross reference— Residential zone commercial vehicle parking restrictions, Ch. 4-12. 
State Law reference— Regulation of traffic by cities and villages, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-2-1. - Saved from repeal. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the validity of the Traffic Ordinance of the City of White Plains, being an ordinance adopted on September 3, 1946, as amended, and such ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect as if set out at length in this Code.  
Chapter 8-3 - BICYCLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bicycles in parks, § 6-2-7; bicycles, Ch. 8-3. 
State Law reference— State regulation of bicycles, Vehicle and Traffic Law, §§ 1230—1236; local regulation of bicycles, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1641. 
 
Sec. 8-3-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(1)  Bicycle: Every two (2) or three (3) wheeled device upon which a person or persons may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, a chain or gears, with such wheels in a tandem or tricycle, except that it shall not include such a device having solid tires and intended for use only on a sidewalk by preteenage children. 
(2)  Commissioner: The commissioner of public safety. 
(3)  Person: Persons residing in or having a place of business in, the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 102.  
Sec. 8-3-2. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey all official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(a))  
Sec. 8-3-3. - Application of rules of the road. 
Every person riding a bicycle upon a public highway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties, applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles, or by chapter 8-2 of this Code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(b)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1231.  
Sec. 8-3-4. - Operation on sidewalk. 
No person shall ride a bicycle upon any public sidewalk within the city. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(i))  
Sec. 8-3-5. - Operation on right side of roadway; bicycle paths. 
(a)  Establishment of bike routes. As an aid in the guidance of bicyclists, the city has established bike routes throughout the city in accordance with the "City of White Plains Bike Routes" map dated April 1, 2002, as maintained by the city department of traffic and the city clerk. 
(b)  Every person operating a bicycle upon the roadway of a public highway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of such roadway as practicable and shall not ride two (2) abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(e); Ord. of 5-6-02, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1234(a).  
Sec. 8-3-6. - Speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(f))  
Sec. 8-3-7. - Clinging to vehicles. 
No person riding upon a bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(g)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1233.  
Sec. 8-3-8. - Maximum number of persons allowed on bicycles. 
No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(d)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1232.  
Sec. 8-3-9. - Carrying packages. 
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(h)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1235.  
Sec. 8-3-10. - Seats. 
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride and seated upon a permanent seat attached thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(c)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1232.  
Sec. 8-3-11. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a public street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(j))  
Sec. 8-3-12. - Equipment and maintenance. 
Every bicycle on a public highway shall be equipped and maintained in compliance with Section 1236 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 9(k))  
Sec. 8-3-13. - Penalty. 
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter may be punished by a fine of up to one hundred ($100.00) dollars or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days or by any combination thereof. 
(Ord. of 3-22-54, § 10; Ord. of 11-5-18, § 1 ) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 8-4 - PARADES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Parades generally, General City Law,, § 5; regulation of parades, Vehicle and Traffic Law, § 1640(a)(12). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-4-1. - Exemption. 
This chapter shall not apply to the movements of the armed forces of the United States, to the New York Guard, to the police and fire departments of the city and to funeral processions. 
(Ord. of 11-4-43, § 2)  
Sec. 8-4-2. - Violations. 
Every person participating in any procession or parade for which a permit has not been issued as required by this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or by imprisonment for not to exceed ten (10) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 111-4-43, § 3) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 8-4-3—8-4-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 8-4-16. - Required. 
(a)  No procession or parade shall be permitted on any street or any public place in the city without permit being first obtained from the commissioner of public safety. 
(b)  Special permits for occasions of extraordinary public interest may be granted by the commissioner of public safety for any day or hour with the written approval of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 11-4-43, § 1)  
Sec. 8-4-17. - Application. 
An application for a parade or procession permit shall be made in writing upon a suitable form prescribed and furnished by the commissioner of public safety not less than thirty-six (36) hours prior to the forming or marching of the parade or procession. If a special permit is applied for, the application may be made at any time prior to the forming or marching of the procession or parade. 
(Ord. of 11-4-43, § 1)  
Sec. 8-4-18. - General conditions for issuance. 
(a)  The commissioner of public safety shall not grant the permit required by this article when he has good reason to believe that the proposed procession or parade will be disorderly in character or tend to disturb the public peace. 
(b)  The commissioner shall not grant such a permit for the use of any street or any public place or material portion thereof which is ordinarily subject to great congestion of traffic, except on holidays or on weekdays. 
(c)  No such permit shall be granted if the procession or parade is not to be completed prior to sundown. 
(d)  A permit shall be granted only after due investigation by the commissioner of public safety. 
(Ord. of 11-4-43, § 1(a), (b), (g); Ord. of 12-16-54, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 8-4-19. - Designation of route and other rules and regulations. 
Each parade or procession permit shall designate specifically the route through which the procession or parade shall move and it may also specify the width of the roadway to be used and may further include such rules and regulations as the commissioner of public safety may deem necessary. 
(Ord. of 11-4-43, § 1(c))  
Sec. 8-4-20. - Insurance ad prerequisite. 
Except where a special permit is granted as provided in this article, before any parade or procession permit shall be granted there shall be furnished the city, without cost to the city, a public liability and property damage policy insuring the city against any loss or damage arising out of the granting of the permit, which said policy must meet with the approval of the corporation counsel of the city as to form and correctness and of the commissioner of public safety as to sufficiency. 
(Ord. of 11-4-43, § 1(d))  
Sec. 8-4-21. - Sunday parades. 
Permits may be granted by the commissioner for the conduct of, the witnessing of and the participation or engagement in processions or parades and the playing of music in any such procession or parade on Sunday after 2:00 p.m. for patriotic, fraternal, veteran, military and religious organizations. 
(Ord. of 12-16-54, § 2(h)) 
State Law reference— Power of city to allow parades on Sunday, General Business Law, § 14.  
Sec. 8-4-22. - Compliance. 
The chief officer of any procession or parade for which a permit has been granted by the commissioner of public safety shall be responsible for the strict observance of all rules and regulations included in the permit. 
(Ord. of 11-4-43, § 1(f))  
ARTICLE III. - PARADE VENDORS AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 8-4-23. - Application. 
This article shall apply only to parades and events of extraordinary public interest as determined by the mayor and under permit granted by the commissioner of public safety under section 8-4-16. This article does not apply to the traditional annual parades or events as may be conducted on Memorial Day or Columbus Day. 
(Ord. of 6-17-91, § 1)  
Sec. 8-4-24. - Parade vendor. 
A parade vendor is a hawker, peddler or solicitor, as defined in chapter 4-9 of the White Plains Municipal Code, entitled, "hawkers, peddlers and solicitors," who is engaged in selling souvenirs or such other items as may be related to the special event or parade. 
(Ord. of 6-17-91, § 1)  
Sec. 8-4-25. - Permit required. 
All persons desiring to be parade vendors shall obtain a permit from the city clerk. Application shall be made to the city clerk at least one (1) week in advance of said parade or special event. A fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or certified check shall accompany said application. However, persons already licensed under chapter 4-9 of the White Plains Municipal Code and persons exempt under any other federal, state, or county statute are not required to obtain such permit. 
(Ord. of 6-17-91, § 1)  
Sec. 8-4-26. - Display of identification. 
All persons issued a parade vendor's permit shall also be issued a button identifying them as parade vendors. Said button shall be worn on the apparel of the parade vendor during such parade or special event. Said permit must be shown upon request to any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-17-91, § 1)  
Sec. 8-4-27. - Penalty. 
Any person acting as a hawker, peddler or solicitor during the parade or special event without having obtained a permit shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 6-17-91, § 1)  
Chapter 8-5 - VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-5-1—8-5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 8-5-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commissioner of building shall mean the commissioner of building of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
Commissioner of public works shall mean the commissioner of public works or his duly authorized representative. 
Department of parking shall mean the department of parking of the city. 
Parking commissioner shall mean the commissioner of parking of the city. 
Residence districts shall mean all the districts classified as residence in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Street lines shall mean curb line or edge of street pavement lines. 
(Ord. of 8-4-80, § 1; Ord. of 12-3-12, § 2)  
Sec. 8-5-22. - Prohibited. 
No fence, wall, hedge or planting shall be erected, placed, or maintained on any corner lot in a residence district more than thirty (30) inches in height within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line joining said street lines at points which are forty-five (45) feet distance from the point of intersection measured along said street lines as shown on Appendix A attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and made a part hereof. The height of thirty (30) inches shall be measured from the top of the curb or in the absence of a curb, the top edge of the pavement. This article shall not apply to utility poles, buildings and structures placed pursuant to a permit issued by the city. This article shall not apply to isolated or ungrouped trees, shrubs, or plants, or fences of open design provided that they are not a visual obstruction which would create a traffic hazard. 
(Ord. of 8-4-80, § 2)  
Sec. 8-5-23. - Duty of owner, lessee or occupant. 
It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee or occupant of any corner lot in a residence district of the city to cut or remove all such obstructions as often as may be necessary to comply at all times with the provisions of section 8-5-22 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-4-80, § 3)  
Sec. 8-5-24. - Notice of removal; removal. 
The department of parking shall refer any obstruction to vision which has not been brought into conformity with the sight line requirements of this article and which the department determines to be a traffic safety hazard, along with its recommendation for appropriate action, to the traffic commission. After consideration of all the facts, the parking commissioner shall, if it agrees with said recommendation, refer the matter to the commissioner of building or commissioner of public works who shall serve written notice upon the owner, lessee, occupant, or any person having the the care or control of any such lot requiring him to remove the obstruction within ten (10) calendar days thereafter. Any existing condition, which is prohibited by section 8-5-22 of this Code, may be permitted to remain after a review of the conditions by the transportation commission with the understanding that its continued presence does not convey any permanent license, easement or other vested rights to the property owner, but rather is a revocable temporary license which may be revoked at any time without cause upon written notice to the property owner by the commissioner of building or the commissioner of public works and furthermore that the city does not accept any liability for damage to such objects or conditions from any activity of the city or any third party. 
(Ord. of 8-4-80, § 4; Ord. of 12-3-12, § 3; Ord. of 9-2-14, § 1)  
Sec. 8-5-25. - Failure to remove; removal by city; lien for cost. 
If the property owner shall fail to remove the obstruction within the designated time as required in this article, the city may perform such removal using city forces or a contractor employed for that purpose and shall charge the cost of such removal and restoration to the owner of the property. Such charges shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Ord. of 8-4-80, § 5)  
Sec. 8-5-26. - Administrative liability. 
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any omission or act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-80, § 7)  
Sec. 8-5-27. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of any notice herein provided, or who shall resist or obstruct the commissioner of public works, or his employees or any employee of the city in carrying into effect the provisions of any notice served hereunder, shall be guilty of a violation and on the first conviction thereof, be subject to a fine which shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in amount, and on any subsequent conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine which shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in amount, or to imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or to both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 8-4-80, § 6; Ord. of 5-3-93)  
Chapter 8-6 - WRECKERS AND TOWING OF VEHICLES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-6-1. - Wrecker rotation list. 
(a)  The commissioner of public safety or his or her deputy is hereby granted the authority to draft and employ a rotating list of towing companies or towing services. No person, corporation, or entity shall engage in rotational towing without having first obtained a medallion for such towing issued pursuant to section 8-6-3 of this article. Such medallion shall be referred to as a license to engage in public safety/parking department related towing. No person shall engage in said towing without having obtained a medallion plate issued pursuant to section 8-6-3 of this article for each tow truck and flat bed tow truck. The commissioner shall have discretion to include on said list any towing company or service subject to the provisions of subsection (b). 
(b)  To be eligible for inclusion on the rotating list, any towing services or towing company must: 
(1)  Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the commissioner or his or her deputy that the service or company has equipment which is sufficient to perform the required tasks including one (1) two truck and one (1) flatbed tow truck which shall meet the standards set by the department of public safety as well as those standards and/or rules or regulations promulgated by the federal or state departments of transportation, as those standards, rules or regulations may be amended from time to time; 
(2)  Agree to hold harmless and indemnify the city, and its employees, officers and agents from all claims, suits, actions, damages, and costs which may result from the towing of any vehicle under this section; 
(3)  Procure any and all insurance required by the department of law of the city. 
(c)  Any towing company or towing service included on said rotation list providing services to the city shall be considered an independent contractor with the city. The towing service or towing company shall not in any way be considered an agent or employee of the commissioner of public safety, the department of public safety, the city or the department of parking. 
(Ord. of 8-3-81, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 1; Ord of 7-9-07, § 1; Ord. of 5-28-09, § 1)  
Sec. 8-6-2. - Removal from the list. 
After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the commissioner of public safety or his or her deputy may remove a tow company from the rotation list for a period of time designated by the commissioner or his or her deputy, if such owner and/or operator is found to have violated any of the following: 
(a)  Any provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter; 
(b)  Was found to have operated a tow truck in a negligent manner or in a manner showing reckless disregard for life or property. For purposes of this subsection, a finding that any such operator violated section 1192 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law in the course of operating a tow truck shall be deemed negligence; 
(c)  Repeatedly refuses tow calls, or fails to respond in a reasonable time for no legitimate reason; 
(d)  Refuses without justifiable grounds to render towing services upon request of the department of public safety, or the department of parking; 
(e)  Repeated complaints of substandard service, overcharging or improper care of vehicle towed resulting in damage to the vehicle; 
(f)  Habitual violator of the regulations of the department of parking. 
(Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 2; Ord of 7-9-07, § 2)  
Sec. 8-6-3. - Medallion fees. 
The fees to obtain a medallion pursuant to this chapter shall be: 
(a)  The annual fee for a medallion to engage in towing as part of the wrecker rotation list shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each tow truck. 
(b)  A minimum of two (2) medallions shall be issued per company one (1) for a tow truck and one (1) for a flatbed tow truck. 
(c)  In the event of the loss, mutilation, destruction or transfer of any medallion issued hereunder, the licensee may file such statement and proof of facts as the commissioner shall require, with a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per medallion, at the department of public safety, and the department of public safety shall issue a duplicate or substitute medallion. 
(Ord. of 5-28-09, § 1)  
Secs. 8-6-4—8-6-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWING OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 8-6-21. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall be defined as is indicated below: 
Abandoned vehicle shall mean an abandoned vehicle as defined in Vehicle and Traffic Law section 1224(1). 
Booting shall mean the clamping, affixing or locking of a booting device onto the wheel of a motor vehicle to prevent the wheel from rotating, thereby immobilizing the vehicle. 
Booting device shall mean any device that is clamped, affixed or locked onto the wheel of a motor vehicle to prevent the wheel from rotating, thereby immobilizing the vehicle. 
Commissioner shall mean the commissioner of public safety of the city or his or her designee unless as otherwise specified herein. 
Disabled vehicle shall mean any vehicle for which towing is necessary because of a vehicular accident or for which towing is necessary because of the vehicle's inability to proceed under its own motor power due to reasons other than a vehicular accident. 
Evidence vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is suspected of having been used as a means of committing a crime or employed in aid or furtherance of a crime or held, used or sold in violation of law or which may be required to be held or produced as evidence in a criminal investigation or proceeding. 
Flatbed tow truck shall mean any tow truck where the entire back of the truck is fitted with a bed that can be hydraulically inclined and moved to ground level, allowing the customer's vehicle to be placed on it under its own power or pulled by a winch. 
Habitual violator shall mean any person who has five (5) or more unpaid summonses and/or parking violations against him or her or any vehicle owned by him or her. 
Medallion shall mean a plate issued by the commissioner of public safety as the physical evidence of a tow truck operation license, and is affixed to the outside of such authorized tow truck. 
Parking violations are deemed outstanding when said violations and/or unpaid parking summonses have not been answered by the required appearance date. 
Rotational towing shall mean the operation of a tow tuck, or the offering to transport a vehicle by means of a tow truck as part of an independent contractor agreement with the City of White Plains. 
Storage area shall mean an area or region designated by the commissioner or commissioner of parking owned or under the control of the tow company and/or city to hold vehicles towed under this article until disposed of under the provisions of this chapter. 
Towing shall mean the moving for hire of a vehicle subject to towing, as herein defined. 
Tow truck shall mean a vehicle that is equipped with a crane, winch, tow bar, push plate, or other device designed to pull or push a vehicle or to raise a vehicle to raise or the front or rear end thereof. 
Vehicle shall mean a motor vehicle as defined in section one hundred twenty-five of the vehicle and traffic law, a tractor as defined in section one hundred fifty-one of such law or a trailer as defined in section one hundred and fifty-six of such law. 
Vehicle subject to towing shall mean any vehicle which: 
(1)  Cannot safely be removed as a result of an accident or some mechanical failure, or 
(2)  Is owned or operated by a habitual violator and is stopped or parked in violation of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or the Traffic Ordinance of the city or vehicles which have five (5) or more outstanding and unpaid parking violations issued against them, and which, after mailing to the registered owner a final notice, at the address provided by the department of motor vehicles records, are found operated or parked on any public street, public highway, roadway, any portion of the entire width between the boundary lines of any publicly maintained or any property owned by, or in the possession and control of the City of White Plains, or 
(3)  Is found unattended where it constitutes an obstruction to traffic, or 
(4)  Is unattended and is stopped or parked in an area designated by the commissioner to be an unsafe road condition, or 
(5)  Is unattended and is stopped or parked in a place where stopping or standing is prohibited by the Vehicle and Traffic Law or the Traffic Ordinance of the city, or 
(6)  Is abandoned, as herein defined. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 6-3-02, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 3; Ord of 7-9-07, § 3; Ord. of 5-28-09, § 1)  
Sec. 8-6-22. - Towing generally. 
Subject to any regulations promulgated hereunder by the commissioner: 
(a)  Any operator may, upon the request of any person listed below, tow or cause to be towed any vehicle subject to towing under this article; 
(b)  The following persons may request that a vehicle subject to towing be towed: 
(1)  The owner of the vehicle; 
(2)  Any other person authorized to have possession; 
(3)  Any police office of the City of White Plains; 
(4)  Any authorized parking enforcement officer of the department of parking. 
(c)  Unless requested to do otherwise, such vehicle shall be towed to the storage area provided by the tow company which storage area shall be approved by the commissioner or his or her designee or the city storage area as designated by the commissioner of parking or his or her designee. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 2; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 4; Ord of 7-9-07, § 4)  
Sec. 8-6-23. - Fees. 
Subject to regulations promulgated by the commissioner: 
(a)  The maximum charge for towing a vehicle shall be: 
(1)  In case of vehicles which do not exceed four (4) tons gross weight, one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per tow; 
(2)  An additional charge not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is authorized for services requiring a flatbed tow truck; 
(3)  In the case of vehicles which exceed four (4) tons of gross weight, ten dollars ($10.00) per additional ton gross weight. 
(b)  The storage charge shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for all or any part of a day. Such charge shall commence at the time the vehicle enters the storage area; 
(c)  In the event that the owner or person authorized to have possession of the vehicle subject to towing arrives at the scene after a tow truck has been called but before the vehicle has been hooked up to the tow truck: 
(1)  The charge imposed by paragraph (a)(1) shall be twelve dollars ($12.00); 
(2)  The charge imposed by paragraph (a)(3) shall be five dollars ($5.00) per ton gross weight. 
(d)  An additional charge not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) is authorized for services necessarily rendered by the tow truck operator to prepare a disabled motor vehicle for towing in instances such as, but not limited to, overturned vehicle, a vehicle in a ditch or embankment, or where the use of a flatbed truck is necessary to transport a vehicle. 
(e)  The fee to be paid to remove a booting device, affixed pursuant to section 8-6-29 of this article, shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). There shall also be a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) for all or any part of a day that a booted vehicle remains in a public location. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 3; Ord. of 5-16-83, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-94; Ord. of 6-3-02, § 2; Ord. of 6-2-03, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 5; Ord of 7-9-07, § 5; Ord. of 5-22-08, § 1; Ord. of 5-28-09, § 1)  
Sec. 8-6-24. - Notice and disposal of vehicles, other than abandoned vehicles. 
If a vehicle other than an abandoned vehicle remains unclaimed for ten (10) days after being towed, the commissioner or the commissioner of parking, as the case may be, shall mail a notice of removal to the last registered owner or lienholder, if such can be ascertained with reasonable diligence. Such notice shall state: 
(a)  The date of towing and the place of storage. 
(b)  That if the vehicle is not claimed within ten (10) days, it will be sold at a public auction within forty (40) days from the date of the notice or otherwise placed in use by the police department as the commissioner may direct. 
Notice of the auction shall be published in the official newspaper of the city once, at least five (5) days prior to the auction. If the commissioner determines that a vehicle may be suitably used for police purposes, he may direct that, in lieu of the auction, the vehicle be kept and used by the police department, except any vehicle which was towed and stored as a scofflaw vehicle, in which case, the commissioner of parking may determine that a vehicle may be utilized for parking enforcement and/or parking department purposes. 
(c)  Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 4; Ord. of 5-2-88, § 1; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 6; Ord of 7-9-07, § 6)  
Sec. 8-6-25. - Disposal of abandoned vehicles. 
Abandoned vehicles, as herein defined, shall be disposed of in accordance with section 1224 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 5; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 8-6-26. - Proceeds from sale of towed vehicles. 
The proceeds from the sale of any vehicle sold as provided in sections 8-6-24 and 8-6-25 of this Code shall be applied first to the cost of sale; second, against any towing charges; third, against any storage charges; fourth, against any municipal administrative charges; fifth, to any and all unpaid outstanding summonses against the vehicle and the registered owner thereof. In the event that the sale proceeds exceed the above costs and charges, the excess shall be held by the commissioner of finance for the benefit of the owner for a period not to exceed five (5) years. If the proceeds remain unclaimed after the five-year period, the proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 6; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 8-6-27. - Reimbursement of tow truck operator. 
Upon the presentation of proof of towing, the operator will be reimbursed for the charges imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 7; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1)  
Sec. 8-6-28. - Rules, regulations, etc. 
The commissioner is hereby authorized to: 
(a)  Promulgate regulations with respect to towing rates, storage charges, and the method for reimbursing operators and; 
(b)  Employ operators as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-21-81, § 8; Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 7; Ord of 7-9-07, § 7)  
Sec. 8-6-29. - Booting. 
(a)  Booting. The commissioner and/or the commissioner of parking may, in lieu of towing a vehicle owned or operated by a habitual violator, or vehicles which have five (5) or more outstanding and unpaid parking violations issued against them, and which, after mailing to the registered owner a final notice, at the address provided by the department of motor vehicles records, are found operated or parked on any public street, public highway, roadway, any portion of the entire width between the boundary lines of any publicly maintained or any property owned by, or in the possession and control of the City of White Plains, order that the operator of the towing and/or booting service or such similarly related state of the art service immobilize the vehicle by affixing a booting device. 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  When an immobilization device is used, the department of public safety, department of parking, or the operator shall attach or cause to be attached to the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, in such form as directed by the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of parking, a notice containing the following information: 
a.  The location and identifying characteristics of the vehicle. 
b.  The date and time of placement of the device and the signature of the installer. 
c.  Notice that any such person tampering with, defacing, removing or destroying the device or vehicle will be subject to prosecution and liability for any loss to the city due to such attempt. 
d.  A warning that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to such vehicle. 
e.  The steps which the owner must take to obtain release of the vehicle. 
f.  Such other information, statements, notices and warnings as the commissioner of parking shall from time to time determine. 
(2)  The commissioner in consultation with the commissioner of parking shall also provide for such notice to the last registered owner or lien holder of the booted vehicle as provided for in section 8-6-24, if such vehicle remains unclaimed. 
(c)  Tampering with immobilized vehicles. 
(1)  Any attempt by any person to tamper with, deface, remove or destroy an immobilization device or to move by any means a vehicle towed or secured as herein provided is a violation of this ordinance punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by incarceration for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both. 
(2)  Any person tampering with, removing, defacing or destroying an immobilization device shall be liable to the city for any loss due to such attempt. 
(Ord. of 6-3-02, § 3; Ord. of 3-5-07, § 8; Ord of 7-9-07, § 8)  
TITLE IX. - ZONING, PLANNING, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[1] 
CHAPTER 
 9-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 9-2  ZONING 
 9-3  PLANNING 
 9-4  SUBDIVISIONS 
 9-5  IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS 
 9-6  HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 9-7  AFFORDABLE HOUSING REGULATIONS 
 9-8  RESERVED 
 9-9  SPECIAL RESIDENCE FACILITIES 
 9-10 OUTDOOR SIGNS AND AWNINGS 
 9-11 RESERVED 
 9-12 PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF TREES 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— By § 1 of an ordinance adpoted July 13, 1989, the city adopted a Supplemental Code to the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code as the city's building code. A separate ordinance of the same date repealed the city's building, fire prevention, plumbing and housing codes. 
Cross reference— Weed abatement, Ch. 5-5. 
 
Chapter 9-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 9-1-1. - Commissioner of building authorized to delegate authority. 
The commissioner of building is hereby authorized to appoint a representative who when so appointed shall be authorized to act generally for and in the place of said commissioner of building. 
(Res. of 8-7-72)  
Chapter 9-2 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environmental quality review, Ch. 3-2; wetlands, Ch. 3-5; residential zone commercial vehicle parking restrictions, Ch. 4-12; planning, Ch. 9-3; submission of changes in zoning ordinance to planning board, § 9-3-18; uniformity of exterior design and appearance of buildings, § 9-3-31 et seq.; subdivisions, Ch. 9-4; building code, Ch. 9-5; outdoor signs and awnings, Ch. 9-10. 
State Law reference— Zoning ordinances authorized, Statute of Local Governments, § 10, 6; General City Law, § 20, 24.25. 
 
Sec. 9-2-1. - Saved from repeal. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the validity of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended.  
Chapter 9-3 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of planning, §§ 238-x, 238-y. 
Cross reference— Designation of public housing agency, § 2-1-4; authority of planning board under wetlands ordinance, § 3-5-4; zoning, Ch. 9-2; subdivisions, Ch. 9-4. 
State Law reference— Municipal planning authorized, Statute of Local Governments, § 10, 7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-3-1. - Official map or plan. 
The map or plan of the city entitled, "Official Map or Plan of the City of White Plains, Westchester County, New York," signed by Eugene Halpin, Jr., Commissioner of Public Works of said city, dated the fourth day of April, 1927 and filed with the Common Council of said city on the fourth day of April, 1927 be, and the same hereby is adopted and established as the official map or plan of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-2-27, § 1) 
State Law reference— Official map, General City Law, § 26.  
Sec. 9-3-2. - Comprehensive plan management group and committee. 
(a)  There is hereby established the comprehensive plan management group as follows: 
(1)  The management group shall consist of not more than eighteen (18) members who shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the mayor. 
(2)  The chairman of the management group shall be appointed by the mayor from among its members. 
(3)  The function of the management group shall be to develop, organize, and manage the citizen participation process for updating the 1977 comprehensive plan. 
(4)  The management group shall adopt rules and procedures to establish a responsible and flexible comprehensive planning process. 
(5)  The management group shall foster discussion, analysis, and review of all relevant matters encompassed in General City Law § 28-a(5)(a)—(o), which statute will take effect on July 1, 1994. 
(6)  The chairman shall appoint the chairmen of all task forces who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(b)  There is hereby established the comprehensive plan committee ("CPC") as follows: 
(1)  The CPC shall consist of the chairmen of each of the task forces established by the management group and such other individuals as may, from time to time, be appointed by the chairman of the management group. 
(2)  The chairman of the CPC shall be appointed by the mayor, and shall be a member of the management group. 
(3)  The CPC and the task forces shall assure effective communication of information, data, proposals, and recommendations to civic and business groups, neighborhood associations, and the general public. 
(4)  The CPC and the task forces shall prepare general statements of goals and objectives upon which proposals for the immediate and long-range enhancement, growth, and development of the city can be based, and proposed measures and programs to implement said goals and objectives. 
(c)  The commissioner and members of the department of planning shall serve as staff to the management group, comprehensive plan committee and all committees and task forces. All other city departments, as directed through their respective department heads, shall cooperate and assist the management group, the COC, and all committees and task forces. 
(d)  Participation in the COC and all committees and task forces shall be open to all residents of the City of White Plains who may participate as individuals or representatives of neighborhood associations or other civic or business groups. 
(e)  The common council encourages all social and economic groups to participate. 
(f)  It is the goal of the common council to receive a final draft of a proposed update of the 1977 comprehensive plan within the next two (2) years. 
(Res. of 4-4-94; Res. of 6-5-95) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of a resolution adopted Apr. 4, 1994, as § 9-3-2 was at the discretion of the editor, the resolution being nonamendatory of the Code.  
Sec. 9-3-3. - Comprehensive plan, acceptance. 
The common council accepts and recognizes with appropriate recognition of public comments, the Comprehensive Plan of the City of White Plains as the basic policy framework for actions relating to land use, community facilities and public improvements. Plan implementation shall be achieved by decisions which involve zoning, urban renewal, subdivision regulation, the official map, land acquisition, capital and operating budgets, environmental protections, design regulations, and historic preservation. 
The accepted comprehensive plan and any amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and a copy thereof shall be filed with the White Plains Planning Board and the Westchester County Planning Board. 
(Res. of 9-8-97) 
Editor's note— The resolution adopted Sept. 8, 1997, which pertained to acceptance of the comprehensive plan, did not specify manner of codification; hence inclusion as § 9-3-3 has been at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 9-3-4—9-3-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD 
 
Sec. 9-3-16. - Created; composition. 
(a)  A planning board is hereby created pursuant to the General City Law, to consist of seven (7) members. Pursuant to section 27(16) of the General City Law, three (3) alternate planning board member positions are hereby established for purposes of substituting for a member in the event such member is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest. Alternate members of the planning board shall be appointed by the mayor for a term of seven (7) years. 
(b)  The chairperson of the planning board may designate an alternate member to substitute for a member when such member is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest on an application or matter before the board. When so designated, the alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such member of the board. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of the initial planning board meeting at which the substitution is made. 
(c)  All provisions of section 27 of the General City Law relating to planning board member training and continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest, compensation, eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, compatibility of office and service on other boards, shall also apply to alternate members. 
(Ord. of 5-2-27, § 3; Ord. of 4-15-46, § 1; Ord. of 1-4-99, § 1) 
State Law reference— Planning board authorized, General City Law, § 27, General Municipal Law, § 234.  
Sec. 9-3-17. - Approval of plats. 
The planning board is hereby authorized and empowered to approve plats showing lots, blocks or sites with, or without, streets or highways and to approve the development of plats entirely or partially undeveloped and which have been filed in the office of the county clerk, division of land records, prior to the creation and appointment of such planning board. The chairman of the planning board shall issue in behalf of the city, the certificate of failure to take action in plats referred to in the General City Law. 
(Ord. of 5-2-27, § 4; Ord. of 8-3-64, § 1) 
State Law reference— Approval of plats by planning board, General City Law, §§ 31, 32.  
Sec. 9-3-18. - Submission of changes in zoning ordinance. 
There shall be referred to said planning board for consideration and report to the common council proposed changes in the city's zoning ordinance, which the common council has before it for action. 
(Ord. of 5-2-27, § 5; Ord. of 3-18-46, § 2)  
Sec. 9-3-19. - Other functions. 
In addition to its other powers and duties, the planning board shall: 
(a)  Recommend to the common council amendments, extensions, additions and other changes in and to the city's official plan as seem desirable to the board. 
(b)  Recommend to the common council changes in the city's zoning ordinance which the board deems advisable. 
(c)  Consider plans for public housing and the replanning, rehabilitation, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 5-2-27, § 6; Ord. of 3-18-46, § 2; Ord. of 9-20-54, § 1)  
Secs. 9-3-20—9-3-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 3, 1995, § 1, repealed Art. III of Ch. 9-3. Prior to repeal, such article pertained to uniformity of exterior design and appearance; the building plan review board and appeals; substantive sections being §§ 9-3-31—9-3-33, 9-3-41—9-3-43, and 9-3-51—9-3-54, derived from an ordinance adopted May 2, 1955, §§ 1—9, as subsequently amended. 
 
Secs. 9-3-31—9-3-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 9-3-61. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public safety to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-4-27, § 1(3))  
Sec. 9-3-62. - Commissioner of public works to furnish assigned number. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of public works to furnish any party applying therefor the number or numbers assigned to any building in the city. 
(Ord. of 4-4-27, § 1(2))  
Sec. 9-3-63. - Numbering required. 
The owner, agent, lessee or other person in charge of any building in the city upon a street, to which street numbers of lots have been assigned by the commissioner of public works, approved and adopted by the common council, shall cause the proper street number or numbers of such building to be displayed on the fan light or transom or door or entrance or steps or gate or at the nearest practicable point to the entrance of such building, in such manner that the street number or numbers shall at all times be plainly legible from the sidewalk in front of such building; provided, however, that so far as the purpose or intent of this section is concerned the "front" shall be construed as that side of the building which faces the street on which the number or numbers of such lot or lots on which such building is situate have been allotted and that the number or numbers shall be displayed on such side of such building or premises. 
(Ord. of 4-4-27, § 1(1))  
Sec. 9-3-64. - Notice to number. 
The owner, agent, lessee or other person in charge of any building in the city, upon a street to which street numbers of lots have been assigned, shall within five (5) days after a notice has been served upon such owner, agent, lessee or other person in charge of such building, display and continue to keep displayed, the number or numbers of such building, as so assigned, such notice shall be in writing signed by the commissioner of public safety or someone in his behalf and to be handed in person to the owner, agent, lessee or other person in charge of such building or to be mailed to such owner, agent, lessee or other person in charge of such building, addressed to the street and lot number so assigned to such building. 
(Ord. of 4-4-27, § 1(4))  
Sec. 9-3-65. - Penalty. 
Any owner, agent, lessee or other persons in charge of any building hereinbefore referred to who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. of 4-4-27, § 1(5)) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Chapter 9-4 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Local Law No. 6 of 1996, adopted Nov. 4, 1996, amended chapter 9-4, subdivisions, in its entirety, and such provisions designated as §§ 9-4-1—9-4-15 have been included herein. Words in brackets [ ] have been added by the editor for clarity. Amendments to this chapter adopted subsequent to Nov. 4, 1996, will be included in their proper places, and history notes indicating their derivation will be inserted following the affected sections. For derivation of amendments to former chapter 9-4, the user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative Table at the back of this volume. 
Cross reference— Environmentally sensitive sites and features, Ch. 3-5; zoning, Ch. 9-2; planning, Ch. 9-3; approval of plats by planning board, § 9-3-17. 
State Law reference— Planning power of city, Statute of Local Governments, § 10, 7; plat approval, General City Law, § 32 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-4-1. - [Adoption; prior rules amended.] 
Under the authority of the ordinance adopted by the Common Council of the City of White Plains, New York, on January 3, 1972, pursuant to the provisions of Article 3 of the General City Law, the planning board of said city hereby amends in its entirety the "Rules, Regulations and Requirements of the Planning Board of the City of White Plains in relation to Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans."  
Sec. 9-4-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words used herein are defined as follows: 
2.1  Ancient subdivision means any subdivision plat filed in the office of the Westchester County Clerk, Division of Land Records (formerly known as the Register of Westchester County) prior to May 2, 1927. 
2.2  Board means the Planning Board of the City of White Plains. 
2.3  Construction plans means the drawings showing the location, profile, grade, size and type of sewers, drains, water mains, underground fire alarm ducts, pavements, cross-sections of streets, miscellaneous structures, etc. 
2.4  Easement means a restriction established in a real estate deed to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or particular person for specified uses such as utilities, access or other municipal purposes. 
2.5  Environmentally sensitive sites or features means a lot, plot, parcel or portion thereof, or a characteristic or element of or on such land, as described in Chapter 3-5 of the Municipal Code meeting the thresholds set forth at chapter 3-5 thereof. 
2.6  Final plat means the final map, drawings or chart on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented to the planning board for approval and which, if approved in accordance with these regulations, must be submitted to the county clerk for recording. 
2.7  Lot means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map or by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease, or separate use. 
2.8  Master plan means a comprehensive plan prepared by the planning board, pursuant to section 28-a of the General City Law, which indicates the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of public works, places and structures and for the general physical development of the City of White Plains and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
2.9  Official map means the map established by the Common Council under section 29 of the General City Law showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law, and any amendments thereto adopted by the city legislative body or addition thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the planning board and the subsequent filing of such approved plats. 
2.10  Performance bond means a security in a form acceptable to the commissioner of public works and pursuant to the provisions of New York State General City Law including the term of the instrument which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the planning board or other approving body approves a plat; including performance instrument escrow agreements, maintenance bonds and other similar collateral or surety agreements. 
2.11  Informal plan means the preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning board for its consideration. 
2.12  Preliminary plat/plan means drawings prepared in a manner prescribed by local regulation showing the layout of a proposed subdivision, including a survey, but not restricted to, road and lot layout and approximate dimensions, key plan, topography and drainage, all proposed facilities unsized, including preliminary plans and profiles at suitable scale and in such detail as local regulation may require. 
2.13  Street, arterial means a street which carries large amounts of traffic with a high volume of through traffic and connects to regional highways. 
2.14  Street, collector means a street the primary purpose of which is to collect a moderate amount of traffic from minor streets and carry it to or from arterial streets. 
2.15  Street, minor means a street which provides access for small amounts of traffic to and from land which fronts on the street. 
2.16  Subdivider means any individual, owner, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter having sufficient proprietary interest in the subject land to be subdivided. 
2.17  Subdivision means the division of a lot, parcel or tract of land into two (2) or more lots, plots, sites, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfers of ownership or building development with or without streets or highways, except that this shall not apply where primarily only the dimensions of two (2) existing lots are changed and additional building lots are not actually created nor where restored tax lots are reestablished. 
2.18  Restored tax lots means lots reestablished from a single tax lot by the assessor where the lot lines for said restored tax lots are shown on a subdivision map filed in the Westchester County Clerk's Office, Division of Land Records, except that said lots need not be reestablished where the assessor determines that it is impractical to separately assess one (1) or more lots (i.e., said lots having previously been used or improved as a single parcel). 
2.19  Tax lot means a piece, plot or parcel designated as a single tax lot on the tax assessment maps of the city. 
(L.L. No. 1-1998, 5-4-98)  
Sec. 9-4-3. - Procedure. 
Before any property is subdivided into two (2) or more lots, the subdivider shall apply in writing to the board requesting approval of preliminary plans for the entire subdivision and conditional approval of final plans of all or part of such subdivision as determined by the board and required hereinafter. After conditional approval has been granted, final approval may be given when all stipulated conditions have been complied with, such final approval being given by affixing the signature of the board chairman to the final plat plan after said plan has been approved and signed by the commissioner of public works. 
Applications for such subdivision shall be presented on the subdivision application which may be obtained from the office of the department of planning. A sample application is included in these regulations. 
The order of procedure for submittal of subdivision plans shall be as follows: 
3.1  Informal subdivision application: Applicants are encouraged to submit an informal application and to discuss it with the planning board prior to formal submission of a complete and detailed subdivision application. The informal application shall generally provide the information required in a preliminary application as outlined in section 9-4-5 or as required by the planning board. 
3.2  Submittal of preliminary plat/plan and application: The subdivider shall submit to the board at least seven (7) days prior to any regularly scheduled board meeting two (2) copies of the application for the proposed subdivision and twenty (20) copies of a preliminary plat/plan in conformance with the requirements set forth in section 5 [9-4-5], hereinafter and the fee schedule, section 10 [9-4-10]. 
3.3  Subdivision with no new streets: Wherein a subdivision is proposed which does not require new streets, the preliminary plat/plan and final plat may be submitted concurrently for consideration by the board, subject to the satisfaction of the requirements in sections 5, 7, 8, and 9 [9-4-5, 9-4-7, 9-4-10, and 9-4-11], hereinafter. 
3.4  Submittal of construction plans: Coincident with the submittal of the preliminary plat/plan or the final plat/plan, the subdivider shall submit four (4) copies of a construction plan in conformance with the requirements set forth in section 6 [9-4-6], hereinafter. 
3.5  Public hearing: Prior to the time of submittal of the final plat, the subdivider shall cause notice to be made of a public hearing in conformance with section 11.5 [9-4-11.5] of these regulations. 
3.6  Submittal of final plat/plan: Within six (6) months after the receipt by the subdivider of a letter of approval by the board of the preliminary plat/plan, the subdivider shall file with the board twenty (20) copies of a final plat and four (4) copies of the construction plan for record of either the whole or a portion of the subdivision as determined by the board. Said determination to be in conformance with section 7 [9-4-7] of these regulations. Reasonable extensions of time may be granted by the consent of the board. 
3.7  Final approval: Final approval shall be in conformance with section 11 [9-4-11] of these regulations.  
Sec. 9-4-4. - General requirements for the subdivision of land. 
The subdivider shall observe the following general requirements and principles of land subdivision: 
4.1  Conformance with master plan and official map: Subdivisions or resubdivisions, insofar as possible, shall conform to the city's established official map and master plan in relation to placement of streets and land utilization. 
4.2  Arrangement of streets: The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall, in general, provide for the continuation of the principal existing or planned streets in the adjoining property, or their proper extension when adjoining property is not subdivided. Such street arrangement shall, in general, follow contours of the land rather than cut across them except where necessary for reasonable arrangement of the subdivision. 
4.3  Type and dimension of streets: The streets in a subdivision shall be determined by the board to be of the following type and minimum required width of right-of-way: 
Minor residential street, fifty (50) feet 
Collector street (intermediate), sixty (60) feet 
Arterial street (main), eighty (80) feet 
4.4  Dead end or cul-de-sac streets: 
4.4-1   A dead-end street or cul-de-sac will not be approved unless a circular turnaround with a minimum forty-foot pavement radius is provided at the closed end, and such streets shall not exceed a length of five hundred (500) feet as measured from the centerline of the intersecting street which has two (2) access points to the center point of the turn-around radius along the centerline of the cul-de-sac or dead-end street. Cul-de-sac length may exceed five hundred feet (500) if an acceptable emergency access is provided and it is approved by the commissioners of public works and public safety and the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering. 
4.4-2   All rights-of-way except for the turnaround shall have the same width as is required for a minor street unless otherwise determined by the board. 
4.5  [ Street grades: ] Street grades shall be arranged, unless deemed impractical in the opinion of the board, not to exceed five (5) per cent for arterial streets, eight (8) per cent for collector streets and ten (10) per cent for minor residential streets. The minimum grade shall not be less than two (2) per cent. 
4.6  [ Vertical curves. ] Length of vertical curves shall not be less than fifteen (15) times the algebraic difference, as determined by the commissioner of public works, of the intersecting grades for arterial streets, and not less than ten (10) times such algebraic difference for other streets. In no case shall such vertical curves be less than fifty (50) feet in length. Vertical curves shall be computed as parabolic curves. 
4.7  Horizontal curvature of streets: In general, street lines within a block which deflect from each other at any one point more than ten (10) degrees shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which, for the inner street line, shall be not less than the following: 
Minor streets and cul-de-sacs, one hundred-foot radius. 
Collector streets, three hundred-foot radius. 
Arterial streets, three hundred seventy-five-foot radius. 
4.8  Corners: Street corners shall have a radius of not less than fifteen (15) feet and shall be as follows for right-angled corners: 
Minor streets and cul-de-sacs, fifteen-foot radius. 
Collector streets, twenty-foot radius. 
Arterial streets, thirty-foot radius. 
In cases where an acute angle occurs, the corner radius shall be determined by the board. 
4.9  Blocks: The length of any block should not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet and the width of any block should be, generally, not less than two hundred (200) feet nor greater than four hundred fifty (450) feet, unless otherwise dictated by topographic conditions. 
4.10  In general, No subdivision shall be approved which shows reserve strips of land which may prove untaxable for improvements. 
4.11  Existing building(s) within subdivision: Any existing building(s) and the building lot(s) upon which it is situated shall conform to the pertinent zoning district requirements. The retention of such building(s) in the subdivision must conform to all requirements in these regulations and shall be at the discretion of the board. 
4.12  Lots—General layout: Any lots shall be so laid out to provide frontage on an approved city street as determined by the commissioner of building and shall conform to the minimum frontage requirements of the zoning district involved as well as minimum lot size requirements. Irregularly shaped lots shall be avoided to achieve minimum lot requirements. 
4.13  Lots—Difficult terrain: In cases of areas of difficult or marginal terrain, and/or grading of lots, the board may require the varying of the number of lots, lot lines and/or lot sizes in order to provide land of suitable character for building purposes without danger to health, life or property due to excessive slope, inadequate drainage, floods, high water table, marsh or swampy conditions, unstable subsoil or landfill or inadequate accessibility. 
4.14  Lots—Corner: Lots on the corner of intersection streets must be generally of ample width to provide front yard setbacks on both streets as required by the zoning district regulations. 
4.15  Minimum frontage: The minimum frontage shown for each lot shall coincide with the frontage requirements of the zoning district regulations and the front yard setback shall be shown on the plat plan. 
4.16  On-lot sewage disposal: Septic tanks, cesspools or other private sewage disposal systems are prohibited. 
(L.L. No. 4-2012, § 1)  
Sec. 9-4-5. - Preliminary plat and application. 
Subdividers shall present to the board two (2) copies of the subdivision application and twenty (20) copies of a preliminary plat/plan at a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch and shall show: 
5.1  Location: A small key map, not necessarily to scale, shall show the location of the subdivision to an area of the city at least one-half mile from the bounds of the proposed subdivision. 
5.2  General existing features: The location of all property lines, buildings, watercourses, railroads, monuments, rock outcrops and other existing features shall be shown on a contour map of the proposed subdivision. Such contour map shall show contour intervals of not more than two (2) feet based on City of White Plains datum as determined by the commissioner of public works, and certified as to accuracy by an engineer or land surveyor licensed by the State of New York. 
5.3  Existing improvements: The location, names and widths of existing streets or rights-of-way, alleys, easements, lots, building lines, size of sewers, water mains, culverts and drainage ways, and/or pipes on the property to be subdivided shall be shown. 
5.4  Adjoining properties: The name of the property owners, subdivisions, existing easements, streets, street widths, alleys, property lines and similar facts about adjoining properties within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed subdivision shall be shown. 
5.5  Proposed improvements: The dimensions, proposed lot lines, monuments and number of lots proposed, streets, names and street grades, easements, sewer, water or other utility improvements, building lines and similar proposed improvements shall be shown. Pipe sizes and profiles need not be included on preliminary plans. 
5.6  Dedication of public lands: All parcels of land proposed for dedication for public use or conveyance of easements, if any, shall be shown by cross-hatching or similar technique so as to stand out and be easily identifiable on the drawings. The conditions of dedication, if any, shall be presented on the subdivision application and noted on the final plat. 
5.7  Conformance to zoning: The zoning district, or districts, in which the land to be subdivided is located shall be shown as they appear on the zoning map of the City of White Plains. 
5.8  Environmentally sensitive sites or features: The location and areas of any environmentally sensitive sites or features shall be delineated and identified, including, but not limited to, steep slopes, wetlands and water bodies. 
5.9  Street profile and cross-section: Where difficult topography or special conditions occur in the line of any street, a profile of gradient and cross-section shall be shown. 
5.10  Other plat requirements: The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name(s) of owner(s), and professional engineer shall be recorded on the preliminary plat plan. In addition, the drawing shall contain a date, north point, graphic scale and legend and any other reference notes deemed necessary for adequate explanation of delineated data. 
5.11  Subdivision application form: The subdivision application form shall contain the names and addresses of the owner(s), or principal officer(s) if a corporation is the owner, of the proposed subdivision, the name(s) and address(es) of the professional engineer and registration number, name of the proposed subdivision, a description of the number of lots proposed and a general description of proposed improvements. Further, the application shall require the following information: 
(a)  Date of submittal of application; 
(b)  Description of the nature and extent of street improvements; 
(c)  Description of the nature and extent of sanitary sewage systems, water mains and other utilities to be provided; 
(d)  Description of any dedicated land, its use and any conditions of dedication, if such land is to be dedicated; 
(e)  A statement describing and stating the area to the nearest multiple of ten (10) square feet of any environmentally sensitive site or feature; and 
(f)  A statement signed by the subdivider or his duly appointed agent saying that he is able and willing to proceed forthwith to file the final map or plat of his subdivision in the Office of the County Clerk of Westchester County, or such part thereof as he may wish to develop within the ensuing six-month period, and that he will post necessary surety in the form of a letter of credit or other surety instrument acceptable to the commissioner of public works and establish all property corner monuments as shall be determined for such sections on the final map or plat by designation of the board. 
5.12  Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP): A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of chapter 3-6 of this Code shall be required for preliminary subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and standards in chapter 3-6-6 of this Code. The approved preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of chapter 3-6 of this Code. 
(L.L. No. 4-2007, § 1)  
Sec. 9-4-6. - Final construction plan. 
The applicant shall submit one (1) suitable mylar transparency and/or equivalent reproducible and two (2) lithoprints on cloth showing street[s], structures and all other proposed improvements at an overall scale not to exceed forty (40) feet to one (1) inch, and containing appropriately scaled exploded detail drawings where necessary shall be filed with the board and shall show: 
6.1  Map title and other requirements: The construction plan shall show the title by which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name(s) of the owner(s) and engineer(s) and the New York State professional engineer's registration number, the date of submittal, legend, north point, and graphic scale. 
6.2  Location of monuments: The location and coordinates of all monuments shall be shown with said coordinates referenced to the nearest approved base line of the Westchester County Control System, or City of White Plains datum, as shall be directed by the commissioner of public works. In the absence of such base line within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed subdivision, the method of referencing shall be determined by the commissioner of public works. 
6.3  General base data: The location of proposed property lines, streets, pavements, sidewalks, easements, building lines, alleys, cul-de-sacs, parks and other open spaces, sanitary sewer system, water supply system and collection basins, and means of discharging surface drainage shall be shown. 
6.4  Base data—Streets: The proposed street layout, location and type of sidewalks, final street grades at the centerline, street lighting standards locations, street name sign and utility pole location, location and species of street trees, location of curbs, gutters, catch basins, manholes, sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, fire alarm ducts, and their sizes and types, within the rights-of-way shall be shown. In addition, a typical cross-section showing all details of the width and depth of pavements and sub-base, and any cut and fill between property lines shall be shown. Said section drawing shall be made at a minimum scale of not more than one (1) inch equals four (4) feet. 
6.5  Street details: The subdivider shall submit as part of, or appended to the construction plans, profiles of proposed streets or other public ways on a suitable mylar transparency and/or equivalent reproducible and two (2) lithoprints on cloth. Said profiles shall show the centerlines and both property lines (right-of-way lines) elevations or profiles, proposed curb grades and point of intersection, point of curvature, point of tangency, and the breaks in grade, stations and elevations for a pavement at least thirty (30) feet wide, the proposed sewer, drain, water main and underground utility elevations; the stationing, elevation, etc., of all existing monuments, water tables at buildings, drains, sewers, culverts, hydrants and manholes (both rim and invert), at a scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet vertical and one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet horizontal. All stationing shall show accurate centerline distances. Elevations of the ground surfaces shall be shown to the nearest one-tenth of a foot while all fixed points shall be shown to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, using city datum. 
6.6  Construction standards: In developing the construction plan, the subdivider shall adhere to the following construction standards: 
For purposes of obtaining proper procedures of subdivision review, it is requested that the subdivider submit two (2) blue line paper prints of the construction plans to the commissioner of public works in order to establish conformance to all requirements of this section prior to the submittal of the construction plan. 
6.6-1   Specifications approved by commissioner of public works: All material, structures, manholes, pipe types and sizes, depths and grades, design and workmanship must meet specifications established below by the commissioner of public works. 
6.6-2   Municipal utilities: All municipal utilities proposed and/or constructed in any existing or proposed right-of-way or utility easement to be dedicated to the city shall be subject to inspection and approval during construction by the commissioner of public works. Final approval and acceptance of such utilities shall be exclusively within the jurisdiction of the department of public works. 
6.6-3   Street grading: All streets to be graded from property line to approved final grade and cross-section as approved by the commissioner of public works. 
6.6-4   Curbs: Curbs shall be required in all streets and shall be of fieldstone or granite, meeting the approved specifications of the commissioner of public works. 
6.6-5   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided where required by the planning board. Sidewalk design and construction shall be as approved by the commissioner of public works. 
6.6-6   Street pavement width: Street pavement shall be at least thirty (30) feet (which could provide for two-way traffic and parking on one side of the street) except where a greater width is determined by the commissioner of public works and the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering. 
6.6-7   Pavement: Pavement shall be three-inch hot-mix bituminous surfacing on five-inch plant mix macadam base, or eight-inch reinforced concrete pavement, all measurements being compacted measure. (See 9.3-1. [9-4-11.3-1].) 
6.6-8   Sewers: Sewers shall meet the standards and design requirements of the commissioner of public works and the New York State Department of Health. (See page [section] 9.3. [9-4-11.3].) 
6.6-9   Storm drains: Storm drains shall meet the standards and design requirements of the commissioner of public works. (See 9.3. [9-4-11.3].) 
6.6-10   Water mains: Water mains shall meet the standards and design requirements of the commissioner of public works and the New York State department of health. Water mains shall be not less than eight-inch ductile iron, except where larger pipe may be required to provide an adequate distribution system as determined by the commissioner of public works. The top of the pipe to be at least four and one-half (4½) feet below the top of the pavement or other ground, so as to provide a maximum cover of four and one-half (4½) feet between finished grade and top of pipe. 
6.6-11   Fire hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be provided for purposes of fire protection and shall be spaced not more than three hundred fifty (350) feet apart and near property corners. Hydrant types and connections shall be the approved standard of the department of public works. All standards shall be as approved by the commissioner of public works and all hydrants shall be tested after placement. 
6.6-12   Gas mains: Gas mains shall be at a location and depth approved by the commissioner of public works and in all cases shall be laid in a separate trench which shall not be used by any other type of conduit or pipe. 
6.6-13   Street lighting: Poles, brackets and lights shall be of a type, size and location determined by the commissioner of public works. Light installation shall be complete and fully energized. 
6.6-14   Electrical, telephone, cable TV and other communications technology services: Shall hereafter be placed underground where required by the commissioner of public works. Said underground utilities to be of approved trench-lay cable and conduit per specifications as established by the commissioner of public works in conjunction with accepted engineering practice standards of the appropriate power, telephone, cable TV and other communications technology utilities. 
6.6-15   Street trees: Shall be of Pin Oak, Norway Maple, Crimson King, Redspire Pear or other species approved by the commissioner of public works. Minimum caliper shall be two and one half (2½) to three (3) inches. 
6.6-16   Fire alarm system: Cable ducts shall be provided for fire alarm systems according to the standards and specifications of the commissioners of public safety and public works. Fire alarm systems may not be required, in whole or in part, where deemed unnecessary by the commissioners of public safety and public works. If required, signal boxes shall be of standard approved type as determined by the commissioner;i§ ..... i; of public safety and public works. 
6.6-17   Street name signs: Shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider according to the standards and specifications of the commissioner of public works and/or the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering, in regard to number, size, location, height and type of sign. 
6.6-18   Street names: Shall be subject to approval by the commissioner of public safety and the commissioner of public works. In choosing street names, the proposed name shall avoid potential confusion with existing street names. 
6.6-19   Traffic controls: Shall be determined by the department of parking, and any modifications of intersection design, curb cuts, etc., based on sight distance hazards or like traffic safety engineering concerns, shall be made by the subdivider. Traffic control devices and signs as required, once installed by the subdivider, shall be the responsibility of the city only after final acceptance of the completed street. All corners shall be subject to meeting the minimum standards of the sight module requirements established by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(L.L. No. 4-2012, § 2) 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 9-2.  
Sec. 9-4-7. - Final plat plan. 
After approval of the preliminary plat plan and the final construction plan, the subdivider shall, within six (6) months, submit a final plat plan for final acceptance and approval by the board. Such plat plan shall be drawn to the following specifications: 
7.1  General requirements: All final plat plans shall be drawn upon tracing cloth or mylar to a scale of not more than forty (40) feet to one (1) inch, unless otherwise directed by the commissioner of public works. In addition, the plan shall show a graphic scale and a title block which shall bear: the title of the subdivision, the name(s) of the owner(s), a certificate by the engineer or surveyor making such plans to the effect that the plan is correct and made from an actual survey, and space for the following: 
Construction plans approved 
Office of the Commissioner of Public Works 
City of White Plains, New York 
_____
Commissioner of Public Works 
Date: 
Approved by the Planning Board 
City of White Plains 
_____
Chairman 
Date: 
The submittal of the final plat plan shall be made by presentation of two (2) lithoprints on tracing cloth, or suitable mylar equivalent reproducible, said prints of the plat of final record shall be filed with the planning board at the time of filing the final plat plan with the office of the county clerk of Westchester County. 
7.2  Dimensions: The final plat plan shall show the length to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and the bearing of all straight lines and the central angle, radius and length of arc of all curves along the property lines of each street. Where a street is not continued straight across an intersecting street, the connection across such street shall be given by proper measurements. Each lot area shall be indicated. 
7.3  Survey standards and references: All dimensions, angles, bearings and so forth, shown on the map must be referenced to permanent monuments as required by the commissioner of public works. Such monuments shall be indicated on the subdivision map and coordinate values calculated in the New York State Plane Coordinate System, East Zone (NAD 1927). The error of closure shall not exceed one (1) in fifteen thousand (15,000). 
7.4  Property requirements: The names of all subdivisions and/or the name of the owner of record of lands adjoining and within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed subdivision shall be shown on the final plat plan. Map numbers, as recorded in the office of the clerk of Westchester County and Westchester County block index numbers shall be shown. Boundary lines of the subdivision, all proposed street and/or other dedicated land, and all lots and numbers shall be shown as shall the lines of all adjoining streets, their names, exact survey locations and Westchester County block index numbers. 
7.5  Monuments: Monuments shall be placed at such block corners, angle points, points of curve in streets and intermediate points as shall be required by the commissioner of public works. Monuments shall be of such material, size and length as approved by the commissioner of public works, and shall be set within the top level with the ground surface. Three (3) ties shall be measured to each monument and submitted in an approved format to the department of public works for filing together with coordinate values for each monument.  
Sec. 9-4-8. - Approvals involving environmentally sensitive sites or features. 
In the event that the area involved in any application for subdivision approval includes and/or affects any environmentally sensitive site or feature, the affirmative vote of two-thirds or more of the members of the planning board shall be required for any preliminary or final approval of such subdivision. In granting any such approval, to the maximum extent practicable, adverse environmental effects upon any of the said features shall be minimized or avoided. 
8.1  Such minimization or avoidance shall include, in the case of any wetlands the preservation in its natural state of a buffer area of fifty (50) feet outside of and around the perimeter of all such wetlands; in the case of aquifer recharge area of a buffer area of fifty (50) feet outside of and around the perimeter of all such aquifer recharge areas; and in the case of water courses shall include retention to the maximum extent possible of the pre-existing channel or the creation of a new open channel as nearly similar to the pre-existing natural channel as feasible. Piping shall be avoided except for crossings of roads and driveways. 
8.2  Such minimization and avoidance shall involve, in the case of steep slopes, consideration of the following factors: 
The degree to which the proposed development of the area of the slope would create an unnatural shape; 
The degree to which the proposed development of the area of the slope would enhance the attractiveness of the slope by terracing, landscaping, retaining walls or otherwise; 
The degree to which the proposed development would obstruct views of the slope and surrounding areas; 
The degree to which the proposed development would prevent or minimize erosion and otherwise protect the stability of the slope, both during and after construction.  
Sec. 9-4-9. - Necessary changes in minimum dimensions. 
Where, and to the extent necessary to preserve, protect or minimize the impact upon any environmentally sensitive site or feature, the planning board may make changes in the minimum dimensions for frontage, one (1) side yard, two (2) side yards, front yard and rear yard provided: 
9.1  The applicant shall revise the plat to reflect such changes. 
9.2  The plat shall show, for approval by the planning board, the envelope or limit lines within which site disturbance activities (e.g., house excavation, driveway, utility excavation) may be permitted, which activities shall be enumerated on the plat. 
9.3  In no event shall the separation between buildings be less than the height of the adjoining wall of the higher adjoining building. The plat may specify a maximum height of wall for building envelope in order to achieve compliance with this requirement. 
9.4  In no event shall any frontage be less than twenty (20) feet.  
Sec. 9-4-10. - Application fees. 
10.1  Subdivisions with no new streets: 
10.1-1 Filing fee payable upon application, per lot ..... $500.00 
10.1-2 Final approval fee, per lot ..... 750.00 
10.1.3 Recreation lands for subdivisions of six or more building lots, or money in lieu thereof, 10 per cent of gross area of land or $5,000 per buildable lot, the latter to be set aside in a recreation land fund under the commissioner of finance. Land, or money in lieu of, at the discretion of board. This fee is applicable to entire area encompassed except where under rule 4.11 the planning board permits the retention of a principal building in a subdivision; the building lot on which it is situated shall not be subject to this fee. 
10.2  Subdivisions with new streets: 
10.2.1 Filing fee payable upon application, per lot ..... 750.00 
10.2.2 Final approval fee, per lot ..... 1,000.00 
10.2.3 Recreation lands for subdivisions of six or more building lots, or money in lieu thereof, 10 per cent of gross area of land, or $5,000 per buildable lot, the latter to be set aside in a recreation land fund under the commissioner of finance. Land, or money in lieu of, at the discretion of board. This fee is applicable to entire area encompassed, except where under rule 4.11 the planning board permits the retention of a principal building in a subdivision; the building lot on which it is situated shall not be subject to this fee. 
10.2.4 Inspection fee upon final approval, in percent of bond based on 100 per cent of bond ..... 7.5 
10.2.5 Inspection fee shall only be used to cover labor and other related expenses and costs to the city excluding requested inspection and over-time costs outside of city's normal business week and working hours. 
(L.L. No. 2-2007, § 1)  
Sec. 9-4-11. - Final plat plan approval. 
Before an approval of the final plat plan is given by the board, the following requirements shall be met coincidentally with the submittal of the final plat plan: 
11.1    Certificate of title: The final plans shall be accompanied by a certificate of title showing the ownership of all property and easements to be dedicated to the city, and by a deed of dedication conveying such property or easements to the city free of all encumbrances, including a waiver of claim for damages occasioned by the establishment of grades as finally approved, or the alteration of the surface of any portion of the streets and alleys dedicated, to conform to the grade so established. All easements shown on the plat for sewers, drains, water mains, pavements, curbs, walks, fire alarm ducts or any other public use in or on all streets for the full width thereof as shown on said plat, shall be dedicated by a deed of dedication conveying such easements free and clear of all encumbrances to the city before approval of said plat by the planning board. 
11.2    Engineer's certificate: Before approving the final plan, the board shall request a certificate from the licensed professional engineer that all the technical requirements of the plat itself have been met, and that the plat is in accordance with the laws of the State of New York, ordinances of the City of White Plains, and these regulations. 
11.3   Surety: A letter of credit in a minimum amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) or ten (10) per cent, whichever is greater, of the total estimated cost of public improvements. Any remaining portion may be in an instrument acceptable to the commissioner of public works. The specified amount shall be as calculated by the commissioner of public works This surety will guarantee performance and development of improvements as approved by said commissioner of public works and to approved standards of said department, [and] shall be required to be furnished by the subdivider at the latter's own expense. 
11.3-1 Bituminous street pavement: In the case of the two-inch hot-mix bituminous surfacing on six-inch penetration macadam base, the subdivider shall furnish and pay for a three-year maintenance bond on the entire pavement base and top, in the penalty sum of the total estimated cost of the completed pavement and base, as determined by the commissioner of public works. The bond shall date from the date of dedication of all the roads in a particular subdivision, such dedication to be as certified by the commissioner of public works. 
11.4    Insurance: Contractor and/or subdivider shall obtain and furnish the city with property damage and public liability insurance which shall hold the city harmless. Amounts of insurance to be determined by the commissioner of public works and the form approved by the corporation counsel. 
11.5    Public hearing required: Before approving the final plan, the board shall hold a public hearing. The planning board shall set the time and place for the public hearing on the proposed subdivision. The developer must give notice by certified mail to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed subdivision and must present to the board, an affidavit of publication of the notice of hearing, showing the date on which said notice was published. Notice to the affected property owners as defined above must be mailed at least fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing. Notice of hearing must be published at least ten (10) days before the date of hearing. 
11.6    Certificate of approval by commissioner of public works: Before approving the final plan, the board shall have in its possession a certificate from the commissioner of public works stating that all the construction requirements of sections 6 and 7 [9-4-6 and 9-4-7] have been met; or in lieu thereof, an estimate of the probable cost of such omitted construction certified to by him, and a performance bond by a bonding or surety company approved as to form sufficient to the above estimate; or in lieu thereof, security of the owner acceptable to the common council and approved by the corporation counsel as to form and manner of execution, and as to sufficiency by the commissioner of finance. 
11.6.1.  Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP): A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of chapter 3-6 of this Code shall be required for final subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and standards in chapter 3-6-6 of this Code. The approved preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with the provisions of chapter 3-6 of this Code. 
11.7    Final approval: Shall constitute the satisfactory performance of all above requirements inclusive of payment of fees and shall be granted upon the chairman's affixing his signature to the plan after favorable vote by the board. 
11.8   Compliance with all approval conditions must be completed and the chairperson's signature obtained within two (2) years of the date of the planning board resolution approving the subdivision. 
(L.L. No. 4-2007, § 2)  
Sec. 9-4-12. - Penalties. 
12.1  Unfinished subdivisions: Failure to file a final plat plan with the Westchester County Clerk—Division of Land Records, within a period of one (1) year after final approval is granted by the board, shall be deemed a forfeiture of intent to so subdivide, and the subdivision shall become null and void unless a letter requesting an extension of time shall be received and approved by the board within thirty (30) days of the end of the first year.  
Sec. 9-4-13. - Waiver. 
The planning board, upon written application by the subdivider, may waive or modify performance requirements and standards if it is determined that the waiver will not have an impact on public health and public safety, and subject to the findings and establishments of the general conditions for such waiver as shall be found in Chapter 21, Article 3, Section 33 of the Consolidated Laws of the State of New York as amended.  
Sec. 9-4-14. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-4-15. - Ancient subdivisions. 
15.1  The provisions of this section shall apply to the initial development of any hitherto undeveloped lot or lots in an ancient subdivision. 
15.2  No lot or lots in an ancient subdivision may be developed without prior approval of the planning board in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
15.3  Before approving the development of any lot or lots in an ancient subdivision, the planning board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with section 9-4-11.5 hereof. 
15.4  Application for approval of the development of lots in ancient subdivisions shall be made in writing to the planning board. A complete application shall consist of the following: 
(a)  A certified copy of the ancient subdivision plat in which the lot or lots are located; 
(b)  Two (2) copies of the application and sixteen (16) copies of a preliminary plat plan, in compliance with section 9-4-5 hereof, modified as necessary and appropriate for the particular circumstances, including the number of lots and presence or absence of improvements serving said lot or lots; 
(c)  All information necessary for the building department and the department of public works to determine whether the proposed development complies with all current requirements of the zoning ordinance and this chapter. 
15.5  Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning board shall refer same to the building department and the department of public works and any and all other necessary agencies. The departments and agencies shall review same and report to the planning board with regard to the proposal's compliance with all current requirements of the zoning ordinance and this chapter. 
15.6  If the departments and agencies report that the proposal fully complies as aforesaid, the planning board may schedule and hold a public hearing, and, after such hearing, take final action on the application. 
15.7  If the departments and agencies report that the proposal does not fully comply as aforesaid, the applicant shall be so notified. No approval may be given until a proposal is submitted which fully complies with the zoning ordinance and this chapter. Any required variances must be obtained from the zoning board of appeals prior to submittal. 
15.8  All fees payable shall be in accordance with section 9-4-10.  
Chapter 9-5 - IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT(S)  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 9-5-1—9-5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Introductory Local Law No. 3 (actual Local Law No. 4 of 1997), adopted Oct. 6, 1997, provided for the establishment and operation of a downtown business improvement district. At the city's instruction such subject matter has been codified and the editor has designated L.L. No. 3, §§ 2—5 and Schedule A as §§ 9-5-21—9-5-25. Introductory Local Law No. 2 for 2001 (actual Local Law No. 1 of 2002), adopted Jan. 7, 2002, amended the district plan of the downtown business improvement district to change the maximum amount which can be expended by the district management association for improvements, services, maintenance and operations from $300,000 to $500,000. Local Law Introductory No. 1 of 2006, adopted May 1, 2006, amended the district plan of the Downtown Business Improvement District to change the maximum amount which can be expended by the District Management Association for improvements, services, maintenance and operations from $500,000 to 750,000. 
 
Sec. 9-5-21. - Established. 
The White Plains Downtown Business Improvement District shall be and is hereby established in the city, the common council having found that the establishment of the district is in the public interest, that all notice, mailing and hearing requirements have been complied with, that all properties within the district will benefit from the establishment and that all properties benefitted are included in the boundaries of the district. The boundaries of said district are contained in the district plan, filed in the city clerk's office on June 23, 1997, upon which a public hearing was held on August 4, 1997, as scheduled by a resolution adopted by the common council on July 7, 1997, to which resolution a copy of said plan was annexed and said boundaries are further set forth on Schedule A annexed hereto. 
(L.L. No. 3-1997, § 2 [actual L.L. No. 4 of 1997])  
Sec. 9-5-22. - Construction, improvements, etc., shall be pursuant to plan. 
The construction, improvements, and provision of services within the district shall be pursuant to such district plan of the White Plains Downtown Business Improvement District ("BID"). All services shall be in addition to, and not a substitution for, required municipal services provided by the city on a city-wide basis. 
(L.L. No. 3-1997, § 3 [actual L.L. No. 4 of 1997])  
Sec. 9-5-23. - General Municipal Law to govern operation of district and management; inconsistencies. 
To the extent not otherwise explicitly provided herein, the provisions set forth in article 19-A of the General Municipal Law shall govern the operation of the BID and the district management association in the city. 
Insofar as the provisions of this local law are inconsistent with the provisions of any other local law or act, the provisions of this local law shall be controlling. 
(L.L. No. 3-1997, § 4 [actual L.L. No. 4 of 1997])  
Sec. 9-5-24. - Amendments. 
Any amendments to the BID or to the BID plan shall be made in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 980-i of article 19-A of the General Municipal Law. 
(L.L. No. 3-1997, § 5 [actual L.L. No. 4 of 1997])  
Sec. 9-5-25. - Description of BID area boundaries. 
Beginning at the rear property line of the property fronting on the southwest corner of Maple Avenue and Mamaroneck Avenue; then southerly along the rear property lines of the properties fronting on the western side of Mamaroneck Avenue to Rutherford Avenue; then easterly along Rutherford Avenue to Mamaroneck Avenue; then northerly to Carhart Avenue and easterly along Carhart Avenue to Waller Avenue; then northerly along Waller Avenue to the northeast corner of the parcel at the northwest corner of Waller Avenue and Carhart Avenue; then westerly along the property line of said corner parcel to the rear of the property lines of the parcels fronting on the eastern side of Mamaroneck Avenue, then northerly to Maple Avenue; then easterly along Maple Avenue to the intersection of S. Broadway; then northerly along S. Broadway to the rear property line of the property fronting on S. Broadway and Mitchell Place; then westerly along the rear property lines of the properties fronting on the south side of Mitchell Place to the southeastern corner of Ward 3, Block 10, Lot 18; then northerly along the eastern lot line of Lot 18; then westerly along Mitchell Place to the western lot line of Lot 17A; then southerly to the rear property line of 17A; then westerly to the southeastern corner of the property designated as Ward 3, Block 10, Lot 14; then northerly along the eastern lot line of Lot 14, crossing Mitchell Place, to the southeastern corner of the property designated as Ward 3, Block 9, Lot 36A, located on the northern side of Mitchell Place; then northerly along the eastern lot line of Lot 36A to the southern lot line of Ward 3, Block 9, Lot 7; then westerly along the southern lot line of Lot 7; to the western line of Lot 7; then northerly to Martine Ave; then easterly along Martine Ave to S. Broadway; then northerly along S. Broadway; continuing as North Broadway to Barker Ave.; then westerly along Barker Avenue to the eastern lot line of Ward 4, Block 10, Lot 4; then southerly to the rear lot line of Lot 4; then westerly along the rear property lines of the remainder of the block; then westerly along the rear property lines of the properties fronting on the southern side of Barker Avenue from Church St. to Cottage Place; then northerly along Cottage Place and along the lot line of the property fronting on the southeast corner of Barker Avenue to Grove Street; then southerly on Grove Street to Main Street; then easterly on Main Street to the rear property line of the property fronting on the southwest corner of Main Street and Court Street; then southerly along this property line to Martine Avenue; then east to Court Street; then south on Court Street to Quarropas Street; then east on Quarropas Street to the rear property line of the parcels fronting on the western side of Mamaroneck Avenue; then south along the rear property lines of these parcels to the northwest corner of the property fronting on the northwest corner of East Post Road and Mamaroneck Avenue; then westerly to include the parcel at the Northeast corner of Court Street and East Post Road; then southerly, crossing East Post Road to the western lot line of Ward 3, Block 24, Lot 9; then southerly along this lot line and easterly, to include the lots fronting on the western side of Mamaroneck Avenue, then southerly to the point of beginning. 
(L.L. No. 3-1997, Sched. A [actual L.L. No. 4 of 1997])  
Chapter 9-6 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 
 
Sec. 9-6-1. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to article 5 § 96-a, article 5-g, article 5-j and article 5-k § 119-dd of the General Municipal Law; article 14 of the Parks, Recreation And Historical Preservation Law; and § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, it is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts are necessary to promote the cultural, economic, safety and general welfare of the public. 
Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded, in part, on its past and inasmuch as the City of White Plains has many significant historic, architectural and cultural resources, which constitute its heritage, this act is intended to: 
(1)  Protect and enhance the historic and architecturally and culturally significant buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes and neighborhoods, which represent distinctive elements of the city's historic, architectural, and cultural heritage; 
(2)  Foster understanding of and civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
(3)  Protect and enhance the city's attractiveness, which supports and stimulates the local economy; and 
(4)  Insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the city. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-2. - Historic preservation commission. 
There is hereby established the White Plains Historic Preservation Commission (the "commission"). 
(a)  Membership and appointments. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the common council, and shall consist of a total of five (5) regular members, including the chair, and one (1) alternate member. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  All members shall be residents of the City of White Plains; and 
(2)  It is preferred that members have a background in archeology, architecture, arts, education, history, law, real estate, urban planning, or a related field; and 
(3)  All members shall have an interest in historic preservation and/or architecture. 
(c)  Terms. Commission members shall serve for a term of two (2) years, with the exception of the initial appointments. Of the initial five (5) members, the chair and two (2) other members shall be appointed to a two-year term and two (2) members shall be appointed for an initial one-year term. 
(d)  Chair. The chair of the commission shall be designated by the mayor from among the commission members, and shall serve as chair for no more than three (3)consecutive terms. 
(e)  Alternate member. The alternate member shall be appointed for a two-year term and shall attend all meetings. The chair may designate an alternate member to substitute for a regular member who is absent or when such member is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest on an application or matter before the commission. When so designated, the alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of a regular member of the board. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of each meeting at which such substitution is made. 
(f)  Vacancies. Vacancies occurring on the commission other than by expiration of the term of office shall be filled by appointment of the mayor for the unexpired portion of the term of the replaced member. Such appointment shall be made in accordance with the criteria established for original appointments. 
(g)  Removal. A member who has three (3) consecutive unexcused absences from commission meetings may be removed by the mayor. 
(h)  Duties and powers. 
(1)  Making recommendations to the mayor and common council regarding: 
a.  New or amended local laws or other regulations that the commission believes will further the goals of this local law; 
b.  Proposals for the acquisition of interests in real property; and 
c.  Proposed demolitions. 
(2)  Preparing reports and recommendations in response to referrals or requests from the common council. Promulgating commission policies, procedures, or bylaws that may be necessary for the commission to conduct its business, consistent with the scope and intent of this local law; 
(3)  Maintaining an inventory of designated historic landmarks or districts within the city; 
(4)  Conducting surveys and preparing maps, reports and recommendations regarding historic preservation policies, regulations and local law; 
(5)  Reviewing applications for alterations to or demolition of local landmarks or districts; 
(6)  Evaluating applications for certificates of appropriateness; 
(7)  Recommending designation of local landmarks or districts. 
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the applicant from obtaining review and approval from other city boards or commissions as required. 
(i)  Meetings. The commission shall hold regular monthly meetings. Additional meetings may be held at any time, upon public notice. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15; Ord. of > 2-1-16 , § 1; Ord. of > 5-9-16 , § 1)  
Sec. 9-6-3. - Designation of local landmarks or historic districts. 
(a)  Recommendations for establishing a local landmark or historic district. Such recommendations may be initiated through maps and documentation prepared by either of the following: 
(1)  The commission; or 
(2)  Petition by owners of property in fee simple wishing to establish a local landmark or historic district, which includes their property. 
(b)  Criteria. 
(1)  Individual landmarks. The commission may recommend designation an individual property as a local landmark if it: 
a.  Possesses special character, historic, aesthetic interest or value as part of the cultural, political, economic or social history of the city, region, state or nation; or 
b.  Derives its primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; or 
c.  Identifies with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history; or 
d.  Is a cemetery that derives its primary importance from graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; or 
e.  Is the birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding importance; or 
f.  Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style; or 
g.  Is the work of a noted designer, architect, or builder; or 
h.  The property has yielded or may be likely to yield information important to the study of the prehistory or history of the region, state, or nation. 
(2)  Historic districts. 
a.  The commission may recommend the designation of a group of properties as a historic district if the majority of properties contained therein meet one or more of the criteria for designation of an individual landmark. 
b.  Historic buildings, structures, and sites must possess identified historic or architectural merit of a degree warranting their preservation. 
c.  Districts may be geographic or thematic in nature. 
(c)  Decision making requirements. 
(1)  Public notice. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property proposed for designation, describing the property and announcing a public hearing by the commission to consider the designation. Notice shall be published in the official newspaper designated by the city, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing and on the city website. 
(2)  Public hearing. The commission shall hold a public hearing prior to rendering a decision on the proposed designation of an individual landmark or historic district. In addition to testimony or documentary evidence received at the public hearing, the record may also contain reports, public comments, expert testimony, or other evidence offered outside of the hearing, but submitted for the commission's consideration by the date of the hearing. 
(3)  Decision. Within sixty-two (62) [days] after the close of the public hearing, the commission shall issue a report to the common council recommending approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the requested designation. The report shall set forth the reasons for the recommendation. The commission's recommendation shall be deemed approved forty-five (45) days after it first appears on the common council's agenda, unless, by resolution, the council disapproves the proposed action. 
(4)  Notice of decision. Notice of the common council's decision shall be sent by the commission to the applicants and owners of a proposed property or, in the case of an approved historic district, notice shall be sent to the applicants and owners of all properties within the approved district, by certified mail return receipt requested. Failure to send any notice by mail to any property owner whose address is not on file with the assessor shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with the proposed designation. 
(d)  Stay on alteration or demolition. Once the commission has issued notice of a proposed designation, no demolition or building permits shall be issued for the subject property by the building commissioner until the commission has made its decision. 
(e)  Mapping of individual landmarks and historic districts. The commission shall classify and designate on a map all individual and local landmarks and the boundaries of all local historic districts. The map shall identify all buildings, structures, and sites within each historic district as historic or non-historic. 
(f)  Recording. The boundaries of each historic district and local landmark designated henceforth shall be mapped by the Commissioner of Planning, and shall be filed, in graphic and written form, in the City Clerk's Office for public inspection. Upon final designation, the Commission shall forward notice of each property designated as a landmark and the boundaries of each designated historic district to the office of the City Clerk and Assessor for recording. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15; Ord. of > 2-1-16 , §§ 2, 3; Ord. of > 5-9-16 , §§ 2, 3; L.L. No. 2, § 1, 4-1-19 )  
Sec. 9-6-4. - Repair and maintenance required. 
(a)  No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as an individual landmark or included in a historic district shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair. Maintenance shall be required, consistent with the Property Maintenance Code of New York State, Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and all other applicable local regulations. 
(b)  Nothing in this local law shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a historic landmark or property within a historic district that does not involve a change in design, building materials, color or outward appearance. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-5. - Classification of actions affecting designated local landmarks or districts. 
Any proposed exterior alteration, restoration, reconstruction, demolition, new construction, or relocation of a designated local landmark or property within a historic district, shall be reviewed and classified according to the action required. Upon the filing of an application, the commissioner of building shall classify it into one (1)of the following categories: 
(a)  Exempt actions. Exempt actions do not require a certificate of appropriateness. All applications determined to be exempt shall be forwarded to the commission for the record. Exempt actions must be classified as: 
(1)  A threat to public health and safety. The repair of conditions determined by the commissioner of building to pose an immediate danger to life, health or property shall be limited to securing the property and eliminating risk to life and health; or 
(2)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district, which does not involve a change in design, material, color, or outward appearance. 
(b)  Non-exempt actions. 
(1)  Minor alterations. Minor alterations are actions for which the applicant may seek approval of an administrative certificate of appropriateness. These actions are listed in section 9-6-6, below. 
(2)  Major alterations, demolitions or relocations. All other proposed actions affecting designated local landmarks or historic districts not determined to be exempt actions or minor alterations, shall be classified as major alterations. All major alterations require a certificate of appropriateness from the commission. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-6. - Administrative certificate of appropriateness for alteration, demolition, or new construction affecting landmarks or historic districts. 
Certain minor exterior alterations, restorations and material changes that do not have a substantial adverse impact on the historic character of the landmark or district, and which conform to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation, may be approved on behalf of the commission and issued an administrative certificate of appropriateness. Such approval shall be made by staff in consultation with the chair of the commission. However, no work authorized by an administrative certificate of appropriateness shall be commenced until the applicant obtains all required approvals from other city boards or commissions. 
(a)  [ Limitations .] Activities which may be eligible for an administrative certificate of appropriateness are limited to the following: 
(1)  Painting of exterior wooden or metal materials and previously painted masonry materials with colors that are pre-approved from time to time by the commission; 
(2)  Replacement of existing roofing materials with roofing materials original to the structure as supported by documentation; 
(3)  Building system components or elements (such as, but not limited to, components or elements associated with, HVAC, electrical, plumbing, fire protection and tele/data/video systems) that have to penetrate the building exterior to serve equipment within the building provided that the penetrations are minor in nature and do not occur at the front facade; 
(4)  Installation of new building systems (such as air conditioning units, generators, etc) when restricted to areas not visible from the public right of way and installed as to be reversible without resulting in damage to the historic structure; 
(5)  Replacement of existing building systems (such as air conditioning units, generators, etc) provided that the replacement does not exceed the existing system in size by more than ten (10) percent and is not visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(6)  Awnings. Installation of new awning fabric, without signage, to be canvas or treated fabric on an existing awning frame. 
(b)  Approval. Approval of an administrative certificate of appropriateness may be granted for a proposed project which city staff determines conforms to the activities listed above. An administrative certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for eighteen (18) months from the date it is issued. 
(c)  Denial and referral. If city staff determine that a proposed project does not to conform to the activities listed above, the application shall be forwarded to the commission for full review at the next available meeting. 
(d)  Extension. A one-time extension of an administrative certificate of appropriateness may be granted by staff for an additional period of up to an additional eighteen (18) months, provided the parameters of the project have not changed from those approved in the original administrative certificate of appropriateness and such certificate has not lapsed. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-7. - Certificate of appropriateness for alteration, demolition, or new construction affecting landmarks or historic districts. 
(a)  Permit required. No building permit shall be issued for proposed work classified as a non-exempt action as defined in section 9-6-5 until a certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the historic preservation commission. The certificate of appropriateness shall be a prerequisite to obtaining any building permit that may be required by any other ordinance or code of the city. Furthermore, no work authorized by a certificate of appropriateness shall be commenced until the applicant obtains all required approval from other city boards or commissions. 
(b)  Application. Prior to the commencement or any work requiring a certificate of appropriateness, the owner shall file a complete application for such a certificate with the department of building. The application shall contain: 
(1)  Name, corporation, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of applicant; 
(2)  Location and photographs of the subject property and all properties within five hundred (500) feet of its property line; 
(3)  Drawings of proposed changes, such as but not limited to elevation, perspective or scale drawings as appropriate; 
(4)  Samples of proposed color or material to be used; 
(5)  Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing showing the type of lettering to be used, all dimensions and colors, a description of materials to be used, method of illumination, and a plan showing the sign's location on the property; and 
(6)  Any other information which the commission may deem necessary in order to understand and visualize the proposed work. 
(c)  Criteria. 
(1)  Alteration or new construction. The commission's determination shall be based on the following: 
a.  Retention and minimal alteration of historic features; and 
b.  Compatibility. Any alteration of existing properties or new construction shall be compatible with the historic character of the structure and/or the surrounding historic district. 
In applying the principle of compatibility, the following criteria shall be employed: 
i.  The stated purposes of this title; 
ii.  The general design, character and appropriateness to the property of the proposed alteration or new construction with character being by form, proportion, structure, plan, style or material. General character refers to ideas of design and construction such as basic plan or form. Specific character refers to precise ways of combining particular kinds of materials; 
iii.  The importance of historic, architectural or other features to the significance of the property; 
iv.  Height in relation to the setting; 
v.  The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to the property itself, surrounding properties, and the neighborhood; 
vi.  Texture, materials, and color and their relation to similar features of other properties in the neighborhood; 
vii.  The position of the building or structure in relation to the street, public right-of-way and to other buildings and structures; 
viii.  The relationship of the width of a building to the height of the front elevation; 
ix.  Fenestration pattern and porches; 
x.  Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets: the relationship of a building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings; 
xi.  Roof shape; and 
xii.  Walls of enclosure. Continuity of appurtenances of a building or site, such as walls, wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, and building facades. 
(2)  Demolition or relocation. A certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation shall only be approved if the commission determines that the applicant has established a hardship by documenting each of the following: 
a.  The landmark is in a serious state of disrepair; which is not due to the waste or neglect of the property owner; 
b.  The alleged hardship is not self-created (a hardship is self-created when the applicant acquires the property subject to the restrictions from which the applicant seeks relief), which factor alone shall not preclude the approval of a certificate of appropriateness; 
c.  The landmark, and the lot upon which it was situated at time of designation, is incapable of earning a reasonable return as demonstrated by competent financial evidence; 
d.  The landmark cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, that could earn a reasonable return; 
e.  The alleged hardship is unique and does not apply to other landmarks; and 
f.  Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property have failed. 
A permit for demolition shall only be granted in connection with the approval of a site plan for a replacement project excluding surface parking lots. 
(d)  Decision making requirements. 
(1)  Public notice. Upon application for a certificate of appropriateness, a public notice of the proposal shall be posted by the owner or owner's representative and located on the property readable from a public street for a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. This notice must remain in place until a decision to approve or deny the certificate of appropriateness has been made. The notice shall specify the proposed work, the time and place of the public hearing, and to whom and by when any public comments are to be communicated. 
(2)  Public hearing. The commission shall hold a duly noticed public hearing prior to rendering a decision on any application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(3)  Determination. 
a.  The commission shall render a determination on the proposed certificate of appropriateness within sixty-two (62) days from the close of the public hearing. 
b.  All determinations of the commission shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for approving, denying, or modifying any application. 
c.  The determination shall be filed within five (5) business days with the city clerk, mailed to the applicant, and posted on the city's website. 
(e)  Term. Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for eighteen (18) months after the issuance of the certificate. A one-time extension of a certificate of appropriateness may be granted by staff for an additional period of up to an additional eighteen (18) months, provided the parameters of the project have not changed from those approved in the original certificate of appropriateness and the previous approval has not lapsed. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15; L.L. No. 2, § 2, 4-1-19 )  
Sec. 9-6-8. - Disaster recovery. 
In the event that designated historic resources are damaged during a declared disaster, the commission shall coordinate with the New York State Office of Emergency Management (NYSOEM) and/or the Federal Emergency Management Agency to ensure that all environmental and other applicable laws and procedures are followed during the recovery period. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-9. - Enforcement. 
All work performed pursuant to any certificate of appropriateness issued under this chapter shall conform to any requirements included therein. It shall be the duty of the building commissioner to inspect periodically any such work to assure compliance. In the event work is not being performed in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness or upon notification of such fact by the historic preservation commission, the building commissioner shall take appropriate action. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-10. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who demolishes alters, constructs, or permits a designated property to fall into a serious state of disrepair in violation of this chapter shall be required to restore the property and its site to its appearance prior to the violation in accordance with a plan approved by the commission. Any action to enforce this subsection shall be brought by the corporation counsel. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation and if convicted thereof may be liable for a fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-11. - Reconsideration. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the historic preservation commission relating to denial of a certificate of appropriateness may, within thirty (30) days of the decision, file a written application with the commission for review of the decision. Reviews shall be conducted based on the record that was before the commission and additional evidence relating to the following: 
The cost of alterations or replacement according to strict application of the design criteria is prohibitive in comparison with the cost of a reasonably compatible alternative; or 
The replacement of an existing feature on a building is necessary for safety reasons. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Sec. 9-6-12. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, clause or phrase in this local law, or if any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or portions of this local law, or any part thereof. The City of White Plains hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this local law, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(L.L. No. 1, § 1, 5-4-15)  
Chapter 9-7 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-7-1. - Statement of policy. 
The City of White Plains finds that having housing that is affordable to a range of income groups is necessary in order to ensure the continued social and economic diversity of its population, which is one of its defining characteristics. The City finds that Fair Market Rents are unaffordable to low and moderate income households, and that there is a shortage of affordable housing due to the high cost of existing housing, land, and construction in the region. 
In the interest of reducing the number of cost-burdened households (those spending more than 30% of gross income on housing costs), the City has established a policy requiring that Affordable Rental Housing be a component of the development of multi-family or mixed-use residential rental developments greater than ten (10) dwelling units, including the conversion of existing non-residential buildings to residential, or substantial renovation of vacant residential structures. 
( Ord. of 3-4-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 4-1-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-6-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 9-7-2. - Definitions. 
(A)  AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING: Rental housing for which the monthly rent is established using Westchester County Rent Limits published annually by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) which is rented to an Income Eligible Household. 
(B)  AFFORDABLE RENT: Monthly rent, based on income limits for Westchester County published annually by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), which is adjusted for unit-size, utilities, and amenities. 
(C)  AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM (ARHP): The program established by the City of White Plains to assist families with incomes between 50% and 99% of Area Median Income (AMI) to obtain rental housing in ARHP Applicable Rental Projects. The ARHP shall be administered by the White Plains Department of Planning, or other agency approved by the Common Council, and operated under the oversight of the Commissioner of Planning. 
(D)  AFFORDABLE HOUSING ASSISTANCE FUND (AHAF): A fund held and maintained by the City of White Plains which may be used for: down payment assistance; land acquisition or project construction expenses for the development or rehabilitation of affordable housing; program administration costs; and other actions taken for the furtherance of increasing affordable housing city-wide. 
(E)  AFFORDABLE UNITS: Dwelling units that are designated for rental to income qualified Households pursuant to these regulations. 
(F)  ANALYSIS OF IMPEDIMENTS TO FAIR HOUSING CHOICE (AI): A document published regularly by the Planning Department in compliance with HUD requirements, to further fair housing objectives. It analyzes impediments to fair housing, and it identifies strategies to reduce the effect of those impediments. 
(G)  APPLICANT: The person(s) under whose name the apartment will be leased. 
(H)  AREA MEDIAN INCOME (AMI): The middle of the income distribution, with equal parts falling below and above the median income. The Area Median Income (AMI) is defined herein as 100% of Westchester County Area Median Income as reported annually by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and adjusted for Household size. 
(I)  ARHP ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT: City of White Plains Planning Department or other agency contracted by the City of White Plains to administer the ARHP, with oversight retained by the Commissioner of Planning. 
(J)  ARHP APPLICABLE RENTAL PROJECT: Any multi-family rental or mixed-use development that includes ten (10) or more residential rental units including new construction, conversion of non-residential structures to residential use, or substantial renovation of vacant residential structures. 
(K)  HOUSEHOLD: Related and/or unrelated persons living together in a rental unit as a single housekeeping unit, sharing rent and unit amenities, as permitted under the Maximum Permitted Occupancy for the unit. 
(L)  HOUSEHOLD ASSETS: Monies in savings or checking accounts, certificates of deposit, trusts, stocks and bonds, and the value of any real property, less outstanding debt. 
(M)  HOUSEHOLD INCOME: The total income from all sources of all persons in the Household over eighteen (18) years of age and not registered full time at an accredited college, university or trade school. 
(N)  INCOME ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD: A Household with an annual income between 50% and 99% of the AMI for Westchester County, as adjusted annually by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(1)  Household Income between 50% and 59% of AMI will qualify for an Affordable Unit that has rent based on 50% of the AMI. 
(2)  Household Income between 60% and 79% of AMI will qualify for an Affordable Unit that has rent based on 60% of the AMI. 
(3)  Household Income between 80% and 99% of AMI will qualify for an Affordable Unit that has rent based on 80% of the AMI. 
(4)  An Applicant may rent an ARHP unit in a higher rent designation as long as the rent does not exceed 39% of the gross monthly Household Income. 
(5)  Applicants with rental subsidies may qualify for an ARHP unit with an annual Household Income below the required AMI levels provided the combination of income and subsidy is sufficient to cover the monthly Affordable Rent. 
(O)  IN-LIEU HOUSING FEE: Fee paid to the Affordable Housing Assistance Fund (AHAF) in lieu of providing Affordable Units in an ARHP Applicable Rental Project. 
(P)  MARKET RATE UNIT: Any housing not restricted to low- and moderate-income households that may rent at any price. 
(Q)  MAXIMUM PERMITTED OCCUPANCY: The maximum number of people that can occupy a dwelling unit as determined by the Commissioner of Building based on the White Plains Building and Fire Prevention Code. 
(R)  PLANNING DEPARTMENT: The City of White Plains Department of Planning. 
( Ord. of 3-4-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 4-1-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-6-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 9-7-3. - Affordable housing requirements. 
(A)  Affordable Housing Obligation by Project Size. 
(1)  ARHP Applicable Rental Projects approved after September 1, 2019 []* are required to provide Affordable Units in accordance with the following table. Projects containing 15 or more units may select either the 8% or 12% set-aside requirement. 
Total Units in 
Development 	Number/Percentage of 
required ARHP units 	Percentage of 
units at 
designated AMI 
Level 	AMI Level 
1-9 	None 	— 	— 
10-14 	1 	100% 	60% AMI 
15+ 	12% 	100% 	80% AMI 
	8% 	80% 
20% 	60% AMI 
50% AMI 
 
(2)  When selection of the 8% set-aside option results in an affordable housing requirement of less than 5 units, all units must be provided at the 60% AMI level. 
(3)  If calculating the number of required Affordable Units results in a decimal of 0.5 or greater, the number of affordable dwelling units required shall be the next greater whole number. 
(B)  Term of Affordability. The dedicated ARHP Affordable Units must remain affordable in perpetuity, for the life of the project. 
(C)  Affordable Unit Allocation by Size and Percent of AMI. 
(1)  Affordable Units must be provided onsite and allocated by unit size (bedroom count) in the same proportion as the Market Rate Units. 
(2)  Affordable Units shall be distributed throughout the building(s), except that for any building ten (10) or more stories in height, the top four floors may be reserved for Market Rate Units. 
(3)  Each Affordable Unit in a development shall be designated as a 50% unit, a 60% unit, or an 80% unit, and it shall retain that designation regardless of whether tenant income fluctuation results in changes to Affordable Rent. 
(D)  Marketing. The marketing of Affordable Units shall be the responsibility of the developer and/or owner, and shall be in compliance with Federal Fair Housing Laws and in consideration of the recommendations and strategies of the City's Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing ("AI"). 
(E)  Dwelling Unit Size and Quality. 
(1)  The Affordable Unit(s) shall be of comparable square footage to the Market Rate Units. 
(2)  Affordable Units must be maintained and updated on the same schedule and in the same manner as Market Rate Units. 
(3)  All tenants in the Affordable Units shall have access to the same amenities as the tenants in Market Rate Units. 
(F)  Occupancy. An ARHP Affordable Unit must be the primary residence of the Household. Only persons listed on the ARHP application or recertification form shall occupy an ARHP unit. Any change to Household composition must be reported to the ARHP Administrative Agent. Affordable Units may not be sublet. 
(G)  Timing of Construction. The Affordable Units shall be constructed and issued certificates of occupancy concurrently with, or prior to, the Market Rate Units in the development. If a project has phased construction, Affordable Units shall be provided on a pro rata basis. 
(H)  Methods of Meeting the Affordable Housing Obligation. The affordable housing requirement may be satisfied through one or both of the following methods: 
(1)  Inclusion of Affordable Units within an ARHP development as described in Section C above; or 
(2)  Payment of a fee-in-lieu of providing Affordable Units within the ARHP development. A buy-out of up to 25 Affordable Units is permitted. The per unit fee, regardless of unit size (bedroom count) or AMI designation shall be 1.25 times (1.25X) the HUD Westchester County AMI for a Household of four for the year in which the project is approved. Any remaining Affordable Units required within the project must be allocated at a pro-rata basis with respect to unit size (bedroom count) and AMI designation. 
Applicants seeking a buy-out of their entire affordable housing obligation must calculate their Affordable Unit requirement at 12% of total project units. Applicants selecting the 8% set-aside option may choose to buy-out a portion of their affordable housing obligation provided a minimum of 5 ARHP Affordable Units are constructed within the project. 
Fee-in-lieu payments shall be made prior to the issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy for the development and will be deposited into the Affordable Housing Assistance Fund. If a project has phased construction, payments for Affordable Units shall be provided on a pro-rata basis. 
Projects approved prior to the adoption of this section that have yet to receive a Certificate of Occupancy (temporary or permanent) may opt to buy-out of up to half of their affordable rental unit obligation without requiring an amendment to existing site plan approval. The per unit fee for retroactive buy-out shall be 1.25 times (1.25x) the HUD Westchester County AMI for a Household of four for the year in which the fee-in-lieu payment is made. Remaining Affordable Units must be provided within the development at a pro-rata share of the full Affordable Unit requirement designated in the site plan approval regarding unit size (bedroom count) and AMI. 
Projects receiving a residential density bonus in exchange for the inclusion of Affordable Units within the development per Section 5.3 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations of the Zoning Ordinance may not buy-out of any portion of their affordable housing obligation. 
(I)  Rental Terms. 
(1)  ARHP tenants are subject to the same leasing qualifications as those required for market rate tenants. 
(2)  Application fees charged by the developer or management agency (including the charge for any credit check) shall not exceed 5 percent of the monthly rent of the applicable ARHP Affordable Unit. Except for a security deposit, additional up-front fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the monthly rent. 
(3)  The monthly rental rate for the ARHP Affordable Units shall not be more than the Monthly Housing Cost Limits published by HUD for Westchester County, as adjusted annually and should not be higher than the rent for Market Rate Units. Rent will be adjusted annually, based on Westchester County Rent Limits published annually by HUD. 
(4)  Tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as stated on the lease. Tenants may be charged fees for optional services they choose, such as pet or parking fees associated with the rental in the same manner as other tenants of the building. However, any mandatory fees shall be considered a part of the rent and there will be a corresponding reduction in the ARHP monthly rent. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the Affordable Rent without the express written approval of the Commissioner of Planning. 
(5)  A written lease is required for each ARHP rental unit, and a copy shall be provided to the ARHP Administrative Agent. The lease shall state which utilities are the tenant's responsibility, if any. 
(6)  All Household members 18 years and older must sign the lease. 
(7)  Under no circumstances shall the Affordable Unit premises be occupied by, subleased, or boarded to anyone other than the lease holder(s). 
(8)  Renewal of a lease shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the original lease and to the conditions of Federal, State, or Westchester County provisions that may be imposed by the terms of the original funding agreements for the development, and the determination of continued eligibility by the ARHP Administrative Agent. 
( Ord. of 3-4-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 4-1-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-6-19, § 1 ) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* ARHP Applicable Rental Projects providing affordable housing pursuant to a site plan approval granted prior to September 1, 2019, remain subject to the terms and conditions of the resolution approving the project. For subsequent amendments to site plans granted prior to September 1, 2019, the regulations herein will be applied to any increase in dwelling units beyond the previously approved plan. 
 
Sec. 9-7-4. - Rental unit assignments and occupancy. 
(A)  Rental Unit Assignments. Within each ARHP Project, individual Affordable Units will be designated for occupancy by a Household that is income qualified, as follows: 
	Rental Unit Designation 
Household Income 	50% 	60% 	80% 
50% - 59% AMI 	* 		
60% - 79% AMI 		* 	
80% - 99% AMI 			* 
 
(1)  Household Income between 50% and 59% of AMI will qualify for an Affordable Unit that has rent based on 50% of the AMI. 
(2)  Household Income between 60% and 79% of AMI will qualify for an Affordable Unit that has rent based on 60% of the AMI. 
(3)  Household Income between 80% and 99% of AMI will qualify for an Affordable Unit that has rent based on 80% of the AMI. 
(4)  An Applicant may rent an ARHP Unit in a higher rent designation as long as the rent does not exceed 39% of the gross monthly Household Income. 
(5)  Applicants with rental subsidies may qualify for an ARHP Affordable Unit with an annual Household Income below the required AMI levels provided the combination of income and subsidy is sufficient to cover the monthly Affordable Rent. 
(B)  Occupancy. ARHP tenants will be assigned a unit size based on the number of persons in the Household, as follows: 
Household Size 	Studio 	One Bedroom 	Two Bedrooms 	Three Bedrooms 
1 	* 	* 		
2 	* 	* 	* 	
3 		* 	* 	* 
4 			* 	* 
5 or more 				* 
 
( Ord. of 3-4-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 4-1-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-6-19, § 1 )  
Sec. 9-7-5. - Qualification, application, and recertification. 
(A)  Income and Asset Qualification. The ARHP Administrative Agent determines income eligibility for participation in the Program. Lease offerings to eligible Applicants are subject to the discretion of the building owner, and shall be based on the same criteria as applied to Applicants for Market Rate Units. 
(1)  Income Sources. All Households applying to the White Plains ARHP must have an annual income that falls between 50% and 99% of the Area Median Income level for the appropriate Household size listed in the Westchester County Income Limits published annually by the HUD. Applicants with rental subsidies may qualify for an ARHP unit with an annual Household Income below the required AMI levels provided the combination of income and subsidy is sufficient to cover the monthly Affordable Rent. 
(2)  Household Asset Limits. The combined value of Household Assets must not exceed the 100% AMI for that Household size, as reported annually by US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Retirement and dedicated education savings accounts will not be counted toward assets. 
(B)  Application. 
(1)  Applications for the ARHP can be obtained from City of White Plains Website at: www.cityofwhiteplains.com/ARHP or at the Planning Department Office. 
(2)  All Applicants must submit a completed application and the following income documentation for each person 18 years and older who will reside in the apartment: 
(a)  Most recent Federal and State Income Tax Returns; 
(b)  Copy of forms reporting unearned income (child support, alimony, SSI, SSD, investment income, dividends, etc.); 
(c)  Copy of three (3) most recent bank statements; 
(d)  Copies of pay check stubs covering two months prior to application submission; 
(e)  Copy of Pension Award statement, if any; 
(f)  Copy of Social Security Statement, if any; 
(g)  Enrollment verification from an accredited school for any full-time student over age 18; and 
(h)  An Employment Verification Form completed by the Employer of each Household member over 18 years old. 
An application will not be accepted until all of the above-listed documents have been submitted. 
The ARHP Administrative Agent reserves the right to request additional information to verify/confirm any information required above. 
Completed applications and supporting documents can be mailed, emailed, hand delivered, or faxed to the Planning Department. 
(3)  Applications submitted to the Department of Planning will be date and time-stamped. 
(4)  The ARHP Administrative Agent will examine each application in the order received to determine preliminary program eligibility, Household size, and unit size qualification. 
(5)  The ARHP Administrative Agent will notify each Applicant of their eligibility. 
(a)  Those determined ineligible for the White Plains ARHP will be notified that they are ineligible and the reason for such determination. 
(b)  Those determined eligible for the participation in the ARHP will be notified of their eligibility for a specified unit size. When a unit of appropriate size becomes available, the Applicant will be notified by the ARHP Administrative Agent. 
(C)  Recertification of Eligibility for Continued Participation in the ARHP. Recertification of eligibility will occur every two years. At least 60 days prior to the recertification date, the ARHP Administrative Agent will notify the tenant to complete a recertification form and submit all required documentation in order to determine continued income eligibility for participation in the program. 
(1)  Changes to Income and/or Household Size. 
(a)  Tenants have up to one year to move to a smaller or larger unit due to a change in Household size. 
(b)  If Household Income has increased to a higher AMI category, the rent will be based on the higher AMI category. 
(c)  If Household Income has decreased to a lower AMI category, the rent will remain in the same AMI category as the most recent recertification. 
(d)  If Household Income is 100% AMI or greater, the tenant will be determined ineligible for continued participation in the ARHP. 
(2)  Determination of Ineligibility. If an ARHP tenant is determined ineligible upon recertification, the tenant must vacate the ARHP unit within 90 days. 
(D)  Rent Adjustments. Rents will be adjusted annually. Adjustments to rent and utility allowances shall be made by the City for the new lease term, based on the HUD rent limits and utility allowances established for Westchester County. 
(E)  Landlord Notification. Based on tenant recertification, the landlord shall be notified in writing by the ARHP Administrative Agent of any changes to tenant eligibility and changes to rent. 
( Ord. of 3-4-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 4-1-19, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-6-19, § 1 )  
Chapter 9-9 - SPECIAL RESIDENCE FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Group homes, § 9-6-25.04; carriage rooms in multiple residences, § 9-6-26.16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-9-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter the following words, shall have the meaning ascribed to them below: 
(1)  Community residence: A residential facility for the mentally disabled operated pursuant to the Mental Hygiene Law and regulations promulgated thereunder, including an alcoholism facility, a hostel, a halfway house and any other such facility as defined in such regulations, and any similar facilities operated under the supervision of federal departments and agencies. 
(2)  Domiciliary care facility: A private proprietary nursing home, a private proprietary convalescent home, a private proprietary home for adults, a residence for adults, an intermediate care facility, a family home for adults, a home for the aged, a home for adults, a group residence and any other residential facility for adults as defined in the Social Services Law or regulations promulgated thereunder, and any similar facilities operated under the supervision of federal departments and agencies. 
(3)  Health officer: The commissioner of the Westchester Department of Health or his authorized representative or agent and, when appropriate, an authorized representative of the state department of health. 
(4)  Licensee: A person who holds a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Motel: A building or group of buildings used for individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing accessory off-street parking facilities. 
(6)  Residential hotel: A building wherein suites are principally designed for continued occupancy by individual guests or families and in which a dining room may be maintained, primarily to serve the occupants of said building and in which not more than two (2) rooms are maintained for transient guests. 
(7)  Rooming house: Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, sister or brother, grandfather or grandmother, or grandchildren of the owner or operator. 
(8)  Rooming unit: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habital unit, used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, without a kitchen, and whether or not cooking or eating facilities are provided. 
(9)  Transient hotel: A building in which rooms are maintained for transient guests, and which may maintain a dining room, public bar, ballroom or other place of assembly accessible to the general public. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 1)  
Sec. 9-9-2. - Classification. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, residential hotels, transient hotels, motels, rooming houses, domiciliary health care facilities, and community residences shall be classified into three (3) major types determined by the number of sleeping accommodations as follows: 
(1)  Type 1—Sixteen (16) or more sleeping accommodations. 
(2)  Type 2—Seven (7) to fifteen (15) sleeping accommodations. 
(3)  Type 3—Three (3) to six (6) sleeping accommodations. 
(b)  In addition to the above classifications, each facility shall be classified as to its specific use pursuant to the definitions above and those contained in the Social Services Law, Mental Hygiene Law and in the appropriate state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 2(b), (c))  
Sec. 9-9-3. - Guest register. 
Every licensee shall keep or cause to be kept in permanent form a register in which there shall be recorded in ink the true name and names in ordinary use and the residence of each and every person renting or occupying a room in the licensee's establishment therein together with a true and accurate record of the room or rooms assigned to such person or persons and of the date and hour when such room or rooms is or are assigned. The register shall be kept in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner of building and shall be open to inspection by guests or any peace officer of the city, the county, the state, or the United States. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 8)  
Sec. 9-9-4. - Registration in true name. 
No person shall write or cause to be written or if in charge of a register, knowingly permit to be written in a residential hotel, transient hotel, motel, rooming house, domiciliary care facility or community residence, any other or different name or designation other than the true name or name in ordinary use of the person registering or causing himself to be registered therein. No person occupying such room shall fail to register or fail to cause himself to be registered. A notice of this provision shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 9)  
Sec. 9-9-5. - Identification of rooming units. 
Every person conducting a residential hotel, transient hotel, motel, rooming house, domiciliary care facility for adults and community residence shall cause each rooming unit in such facility to be numbered in a plain, conspicuous and legible manner. Such numbers shall be placed on the outside of the outdoor door of the rooming unit, and no two (2) rooming units shall bear the same number. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 11)  
Sec. 9-9-6. - Water closets, lavatories, bathtubs or showers. 
(a)  At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each six (6) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of the said facilities, except that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half of the required number of water closets greater than one. 
(b)  All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. 
(c)  Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with heated and unheated water at all times. 
(d)  No such facilities shall be located in a basement, except by written approval of the county health department. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 13) 
Cross reference— Location of toilet rooms, § 9-5-502.6.2.  
Sec. 9-9-7. - Cooking and dining. 
(a)  Cooking in a rooming unit shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Communal cooking and dining facilities in a rooming house shall be permitted provided they comply with all applicable state and local laws and are approved by the health officer. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 14)  
Sec. 9-9-8. - Locks for doors. 
Rooming unit doors shall have operating locks to ensure privacy. This provision may be waived in connection with domiciliary care facilities and community residences whereby the nature of such facility, locks would not be in the best interests of the residents. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 15)  
Sec. 9-9-9. - Bed linen and towels. 
The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. Linens and towels shall be supplied in domiciliary care facilities and community residences in compliance with the requirements of the state agency supervising those facilities, and the health officer. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 16)  
Sec. 9-9-10. - Floor space for sleeping rooms. 
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least eighty (80) square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least sixty (60) square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 17)  
Sec. 9-9-11. - Egress. 
Every rooming unit shall have access to a public hall which has two (2) or more safe and unobstructed exits leading independently to safe open space at ground level, as required by law. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 18)  
Sec. 9-9-12. - Caretaker. 
Every Type 1 or Type 2 licensed premises must have a resident caretaker or manager on the premises at all times. Such resident caretaker or manager must be designated in writing as agent of the owner of the premises for the receipt of legal process. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 10)  
Sec. 9-9-13. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
All rooms and facilities licensed to be used under the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the light, ventilation, cleanliness, fire protection, sanitary facilities, food preparation and storage and structural requirements of chapters 9-2, 9-5, 9-6 and 9-8 of this Code, the Sanitary Code of the County of Westchester, and all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. The commissioner of building, or his representative, shall have access to any premises licensed in accordance with this ordinance at all reasonable times to determine and investigate such code compliance. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 12)  
Sec. 9-9-14. - Entry powers of public officials. 
The members of the police, fire, public safety and health departments shall have access at all reasonable times to all hotels, motels, rooming houses, domiciliary care facilities and community residences for the purpose of investigating any complaint of enforcing any law, ordinance or regulation relating thereto. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 19)  
Sec. 9-9-15. - Enforcement. 
This chapter shall be enforced by the commissioner of building. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 22)  
Sec. 9-9-16. - Violations. 
Any person who himself or itself or by his agent or employee shall knowingly make any false statement in any application for a permit or license under the provisions of this chapter or shall conduct, keep, manage or operate a residential hotel, transient hotel, motel, rooming house, domiciliary care facility or community residences without a license or who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or rules or regulations made pursuant thereto or who, having had his or its license revoked, shall continue to conduct, keep, manage or operate such facility as defined by this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense and each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 20) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 9-9-17—9-9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 9-9-26. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage, operate or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated, either as an owner, lessee, agent or attorney, a residential hotel, transient hotel, motel, rooming house, domiciliary care facility or community residence within the city without first having obtained and paid for, and having in full force and effect, a license for such operation issued by the commissioner of building. Such license shall be in addition to any license, permit or certificate issued by officials of the county or the state. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 2(a))  
Sec. 9-9-27. - Application and issuance. 
(a)  Any person, desiring to procure a license as herein required, shall file with the commissioner of building, a written application upon forms furnished by the commissioner in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner. 
(b)  The commissioner of building shall cause and request inspections to be made to determine compliance by the applicant with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations, including, but not limited to chapters 9-2, 9-5, 9-6 and 9-8 of this Code and the Sanitary Code of the County of Westchester. 
(c)  In causing and requesting these inspections, the commissioner of building shall make specific reference of the application to the Department of Health of Westchester County or, when appropriate, the state department of health and the public safety commissioner. 
(d)  Any officer or employee of the city's department of public safety or department of building or the Department of Health of the County of Westchester, so far as it may be necessary for the performance of his duties, shall have the right to enter any residential hotel, transient hotel, motel, rooming house, domiciliary care facility or community residence in said city upon showing his credentials of office. Application for a license herein shall constitute consent by the applicant to such entry. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of the results of the various inspections, written recommendations from the county department of health and the commissioner of public safety and after determining that the planned use complies with all applicable laws, codes, ordinances and regulations, and the payment of the proper fee, the commissioner of building shall issue a license to conduct a residential hotel, transient hotel, motel, rooming house, domiciliary care facility or community residence. Said license shall be numbered in the order issued and shall state clearly and legibly thereon the location, date of issue, date of expiration, type of location, fee paid, name of licensee and the name of the member or person in charge, the number and location of the rooms to be used for the purpose so licensed and the legal number of occupants who may be accommodated therein. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, §§ 3, 4(a))  
Sec. 9-9-28. - Expiration and transfer. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire at the end of each calendar year and shall be personal to the applicant and not be transferable. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 4(b), (c))  
Sec. 9-9-29. - Fees. 
The fees for licenses to conduct any residential hotel, transient hotel, motel, rooming house, domiciliary care facility or community residence shall be as follows: 
(1)  Type 1 license, three hundred dollars ($300.00); 
(2)  Type 2 license, two hundred dollars ($200.00); 
(3)  Type 3 license, one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 5; Ord. of 7-6-87, § 1)  
Sec. 9-9-30. - Defacing, mutilation, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mutilate, destroy, or in any way alter a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 6(b))  
Sec. 9-9-31. - Display. 
Every licensee shall immediately display his license and keep the same displayed while in force in a conspicuous place in the office or hall of the premises licensed. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 6(a))  
Sec. 9-9-32. - Revocation. 
The commissioner of building may at any time after giving notice to the licensee and providing an opportunity to the licensee to be heard, revoke any license for any false statement contained in any application for such license, or for violation of any applicable law, ordinance, code or regulation. The commissioner of building shall cause notice of such hearing and the reason or reasons therefor to be served upon the persons named in the application as the licensee and also upon the owner of record of the premises so licensed. Said service shall be by certified mail, with return receipt, directed to the licensee at the licensed premises and/or to the owner at the address of said owner last known to the commissioner, or by personal service. Revocation of a domiciliary care facility's or community residence's state license or certificate shall result in the automatic revocation of a license issued to it pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 11-1-76, § 7)  
Chapter 9-10 - OUTDOOR SIGNS AND AWNINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 , amended Ch. 9-10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9-10, §§ 9-10-1—9-10-51, pertained to sinilar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 4-21-75, § 1(1—4), 1(5)(A—D), 1(6), 1(7)(A—H), 1(8—14); Ord. of 3-15-76, § 1; Ord. of 1-2-79, §§ 1—5, 7—11; Ord. of 8-6-79, § 1; Ord. of 5-18-81, § 1; Ord. of 7-3-85, §§ 1—4; Ord. of 7-6-87, § 1;,Ord. of 2-6-89, § 1; Ord. of 3-3-97, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-98, § 1; Ord. of 4-3-00, § 1; Ord. of 3-6-06, § 1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-10-1. - Short title. 
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance." 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-2. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this Sign Ordinance shall have the meanings set forth in this Section. Words and phrases not defined in this Section but defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of White Plains shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in this Chapter. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this Sign Ordinance. 
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall mean as indicated below: 
(a)  ANIMATED SIGN: Any Sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
(b)  AWNING: A roof-like shelter made of fabric or other similar material over or adjoining a door, window, entrance or outdoor service area attached to a rigid or retractable frame and supported entirely from a wall of a building. 
(c)  BANNER: Any Sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is temporarily mounted to a building or structure. National, state or municipal Flags shall not be considered banners. 
(d)  BEACON: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
(e)  BILLBOARD: Any Sign whose display face exceeds eight (8) square feet, is on a permanent structure, and meets any one of the following criteria: (a) it is used for the display of off-site commercial messages; (b) it is used for general advertising or advertising for hire; or (c) the sign structure constitutes a principal, separate or secondary use of the land, as opposed to an accessory or auxiliary use of the land. 
(f)  BOX SIGN: Any Sign attached to a wall, structure or building wall that shows or displays text and/or logo symbols that are painted or silkscreened or made of vinyl or similar material applied to the face of a translucent panel on an internally illuminated or non-illuminated box or cabinet. 
(g)  BUILDING MARKER: Any Sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
(h)  BUILDING SIGN: Any Sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. 
(i)  BUNTING: A Banner that displays no written purpose or identity. 
(j)  BUSINESS SIGN: Any Sign which directs attention to a business, industry, profession, entertainment or service, that is conducted, maintained, sold or offered on the premises where the sign is located. 
(k)  CANOPY: A roof-like shelter made of rigid material or fabric or similar material that is attached to a rigid frame over or adjoining a door, entrance or outdoor service area and that is supported at one end by a building and which may be supported at the other end by stanchions anchored to the ground. 
(l)  CANOPY SIGN: Any Sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. 
(m)  CHANGEABLE SIGN: A Sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this Chapter. 
(n)  CITY: The City of White Plains. 
(o)  COMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Any Sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
(p)  COMMISSIONER: The City of White Plains Commissioner of Building or his/her duly authorized representative. 
(q)  DECORATIVE TRIM: The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or irregular form which are not part of the building or structure and which are attached to part of a Sign. 
(r)  DISPLAY SURFACE: The total area made available by the Sign for the purpose of displaying the advertising message. 
(s)  DISPLAY WINDOW: Any glass or other translucent material comprising a panel, window or door through which a display, said display being in conformance with such guidelines as may be established by the Design Review Board, and/or the interior of the premises would be visible to the general public from any public street or sidewalk area. 
(t)  ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of Wall Signs. "Erect" shall not mean or include repairs. 
(u)  FLAG: Any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a government or political subdivision. 
(v)  GROUND SIGN: Any Sign supported by a structure or supports that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground that is independent from any building or other structure. 
(w)  ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any Sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electricity. 
(x)  INCIDENTAL SIGN: A Sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the Location on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," and other similar directives. 
(y)  LOCATION: Any lot, premises, building wall or any structure whatsoever upon which a Sign is erected, constructed, painted or maintained. Two (2) street fronts shall be deemed two (2) locations. 
(z)  MONUMENT SIGN: Any Sign that is placed on, and anchored in the ground with no separation between the bottom of the Sign and grade that is independent from any building or other structure. 
(aa)  NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any Sign that does not conform to the requirements of this Sign Ordinance. 
(bb)  NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material which will not ignite or actively support combustion in a surrounding temperature of twelve hundred (1200) degrees Fahrenheit during an exposure of five (5) minutes. 
(cc)  PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind (e.g. bunting). 
(dd)  PERSON: Any natural person, association, company, corporation, firm, organization or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
(ee)  POLE SIGN: A Ground Sign which is affixed to a single upright pole without guys, braces or other supporting framework. 
(ff)  PORTABLE SIGN: Any Sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a Sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, Signs designed to be transported by means of wheel signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board Signs; balloons used as Signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and Signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right of way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
(gg)  PROJECTING SIGN: Any Sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than fifteen (15) inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
(hh)  ROOF SIGN: Any Sign erected and constructed wholly on and/or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, or extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
(ii)  RESIDENTIAL SIGN: Any Sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advising of services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(jj)  RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any areas dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(kk)  SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
(ll)  SIGN LIGHTER: A light fixture mounted to the façade of a building, wall or structure that is designed to illuminate a Sign on the same facade. 
(mm)  SUSPENDED SIGN: A Sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
(nn)  TEMPORARY SIGN: Any Sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted including a Sign, Banner, Pennant, poster or display constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, vinyl, wood or other like material that is intended to or appears to be intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, including, but not limited to, Signs for construction projects, political campaigns, garage/yard sales, and real estate sales, leasing and rentals. 
(oo)  WALL MOUNTED SALE OR LEASE SIGN — A Sign permitted under the special circumstances described in Section 9-10-45 of this Chapter. 
(pp)  WALL SIGN: Any Sign attached parallel to an exterior wall, or recessed into an exterior wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one (1) sign surface. 
(qq)  WINDOW SIGN: Any Sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to identify a business or communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed within two (2) feet of the inside surface of a window or upon the inside window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-3. - Enforcement. 
This Chapter shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Building or his/her duly authorized representative. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-4. - Compliance required. 
No Sign shall be erected or maintained in the City except in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-5. - Effect of other ordinances. 
The erection of all Signs shall be subject to all applicable City zoning ordinance restrictions and building code requirements. Whenever conflict exists the most restrictive shall control, provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit business Signs otherwise in compliance with this Chapter at any location lawfully devoted to a nonconforming business use. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-6. - Existing signs. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) below, all Signs constructed, erected and existing as of March 6, 2017 may remain, provided, however, that all Signs shall comply with and be subject to all of the provisions of this Chapter with respect to annual inspections, maintenance and safety. All replacements of Signs shall comply with this Chapter, except that approval by the Design Review Board shall not be required for the direct replacement or repair of a Sign that was previously approved by the Design Review Board and was erected pursuant to a permit issued by the Department of Building. 
(b)  All Window Signs constructed, erected and existing as of March 6, 2017 may remain, provided, however, that any Window Sign that is not in conformance with this Chapter shall be removed upon the change of use or tenancy or the reconstruction or renovation of the premises where such Window Sign is located. 
(c)  All Temporary Signs shall conform in all respects with this Chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-7. - Location restrictions. 
No Sign shall be erected, maintained or constructed so as to obstruct any fire escape, window, door or other required opening. No Sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape or shall be so placed as to interfere with an opening which is required for ventilation. No Sign shall be erected in such a manner as to confuse or obstruct the view or interpretation of any official traffic sign, signal or device. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-8. - Design. 
All Signs and supporting structure shall be designed in accordance with the minimum requirements of this Code, the NYS Building Code and the White Plains Supplemental Building Code. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-9. - Windload. 
All Signs exposed to wind pressure shall be so constructed as to withstand a minimum wind pressure standards and requirements as set forth in the NYS Building Code. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-10. - Electrical requirements. 
(a)  No electrical Sign shall be erected without having the proper underwriters' label attached thereto and each such sign shall be constructed in accordance with the "Standards for Safety-Electric Signs" being Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., Standard No. UL 48 and any successors and amendments thereto. 
(b)  Electrification of any Sign shall be done only by a licensed electrician after necessary permits have been secured. 
(c)  Sign Lighters may project not more than eighteen (18) inches beyond the building line or property line. 
(d)  All color lighting shall avoid the use of traffic red and traffic green; and no green or red colors shall be used in signs which, in the opinion of the Commissioner, are so located as to obscure or detract from the effectiveness of visibility of traffic control lights. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-11. - Materials. 
Except as otherwise permitted by this Chapter, all Signs shall be constructed of Noncombustible Materials, except as follows: 
(1)  Ground Signs or Pole Signs of wood construction or other approved combustible materials. 
(2)  Wall Signs attached to buildings may be made of wood or other combustible materials as may be approved by the Commissioner so long as such Signs are mounted on metal or noncombustible backing and installed in full compliance with building code requirements. No such wood or combustible Wall Signs shall be internally illuminated. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-11.1. - Maintenance. 
The owner or tenant of a building or premises for which a permit is issued to Erect a Sign, Awning or Canopy shall properly maintain such Sign, Awning or Canopy. All Signs, Awnings and Canopies, together with their framing, supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in repair and proper state of preservation. The display surfaces of all Signs, Awnings and Canopies shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times, free from paint scaling or breaks, tears and defacing. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-11.2. - Restoration. 
At such time that a Wall Sign is removed from the facade of a building, the facade shall be restored to match the existing condition of the wall area or the entire wall shall be refinished. All previous mounting holes, conduit penetrations and ghosting images shall be removed. The building owner shall be required to assume sole responsibility for the restoration of the building facade within ninety (90) days after the existing Wall Sign is removed, provided, however, that said ninety (90) day period shall be tolled during holidays or during such other periods that street opening or obstruction work and construction and building is not permitted by the Department of Public Works and/or Department of Building. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Secs. 9-10-12, 9-10-13. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-10-14. - Awnings and canopies. 
(a)  All Awnings, whether fixed or movable, shall be securely attached to and supported by a building wall. No other means of support will be approved. 
(b)  Fixed Awnings. 
(1)  A fixed awning may project up to twelve (12) inches over the Right-of-Way as long as the bottom of the awning is at least eight (8) feet above grade 
(2)  A fixed awning may project up to fifteen (15) inches over the Right-of-Way as long as the bottom of the awning is at least ten (10) feet above grade. 
(c)  Moveable Awnings. No part of a moveable Awning or its supporting frame, shall be less than seven (7) feet above the Right-of-Way over which it is erected. 
(d)  No Awning shall be erected to extend to within eighteen (18) inches of the curb line. 
(e)  An establishment's name may appear on an Awning. Subject to specific approval by the Design Review Board, a trademark, insignia or symbol may appear on an Awning. No advertising shall appear on any Awning. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-15. - Functions of design review board. 
(a)  All Signs, Awnings and Canopies must be approved by the Design Review Board before a permit may be issued for installation, except that such approval shall not be required for the direct replacement or repair of a Sign, Awning or Canopy that was previously approved and erected, or as otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance or this Chapter. In the interest of public safety, health and general welfare, the Design Review Board shall adopt such measures which are reasonable and appropriate with regard to: 
(1)  The character of the district. 
(2)  The peculiar suitability for the particular use. 
(3)  The direction of building development. 
(4)  Special character or aesthetic value. 
(b)  In addition, the Design Review Board shall determine that any Sign when erected: 
(1)  Shall have an appropriate relationship as to size and appearance to the building to which it is attached and adjacent buildings and signs, or any other location where it is erected, and shall not discredit or compete with the architecture of the surroundings, but shall be congruent with it. 
(2)  Shall only include a name and address and, may, subject to specific approval by the Design Review Board, include a trademark, insignia or symbol. 
(3)  Shall not impair or dominate the visual effectiveness of a neighboring Sign of another business. 
(4)  Shall not show advertising, brand names, phone numbers and web addresses 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-16. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following are prohibited: 
(1)  Billboards and Roof Signs. 
(2)  Flashing, scrolling, rotating Signs and lights installed on, within or behind any window, door, façade, store front or wall so as to be visible to the general public from any public street or sidewalk area. 
(3)  Signs or other devices which are inflated by cold air, hot air, or other inflatable gas. 
(4)  A Sign not permanently affixed to the ground, a building, or other structure, which may be moved from place to place. 
(5)  Box Signs. 
(6)  Signs, including Illuminated Signs, Animated Signs and Changeable Signs, placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked so as to be visible from a Right-of-Way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property. 
(7)  Signs which are attached or otherwise affixed to trees or other living vegetation. 
(8)  Signs painted directly on the surface of a fence or the exterior wall, fascia, parapet or chimney of a building. 
(9)  Signs which imitate, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or can be confused with any authorized traffic control Sign, signal or device. 
(10)  Window Signs which cover more than twenty-five percent (25%) of a window, except as may be permitted upon application for a permit and approval of the Design Review Board in accordance with Section 9-10-51(A)(2) of this Chapter. 
(b)  The Commissioner shall, by mail or hand delivery, notify the person who maintains any such prohibited Sign to correct specified violations or omissions so as to comply with this Chapter or remove such sign within ten (10) days from the date of such notice, in default of which the Commissioner may remove or cause to be removed such Sign or make the same comply with this Chapter at the expense of such person. In the event that the necessary corrective action requires the issuance of a street or sidewalk obstruction permit by the Department of Public Works, and the aforementioned ten (10) day period begins during the time of any moratorium on such permits, including the annual Central Business Area Holiday Moratorium, the date to complete such corrective action shall be extended to ten (10) days after the last date of such moratorium. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-17. - Unsafe signs. 
(a)  If in the opinion of the Commissioner, any outdoor Sign is insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise is dangerous or unsafe, the person owning or maintaining the same shall, upon written notice from the Commissioner, forthwith in case of immediate danger, and in any case within ten (10) days from the notice thereof as prescribed therein, secure the same in a manner approved by the Commissioner in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter or cause the same to be removed. 
(b)  If the Sign owner fails to remove an unsafe Sign as ordered or whenever in the opinion of the Commissioner, a violation of this Chapter exists which requires immediate action to abate a direct hazard or immediate danger to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the occupants of a building or of the public, the Commissioner may, without prior notice take such direct action as is necessary to abate the hazard or danger. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-18. - Expenses incurred by the city in correcting or abating unsafe or prohibited signs. 
The expenses incurred pursuant to Section 9-10-16 or Section 9-10-17 of this Chapter shall be paid by the owner of the Sign or by the owner of the property should the sign owner refuse to pay. The Department of Building shall file among its records an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy, the items of expense and the date of executions of actions authorized by Sections 9-10-16 or 9-10-17 of this Chapter. The Commissioner may institute a suit in the name of the City to recover such expenses against any persons liable for such expenses or may cause such expenses to be charged and assessed against the property as a lien. A certified notice of such lien shall be mailed to or served upon the owner and persons claimed liable to pay the same, and a similar copy may be filed in the office of the Commissioner of Finance of the City, and may be noted on the records of liens or assessments against the property. Such liens shall bear interest and penalty of two-thirds of one per centum per annum for each month or part thereof the same are unpaid after said filing of such notice of lien. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-19. - Appeals. 
On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Design Review Board or by the Commissioner of Building or his/her duly authorized representative charged with the enforcement of this Chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to vary or modify the strict requirements of this Chapter where such requirements would cause demonstrated practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, in such manner as to observe the spirit of this Chapter, secure public safety and welfare and do substantial justice. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-20. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days or both. Each day such violation continues shall constitute and be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 ) 
Charter reference— Penalties for violations of ordinances, § 37.  
Secs. 9-10-21—9-10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 9-10-26. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate or maintain any Sign or other advertising device without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Building and paying the fees as required by this Chapter, except that no permit shall be required for Signs described in Section 9-10-31 of this Chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-27. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-10-28. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Applications for Sign permits shall be filed with the Department of Building on its forms, and applicants shall furnish such information as required by the Commissioner. 
(b)  Five (5) copies of clearly and neatly drawn or printed drawings of the plans and specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground, also showing colors of background and lettering and of illuminated portions, shall be furnished by the applicant. 
(c)  The written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which the Sign is to be erected shall be filed with the application. 
(d)  An illustration of the proposed Sign and a colored photograph(s) of the area and, if a Wall Sign, the building facade upon which the proposed Sign is to be erected shall be submitted with each Sign application, showing in detail the physical conditions within the Sign area, as well as the facades of adjoining buildings. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-29. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Every person before being granted a sign permit shall pay to the Commissioner a fee as required below for each Sign, Canopy or Awning: 
(1)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per Sign plus two dollars ($2.00) per square foot of sign display surface. 
(2)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per Sign for repairs. 
(3)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per Awning or Canopy. 
(4)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per permit for Banners and Bunting. 
(b)  The Commissioner shall inspect every Sign for which a permit is required at least once annually. The annual reinspection fee shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) per Wall or Ground Sign. 
(2)  One Hundred dollars ($100.00) per Roof Sign. 
(3)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per Awning or Canopy. 
(c)  The annual reinspection fee shall be due and payable as of the first day of March in each year and paid within that calendar month. 
(d)  Any annual reinspection fee not paid within the calendar month of March shall be increased by one-half (1/2) of the annual reinspection fee as an additional fee. Such additional fee shall be added every calendar month or fraction thereof that the annual reinspection fee remains unpaid. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-30. - Responsibilities of permit holder for ground signs. 
Any person occupying any vacant lot or premises by means of a Ground Sign, for which a permit is required, shall be subject to the same duties and responsibilities as the owner of the lot or premises, with respect to keeping the same clean, sanitary, inoffensive and free and clear of all obnoxious substances and unsightly conditions on the ground in vicinity of such Ground Sign or said premises for which they may be responsible. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-31. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this Chapter relating to required permits shall not apply to the following Signs, provided however, all such Signs and Temporary Signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this Chapter: 
(a)  Professional name plates not exceeding one (1) square foot in area located on the occupied premises. 
(b)  Identification Signs not over twenty (20) square feet in area and bulletin boards not over eight (8) square feet in area for public, charitable or religious not-for-profit institutions when such Signs and bulletin boards are located on the premises of said institutions. 
(c)  Occupational Signs denoting only the names and professions of occupants in a commercial building, public institutional building or dwelling house, and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(d)  Memorial Signs or tablets, historical markers, names of buildings and dates of erection, cut into masonry or of Noncombustible Material. 
(e)  Traffic or other municipal Signs, legal notices, railroad crossing Signs, danger Signs and such temporary emergency or non-advertising Signs as may be approved by the Commissioner. 
(f)  Directional, phone, public conveniences, credit card Signs and similar public facility Signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area for a Ground Sign or two and one-half (2½) square feet in area for any other type of public facility Sign. 
(g)  Awnings attached to one- or two-family dwellings. 
(h)  Signs installed on bus passenger shelters provided by the county, the City or other government entity or agency thereof approved by the City. 
(i)  One (1) Temporary Sign at the premises where a garage sale is taking place. If the owner of the premises is not performing the sale, the operator of the sale shall have a letter of permission from the owner of the premises. 
(j)  Temporary Signs that conform to the requirements and standards set forth in Section 9-10-48 of this Chapter. 
(k)  Window Signs that conform to the requirements and standards set forth in Section 9-10-48 and Section 9-10-51(A)(1) of this Chapter. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Secs. 9-10-32—9-10-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF SIGNS 
 
Sec. 9-10-41. - Generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no types of Signs other than those described in this Chapter shall be erected or maintained, and no permit shall be issued by the Department of Building for any Sign or Temporary Sign that advertises any premises for sale, lease or rent that is affixed to a building or wall except as may be permitted in accordance with Section 9-10-45 of this Chapter. 
(b)  Nothing in this Chapter is intended to prevent the use of designs or technologies as alternatives to those prescribed in this Chapter provided that said designs or technologies result in substantially equivalent, greater or better construction, performance and appearance. All technical information requested by the Commissioner of Building shall be provided by the applicant so that the design or technology alternatives can be evaluated. The Commissioner may approve or disapprove any such submission in his/her discretion. 
(c)  If a new project or building requires site plan approval by the Common Council of the City of White Plains, the Common Council shall have jurisdiction over the approval of all Signs for such project or building. 
(d)  No Signs shall display "offensive sexual material," as defined and prohibited by the New York State Penal Law Sections 245.10 and 245.11 and any amendments and successors thereto, so as to be visible from any public right of way, thoroughfare or sidewalk. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-42. - Ground signs. 
(a)  Ground Signs constructed entirely of metal or approved combinations of materials may be erected to a height not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet above the average grade of the ground level at the base of the uprights. 
(b)  Ground Signs having an open space of more than five (5) feet and less than eight (8) feet between the lower edge of signboard and the ground shall have a substantial horizontal rail between principal supports directly under the sign four (4) feet above the ground. 
(c)  Ground signs shall be located back from all property lines a distance not less than six (6) feet. 
(d)  Ground signs shall be securely built, constructed, and erected upon one or more posts or standards which shall be adequately anchored to the ground and braced, if required. 
(e)  Only one (1) Ground Sign shall be permitted for each building location or premise, per public street frontage. 
(f)  Ground Signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area on any one side and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in any dimension. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-43. - Pole signs. 
A Pole Sign shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
(1)  A Pole Sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in area on any one side. 
(2)  Pole Signs located on areas, walkways or driveways that are open to the public shall have a distance of at least ten (10) feet between the bottom of the Sign and the average grade of the ground level at the base of the pole. 
(3)  The distance between the center line of the supporting pole of a Pole Sign and the extreme projection of any trademark, sign or insignia affixed thereto shall not exceed eight (8) feet. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-44. - Wall signs. 
(a)  Wall Signs shall not be painted directly onto the outside face of any building, part of a building or wall. 
(b)  Wall Signs shall be securely and safely attached to the wall of a building or to the supporting structure by means of corrosive resistant metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than three-eighths of an inch in diameter or by any method which may be found adequate and approved by the Commissioner. Wall Signs shall not be secured by wooden blocks or anchored with wood, wire, nails or screws. 
(c)  Except as provided in section 9-10-46 of this Chapter, a Wall Sign shall not be permitted to extend more than four (4) inches from the face of its supporting wall over public property, right-of-way, public area or public highway unless the lowest point of said Wall Sign is at least ten (10) feet above the grade under such Wall Sign. 
(d)  A Wall Sign may project a distance not to exceed fifteen (15) inches from the face of its supporting structure, provided that the lowest edge of such Wall Sign or any affixed device is a minimum of ten (10) feet above grade at the Wall Sign, and provided further that the Wall Sign does not project beyond any property line other than a street property line or a street building line. 
(e)  All Wall Signs shall be located as low on a building as possible, above the store front or main entrance door. A Wall Sign or a supporting framing shall not project above the eave, parapet wall, or where there is no parapet, above the roof line of the building; nor shall a Wall Sign or its supports project at any point above the structure to which it is attached. Only one (1) Wall Sign shall be permitted for each building on a public street frontage except that in a multi-tenant retail building one Wall Sign shall be permitted at each ground floor tenant space that has direct access from a street. No Wall Signs shall be permitted above the ground floor of buildings up to fifty (50) feet or four (4) stories, whichever is lower, above average grade except for buildings fronting on I-287. When the proposed mounting height of a Wall Sign exceeds fifty (50) feet or four (4) stories, whichever is lower, above the average grade of a building, the Common Council of the City of White Plains shall have jurisdiction over the approval thereof. 
(f)  A Wall Sign shall not obstruct the required door and/or window area of any building, nor shall it be attached to or placed upon a fire escape. 
(g)  A Wall Sign shall not be attached to any building or structure so that, in the opinion of the Commissioner, it will interfere with possible operations of the Fire Department. 
(h)  Except as may be deemed safe by the Commissioner and appropriate by the Design Review Board because of arrangement and dimensions, a Wall Sign erected within ten (10) feet of a street or Right-of-Way shall not have a vertical dimension greater than three (3) feet. 
(i)  Materials and colors of all Signs shall be subject to review and approval by the Design Review Board. 
(j)  All Wall Signs on the same building are to be of a similar height with no new Signs higher than the top of any existing adjoining Sign on that building. This standard shall also apply to Signs on adjacent buildings where relative store front elevations permit. In case of demonstrated hardship the Design Review Board may grant exceptions to the foregoing. 
(k)  Wall Signs shall be permitted only on a street front or face of a building for each corporation or business enterprise per location, except Wall Signs shall also be permitted on a building's face which has direct public access from a public or quasi-public area such as a parking lot or courtyard when the Signs advertise a business or firm located in the building. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-45. - Wall mounted sale or lease signs—Special circumstances. 
(a)  The Commissioner, in his/her sole discretion, may, upon proper application therefore, issue a permit for a Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign that advertises for sale, lease or rent any premises or part thereof where said Sign is to be located and affixed to an exterior wall of said premises only on or at the premises for which the proposed sale, rent or lease is being advertised and only upon a showing by the property owner that no other suitable location for such a Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign is available on any façade, door or window of such building or structure that is in conformance with this Chapter. 
(b)  A permit to install and maintain a Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign may be issued for a period of one year without fee. One year extension permits may be issued without fee upon a showing to the Commissioner that the conditions set forth in Subsection (a) above continue to apply. 
(c)  Such Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign shall be removed within five (5) business days after the lease signing or closing on the sale of the premises described in such Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign. 
(d)  A Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in size. 
(e)  During such times as a Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign is installed on a premises, the property owner shall permit the Commissioner or his/her representative to visit the premises during normal business hours to verify the existence of available space to be leased and/or described on the Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Sign. 
(f)  The provisions of this Section 9-10-45 shall apply to Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Signs installed after March 6, 2017. The owner of any property upon which a Wall Mounted Sale or Lease Signs is installed and existing as of March 6, 2017 shall comply with subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this Section. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-46. - Projecting signs. 
Projecting Signs shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The bottom edge of a Projecting Sign or of any affixed devices, shall be at least ten (10) feet above grade at the Projecting Sign when located over a street property line or street building line. 
(2)  A Projecting Sign or any part thereof shall not project over a property line except that a Projecting Sign may project over a street property line or street building line a distance not to exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
(3)  A Projecting Sign or any part thereof shall not project more than five (5) feet from the face of the supporting structure. 
(4)  A Projecting Sign shall not have advertising in a plane parallel to the surface of the supporting structure. 
(5)  All Projecting Signs shall be located as low on a building as possible, above the store front or main entrance door. A Projecting Sign or a supporting framing shall not project above the eave, parapet wall, or where there is no parapet, above the roof line of the building; nor shall a Projecting Sign or its supports project at any point above the structure to which it is attached. Only one (1) Projecting Sign shall be permitted for each building on a public street frontage except that in a multi-tenant retail building one Projecting Sign shall be permitted at each ground floor tenant space that has direct access from a street. No Projecting Signs shall be permitted above the ground floor of buildings up to fifty (50) feet or four (4) stories, whichever is lower, above average grade except for buildings fronting on I-287. When the mounting height of a Projecting Sign exceeds fifty (50) feet or four (4) stories, whichever is lower, above the average grade of a building, the Common Council of the City of White Plains shall have jurisdiction over the approval thereof. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-47. - Canopy signs. 
(a)  A Canopy Sign shall not project beyond the supporting Canopy. 
(b)  The bottom edge of any Canopy Sign shall be at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk or ground elevation. 
(c)  The Canopy to which such Canopy Sign is to be attached shall be of a permanent nature and constructed of rigid and substantial materials approved by the Commissioner. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-48. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Posting on Public Property and Right-of-Way Prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any Person to paste, post, paint, print, nail or attach or affix by any means whatsoever any Temporary Sign, handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material upon any City property, park or right-of-way, or upon any curb, gutter, flagstone, tree, lamppost, awning post, telegraph pole, telephone pole, public utility pole, garbage bin, bus shelter, bridge, elevated train structure, highway fence, barrel, box, parking meter, mail box, traffic control device, traffic stanchion, traffic sign (including pole), tree box, tree pit protection device, bench, traffic barrier, hydrant, public pay telephone, or any personal property maintained on a City street or right-of-way or other City-owned property pursuant to a franchise, concession or revocable consent granted by the City or other such item or structure in any street, or to direct, suffer or permit any servant, agent, employee or other person under his or her control to engage in such activity; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material so posted by or under the direction of the Common Council, or by or under the direction of any City department or agency, or pursuant to a franchise, concession or revocable consent granted by the City. 
(b)  Size of Temporary Signs. Temporary Signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, four (4) feet in width and three (3) feet in height, except as may be permitted for Window Signs in accordance with Section 9-10-51 of this Chapter. 
(c)  Duration of Placement or Posting of Temporary Signs. Except as permitted in Section (d)(3) below, Temporary Signs relating to an event, including an election, may not be erected prior to sixty (60) days before the event and must be removed within five (5) business days after said event. 
(d)  Location and Condition of Temporary Signs. 
(1)  Temporary Signs shall be constructed and maintained in an orderly, clean condition, be neatly displayed and mounted on solid, sturdy material. 
(2)  Temporary Signs promoting, advertising or identifying a political candidate, party or issue, shall be limited to one such sign per candidate, party or issue per premises, lot or storefront. Said Temporary Sign shall be removed within five (5) business days after the date of the election or vote. 
(3)  One Temporary Sign may be displayed at a construction site for each owner, architect, engineer, real estate broker, financing institution and principal contractor engaged in the work of constructing a building or structure for which a building permit has been issued and has not expired. Said Temporary Sign may display the name, address & phone number of said persons and all such Temporary Signs shall be removed within five (5) business days after the completion of construction or renovation. 
(4)  A Sign which advertises for sale, lease or rent any premises is a Temporary Sign. Any Temporary Sign that advertises for sale, lease or rent any premises shall be located only on or at the premises for which the proposed sale, rent or lease is being advertised and shall not be affixed to any exterior wall of said premises nor may any person Erect such a Temporary Sign on any exterior wall, except as may be permitted by Section 9-10-45 of this Chapter. Once the premises or part thereof advertised are sold or leased such Temporary Sign shall be removed within five (5) business days after the lease signing or closing on the sale. 
(5)  Temporary Signs shall be limited to one (1) such sign per premises, lot or storefront for each event, political campaign or candidate, project, real estate sale, lease or rental or other subject, provided, however, that two (2) of the same Temporary Signs shall be permitted on a premises located at a corner property at the intersection of two public streets, with one (1) such sign facing each street. If affixed to a window, such Temporary Signs shall not, individually or cumulatively, cover greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the door glass or street-level or other window space of any store, office or place of business and shall in all respects conform to Section 9-10-51 of this Chapter. 
(6)  All Temporary Signs that are Window Signs shall comply in all respects with Sections 9-10-48 and 9-10-51 of this Chapter. 
(7)  Unless otherwise directed or ordered by the Commissioner, in the event that the work to remove any Temporary Sign requires the issuance of a street or sidewalk obstruction permit by the Department of Public Works, and the five (5) business days removal period set forth in this section begins during the time of any moratorium on such permits, including the annual Central Business Area Holiday Moratorium, the time to complete such corrective action shall be extended to five (5) business days after the first business day after such moratorium. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-49. - Violations and cost of removal of temporary signs. 
(a)  Any authorized employee of the City of White Plains, City of White Plains Department of Public Works, City of White Plains Department of Building or City of White Plains Police Department may issue an appearance ticket, notice of violation or summons for any violation of this Chapter and may remove without notice any Temporary Sign installed, placed or affixed in violation of this Chapter and repair any damage caused by the placement or removal of said Temporary Sign. Said Sign may be destroyed and disposed of or stored to be retrieved by the person described in Subsection (b) below. 
(b)  There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person whose name, telephone number, or other identifying information appears on any Temporary Sign, handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material on any item placed in violation of this Chapter authorized the pasting, posting, painting, printing, nailing or attaching or affixing by any means whatsoever such Temporary Sign, handbill, poster, notice, sign, advertisement, sticker or other printed material, or (ii) directed, suffered or permitted a servant, agent, employee or other individual under such person's control to engage in such activity and accordingly such person shall be liable for the costs incurred by the Department of Public Works for removal of and any damages arising out of the placement and removal of such Temporary Sign. 
(c)  There shall be a rebuttable presumption that if a telephone number that appears on any Temporary Sign, handbill, poster, notice, sign or advertisement placed in violation of this Chapter belongs to a telephone answering service and no other telephone number or address is readily obtainable to locate the person or business advertised therein, such telephone answering service shall be held liable for a violation of this Chapter, unless said service promptly provides the name and address of said person or business. 
(d)  Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), for the first offense and not less than one hundred fifty dollars nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second and each subsequent offense within a twelve (12) month period, plus the cost of the removal of the unauthorized signs, imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or both. Any person found to have violated the provisions of this Chapter, in addition to any criminal or civil penalty imposed, shall be responsible for the costs to the City of the removal and disposal of said Temporary Sign by City employees or otherwise and any damages caused by any illegal, unauthorized Temporary Sign. For the purposes of imposing a criminal fine or penalty pursuant to this section, every Temporary Sign pasted, posted, painted, printed or nailed in violation of this Chapter, shall be deemed to be the subject of a separate violation for which a separate criminal fine or penalty shall be imposed. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-50. - Banners and bunting. 
(a)  The Commissioner may issue permits for the placement of Banners and Bunting on a building or structure for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. 
(b)  Banners and Bunting shall be erected on the face of a building or structure only and shall not be erected across any sidewalk, driveway, right-of-way, parking lot or vacant lot unless authorized and approved by the Department of Public Works or the Common Council. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 )  
Sec. 9-10-51. - Window signs, displays and lighting; Covering or blocking windows. 
(A)  Standards for Window Signs: 
(1)  Window Signs, including Temporary Signs, may be affixed or otherwise attached to or displayed within a door or other windows of commercial establishments and stores, provided, however, that the aggregate area of all such Window Signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the glass area of all windows and doors fronting a public street of each premises or tenant space. 
(2)  The Design Review Board may approve a Window Sign or Temporary Sign that is also a Window Sign the area of which is greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the glass area of all windows and doors fronting a public street of each premises or tenant space. Approval and installation of a Window Sign and Temporary Sign that is also a Window Sign described in this Subsection (2) shall require an application for a building permit as described in Section 9-10-28 of this Chapter, submission of a comprehensive design plan for affected windows and displays and payment of fees as described in Section 9-10-29 of this Chapter. The Design Review Board may, after consultation with the Commissioner, establish guidelines for the approval of a Window Sign or Temporary Sign that is also a Window Sign pursuant to this Subsection (2). 
(3)  Credit card (monetary, institutional, etc.) signs, decals, or emblems shall be additionally allowed but limited to twenty-four (24) square inches or an aggregate of ninety-six (96) square inches per business premises. 
(4)  Permanent perimeter or background rope lighting, flexible lighting, neon lighting, series lighting, lighting arranged in patterns, lighting unrelated to communicating the name of the business and other similar applications of window trimming or lighting on any part of a window shall only be permitted if approved by the Design Review Board. The Design Review Board may, after consultation with the Commissioner, establish guidelines for the approval of lighting pursuant to this Subsection (4). 
(B)  Merchandise may be displayed within a store Display Window. However, the bulk storage of such merchandise within a store Display Window shall be prohibited. 
(C)  Storefront windows at grade that provide a view from the outside of interior areas that are accessible to the public within any store or premises shall not be permitted to (1) be blocked by merchandise, (2) have opaque glass or (3) be permanently or continuously covered by any window treatment. Such window treatment includes, but is not limited to, blinds, drapes, shades, opaque film or similar material. Blinds, drapes and shades shall not permanently or continuously cover windows and shall only be used at such times as are required to screen customers, patrons and persons from direct sunlight. The Design Review Board may grant exceptions to the strict requirements of this paragraph upon proper application and subject to such guidelines as may be established by the Design Review Board after consultation with the Commissioner of Building. 
(D)  In the event of a vacancy of and during construction in the interior of a ground floor premises, opaque film or similar material may be applied to cover the entire inside of the window and door glass, provided, however, that the material and design of such covering material shall be subject to the prior approval of the Commissioner of Building. 
(E)  Penalties for Violation: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall constitute and be deemed a separate offense. 
(F)  Enforcement: This section shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Building and the Commissioner of Public Safety or their duly authorized representatives. 
( Ord. of 3-6-17, § 2 ) 


ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WHITE PLAINS, NEW YORK 

____________ 
ADOPTED JUNE 1, 1981 
WITH AMENDMENTS THROUGH JULY 2, 2018 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WHITE PLAINS, NEW YORK 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Thomas M. Roach 
Mayor 
____________ 
Hon. Nadine Hunt-Robinson 
Hon. John Kirkpatrick 
Hon. Dennis E. Krolian 
Hon. Milagros Lecuona 
Hon. John M. Martin 
Hon. Beth N. Smayda 
Common Council 
____________ 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a publication of the Zoning Ordinance of the city of White Plains, NY. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as supplemented through 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been divided into parts, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a period. The figure before the period refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1.2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6.1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6.1 and 6.2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6.1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Director of Supplementation, and Lauren Coulter, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Anne M. McPherson for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Zoning Code which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of White Plains, NY. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of White Plains, NY. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of White Plains, NY. 2016. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Date 
Adopted Include (I)/ 
Omit (O) Supp. No.  8- 1-16 I 1  9-26-16 O 1 12- 5-16 I 1  1- 3-17 I 1  4- 3-17 I 1  9- 5-17 I 2  3- 5-18 I 2  4- 2-18 I 2  5- 7-18 I 2  7- 2-18 I 3  
Section 1 - PURPOSES 
Sec. 1.1.  To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance with a well-considered plan, which plan is embodied in this Ordinance. 
Sec. 1.2.  To regulate and limit the "height," bulk and location of "buildings" hereafter erected, to regulate and determine the area of "yards," "courts" and other open space, and to regulate the density of population in any given area, and for said purposes to divide the City into districts. These regulations are uniform for each class of "buildings" throughout any district, but the regulations in each district differ from those in other districts. These regulations are designed to secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers and to promote the public health and welfare, including, so far as conditions permit, provision for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and the accommodation of solar energy systems and equipment and access to sunlight necessary therefor, and are made with reasonable regard to the character of "buildings" erected in each district, the value of land and the "use" to which it may be put, to the end that these regulations are designed to promote public health, safety and welfare and the most desirable "use" for which the land of each district may be adapted and are intended to conserve the value of "buildings" and enhance the value of land throughout the City. 
Sec. 1.3.  To regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of "buildings" designed for specified "uses," and for said purposes to divide the City into districts and to prescribe for each such district the trades and industries that shall be excluded or subjected to special regulation and the "uses" for which "buildings" may not be erected or "altered." These regulations are designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and are made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the district, its peculiar suitability for particular "uses," the conservation of property values and the direction of building development, in accord with a well-considered plan. 
Sec. 1.4.  To carry out the "Comprehensive Plan" accepted by the Common Council, which "Plan" constitutes the basic long-range guide to the City's overall land use and development policies, and which "Plan," as it exists or may in future be amended, is to be given conscientious consideration whenever amendments to this Ordinance are proposed. 
Sec. 1.5.  To protect the character and the social and economic stability, and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the City and all of its neighborhoods. 
Sec. 1.6.  To bring about the gradual conformity of the "use" of land with the well-considered plan as set forth in this Ordinance, and to minimize conflicts among the "uses" of land. 
Sec. 1.7.  To promote the most beneficial relation between the "use" of land and the circulation of traffic throughout the City, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the "streets" and the provision of safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various "uses" of land throughout the City. 
Sec. 1.8.  To provide a guide for public policy and action in the efficient provision of public facilities and services, and for private enterprise in building development, investment, and other economic activity relating to "uses" of land throughout the City. 
Sec. 1.9.  To limit development to that which will not exceed the capacity of existing and programmed public facilities and services. 
Sec. 1.10.  To avoid hazardous conditions and excessive damage resulting from storm water runoff and flooding, and to encourage the appropriate use and sound management of natural resources throughout the City. 
Sec. 1.11.  To preserve the natural beauty of the City; to protect the City against unsightly, obtrusive, and obnoxious land "uses" and operations; to enhance the aesthetic aspect of the natural and manmade elements of the City; and to ensure appropriate development with regard to those elements. 
Section 2 - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1 - Introduction 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain words and terms used herein are defined in this Section. Defined terms and multiple defined terms are printed within quotation marks throughout this Ordinance. 
Sec. 2.2 - General Construction of Language 
    The following rules of construction apply to the language of this Ordinance: 
2.2.1  The specific shall control the general. 
2.2.2  All words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.2.3  All words in the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
2.2.4  Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter, and vice versa, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
2.2.5  The word shall is mandatory; the word may is permissive. 
2.2.6  The word includes shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
2.2.7  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction and, or, or either...or, the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
2.2.7.1  And indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
2.2.7.2  Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
2.2.7.3  Either...or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
2.2.8  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
2.2.9  The words "lot," plot and parcel of land shall one include the other. 
2.2.10  The word premises shall include land and "structures" thereon. 
2.2.11  The words occupied or used shall be considered to be followed by the words or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or used, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
2.2.12  References made to officials and official bodies shall mean officials and official bodies of the City of White Plains, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
2.2.13  Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally. 
2.2.14  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
Sec. 2.3 - Terms Not Defined 
    Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may apply. 
Sec. 2.4 - Definitions 
"Accessory Building" 
A "building" subordinate to the "main building" on the "lot" and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of the "main building." Where an "accessory building" is attached to the "main building" in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such "accessory building" shall be considered part of the "main building." 
"Accessory Building, Minor" 
See "Minor Accessory Building." 
"Accessory Electronic Games" 
The provision of three or less "electronic games" as an "accessory use." 
"Accessory Food Laboratory" 
An "accessory food laboratory" located within a building and constituting an "accessory use" to an existing or proposed office situated on the same "lot", which "accessory food laboratory" is used for experimentation in pure or applied research, design, development and production of new food products and/or reformulation or improvement of existing food products. 
"Accessory Use" 
A "use" which is incidental and subordinate to the principal "use" on a "lot," and located on the same "lot" therewith, except that where specifically so provided, accessory off-"street" parking need not be located on the same "lot." An "accessory use" may not be accessory to another "accessory use." 
"Alter" 
To change, enlarge or rearrange the structural parts or the exit facilities of a "structure," or to move a "building" from one location or position to another. 
"Alteration" 
See "Alter." 
"Area Affected" 
The area of land which is the subject of the proposed action, and all land within 200 feet of the perimeter of said area. 
"Area Variance" 
See "Variance, Area." 
"Assisted Living Facility" 
A residential facility, such as a senior living community with care provided by a licensed home care services agency, which combines "dwelling units," communal dining, routine protective oversight, personalized assistance and supportive services, and health care designed to meet the individual needs of "persons" who need help with the activities of daily living, including, but not limited to, eating, bathing, dressing, getting to and using the bathroom, getting in and out of bed or chair, mobility, and, in appropriately designed facilities, accommodations for Alzheimer's patients, but do not need the skilled medical care provided by a nursing home, convalescent care facility or "domiciliary care facility." 
"Attached Dwelling Units" 
See "Dwelling Unit, Attached." 
"Auction House" 
A place in which goods are sold at auction on a periodic basis. 
"Bar" 
A business enterprise primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. See also "Cabaret." 
"Basement" 
A portion of a "building" partly underground, but having less than half its clear height below the average elevation of the adjoining ground. See also "Cellar" and Illustration I. 
"Building" 
Any "structure" having a roof, self-supporting or supported by column, air pressure or walls, which is permanently affixed to the ground, and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of "persons," animals or chattel. 
"Building Area" 
The maximum horizontal cross-section of a "building," including porches, balconies and raised platforms, but excluding atriums and cornices, roof overhangs, gutters or chimneys projecting not more than three feet, and steps and "terraces" not more than three feet above the average adjacent ground elevation. 
"Building Coverage" 
That percent of the land area covered by the combined "building area" of all "buildings," excluding any "building" or "structure" located completely below ground. 

"Building Plan" 
A map showing the design for the layout, arrangement and "use" of "buildings" and land, including "accessory uses," facilities and services within a "conservation development," which plan is subject to approval pursuant to Section 37 of the General City Law and in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 5.7 of this Ordinance. 
"Cabaret" 
Any room, space or area used in connection with a business enterprise, in which musical entertainment, singing, dancing or other form of amusement by performers and/or by patrons ("Entertainment") is allowed. A "cabaret" is only permitted in connection with a "restaurant." However, the following shall not constitute a "cabaret": 
A "restaurant" or "bar" located in a "hotel" having more than 50 sleeping rooms; or 
A "restaurant" or "café" that provides incidental Entertainment, without dancing, either by: 
• Electrical devices such as, but not limited to stereos, radios or media players, but not including music provided by a disc jockey; 
• Not more than four (4) persons playing non-amplified music; or 
• A person with or without a portable low-wattage amplifier associated with a single instrument or microphone. 
"Cabaret, Accessory" 
A "cabaret" in which the Entertainment and/or dancing do not, in the aggregate, occupy more than 40% of the Net Floor Area of the principal business of a "restaurant." 
"Cabaret, Primary" 
A "cabaret" in which the Entertainment and/or dancing, in the aggregate, occupy more than 40% of the Net Floor Area of the principal business of a "restaurant." 
"Café" 
A small and informal establishment serving various refreshments, such as coffee, tea, soft drinks, snacks, and the like, for consumption on the premises. 
"Cafeteria" 
A business enterprise engaged in preparing and serving a full line of food and beverages primarily through the use of a service line where the customer serves himself or is served from displayed selections, and where table or booth seating facilities are provided; some limited waiter or waitress service may be provided. See also "Restaurant" and "Fast Food Eating Establishment." 
"Camper Trailer" 
A "travel trailer" with a collapsible top which has a body width not exceeding eight feet, a body length not exceeding ten feet and a height measured from the ground, when collapsed, not exceeding four feet. See Illustration VIII. 
"Cellar" 
A portion of a "building" partly or wholly underground, having half or more than half of its clear height below the average elevation of the adjoining ground. See also "Basement" and Illustration I. 
"College" 
See "University." 
"Community Residence" 
A residential facility for the mentally disabled operated pursuant to the New York State Mental Hygiene Law and regulations promulgated thereunder, including an alcoholism facility, a hostel, a halfway house and any other such facility as defined in such regulations, and any similar facilities operated under the supervision of federal departments and agencies. 
"Comprehensive Plan" 
The plan accepted by the Common Council pursuant to Section 28-a of the General City Law. 
"Conservation Development" 
A design of "attached" or "detached dwelling units," together with their related open spaces and "accessory uses," which is planned on a unified basis and designed to achieve the purposes as set forth in Section 5.7.1, and which is approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures, standards and requirements of this Ordinance and Section 37 of the General City Law. 
"Consumer Financial Services Establishment" 
A business establishment providing for the sale at retail to individual purchasers or clients of financial services instruments such as stocks, shares, bonds, certificates of participation, etc. See Section 4.4.26. 
"Corner Lot" 
See "Lot, Corner" and Illustration V. 
"Court" 
An open, uncovered and unoccupied space, bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a "building." An inner "court" is a "court" entirely within the exterior walls of a "building." All other "courts" are outer "courts." 
"Coverage" 
See "Building Coverage" and "Gross Land Coverage." 
"Craft Food Market Hall" 
A curated collection of individual vendors marketing food, beverage, and crafts in a space operated by a single management entity leasing vendor spaces (for terms of six months or more), which collection markets new products in a variety of types, primarily consisting of specialty foods and beverages (including alcoholic beverages, subject to New York State licensing requirements), hand-made products, high-quality crafts and other non-mass produced items exhibited in display areas, not exceeding 1,200 square feet of floor area, including both private and common dining space for its patrons, provided that: (a) the retail sale of food and beverage products for consumption or use outside of the premises shall be permitted only as subordinate and accessory use, since consumption on the premises is the principal use; (b) no more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the floor area shall be dedicated to the sale of non-food or kitchen related items, or similar housewares or hospitality merchandise; (c) the sale of boot-leg, or knock-off items shall not be permitted; (d) no flea market, swap meet, or bartering for merchandise shall be permitted; and (e) the Craft Food Market Hall shall not sell only a single type of product. 
"Customary Home Occupation" 
An occupation of a service character accessory to and customarily incidental to the "use" of a "dwelling unit" by a resident thereof, the conduct of which is clearly secondary to the "use" of the "dwelling unit" for living purposes, does not change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such secondary "use," and does not involve the keeping of a stock of merchandise for sale in connection therewith. Tutoring and instruction, including art, music, voice, violin or other musical instrument, limited to a single pupil at a time shall be deemed a "customary home occupation." Group instruction in dancing or vocal or instrumental music, tea rooms, barber shops, beauty parlors, real estate offices, insurance offices, operation of a business for the carrying of passengers for hire (i.e., limousine services, taxi cabs, and the like) and tourist homes are not "customary home occupations." 
"Day Care Center" 
A non-residential facility which is either authorized by the New York State Department of Social Services and operated by a service provider found qualified by that Department, or licensed by the New York State Department of Health and operated by a service provider found qualified by that Department, and which in both cases offers an organized program of personal care, supervision and activities for three or more children and/or adults for less than 24 hours per day. 
"Deck" 
A "structure" attached to or adjoining a house, other principal "building," or above-ground "swimming pool," consisting of one or more planes constructed of wood, metal and/or other materials and located above the surface of the earth on or including a support system of footings and foundations, piers, pilasters, columns, posts, joists, stringers and beams or any combination thereof, and including any railings or open enclosure thereof and including any stairs, ramps or other devices connecting one level with another, with the ground and/or with the adjoining "structure." 
"Depth" 
See "Lot Depth." 
"Detached Dwelling Unit" 
See "Dwelling Unit, Detached." 
"Development Site" 
The entire site designated by the "site plan" or special permit approving agency as the area to which the dimensional and "use" regulations of this Ordinance shall apply, notwithstanding the subdivision or divided ownership of such site. 
"Dimensionally Non-conforming" 
See "Non-conforming, Dimensionally." 
"Dish Antenna" 
Any parabolic or part spherical device, also known as a satellite dish antenna or earth station, whose purpose is to receive and/or transmit microwave or other electronic communication signals from and/or to satellites or other instruments for television, radio, data, imagery or other forms of telecommunication. A typical device contains a combination of four main components - the antenna, or dish; its support "structure"; the amplifier; and a cable which carries the signals to and/or from a receiver and/or transmitter inside the "building." All "dish antennas" are deemed to be accessory "structures," incidental to the principal "use" of any "building," "structure" or "use." 
"Domiciliary Care Facility" 
A private proprietary nursing home, a private proprietary convalescent home, a private proprietary home for adults, a residence for adults, an intermediate care facility, a family home for adults, a home for the aged, a home for adults, a group residence or any other residential facility for adults as defined in the New York State Social Services Law or regulations promulgated thereunder and any similar facilities operated under the supervision of federal departments and agencies. The keeping of a "roomer" or "roomers" as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance, pursuant to the regulations of the New York State Department of Social Services for family-type homes for adults (18 NYCRR Part 485), or an "assisted living facility," does not constitute a "Domiciliary Care Facility." 
"Dwelling" 
A "building" containing one or more "dwelling units." 
"Dwelling, One Family" 
A "dwelling" containing a single principal "dwelling unit." 
"Dwelling, Two Family" 
A "dwelling" containing two principal "dwelling units." 
"Dwelling, Multi-family" 
A "dwelling" containing three or more "dwelling units." 
"Dwelling Unit" 
A "building" or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for one "family," including independent cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities, and physically separate from any other "dwelling unit" whether or not in the same "building." 
"Dwelling Unit, Attached" 
A "dwelling unit" sharing a common side or rear wall or walls with another "dwelling unit" or "units," but occupying the entire volume within its portion of the "building" from the lowest level to the roof, and having its own separate entrance or entrances to the outside. This type of "dwelling unit" is also known as a townhouse or row house. See Illustration II. 
"Dwelling Unit, Detached" 
A single "dwelling unit" located in its own separate "building" which does not share a common side or rear wall or walls with any other "dwelling unit." See Illustration II. 
"Electronic Games" 
Any electronic, mechanical, video and computer games, ride devices, interactive devices, or any other amusement devices, machines or implements which are designed and intended or used, operated or maintained as a game, amusement or other means of entertainment for the use of which a fee is paid directly into the device by any means, including, but not limited to, coins, cash, keys, prepaid tokens or magnetic swipe cards, debit cards, or credit cards, or directly to an operator, including but not limited to, payment by means of a credit card, debit card or paid on account, or by any other such payment scheme or by membership, excluding any game and/or device the possession or use of which is prohibited by law. 

"Emergency Shelter" 
A facility providing, without charge, temporary housing, with or without meals, for individuals and/or families displaced from their habitual residences as a result of sudden catastrophe (e.g., fire, flood), domestic violence, condemnation, court ordered eviction, or other urgent event. 
"Environmentally Sensitive Site or Feature" 
A "lot," plot, parcel of land or portion thereof, or a characteristic or element of or on such land, as described in Chapter 3-5 of the Municipal Code and meeting the thresholds set forth at §3-5 thereof. 
"Excess Gross Floor Area" 
The amount of "gross floor area" which is in excess of that required for the conformance of "buildings" or "structures," including accessory "structures," to the "floor area ratio" requirements of this Ordinance on an existing "lot" or designated "development site." The "excess gross floor area" is calculated by multiplying the "area" of a "lot" or designated "development site" by the applicable "floor area ratio" of that "lot" or designated "development site" as specified in this Ordinance, and then by subtracting therefrom the amount of "gross floor area" attributable to all existing and/or approved "buildings" on the "lot" or designated "development site." For parcels of land containing more than one "lot," but not designated as a "development site," the "excess gross floor area" for the combined "lots" shall be the sum of the "excess gross floor area" of the individual "lots." 
"Extended Stay Hotel" 
A "building" or portion thereof, containing rooms or suites consisting of connected rooms, with or without cooking facilities, occupied by transient guests who are lodged, with or without meals, which rooms or suites have primary access from public halls, and in which "building" or portion thereof, there are certain public rooms and halls for the use of all guests, and in which are provided such services as are incidental to the "use" thereof as a temporary residence. (See also "Hotel.") 
"Family" 
A "family" is 
a)  One or more "persons" limited to the spouse, parents, grandparents, grandchildren, sons, daughters, brothers or sisters of the householder, or of the householder's spouse, living together as a single housekeeping unit with kitchen facilities; or 
b)  A group headed by a householder caring for a reasonable number of children as would be likely to be found in a biologically unitary "family," which group provides a stable, "family"-type environment for children and which is the functional and factual equivalent of a natural "family." 
"Fast Food Eating Establishment" 
A business primarily engaged in the sale of pre-processed or quickly prepared food and beverages in disposable containers or wrappers, selected by patrons from a limited line of specialized items such as hamburgers, chicken, pizza, tacos, hot dogs, ice cream or yogurt, for consumption either on or off the premises, in a facility in which a major portion of the sales to patrons is at a drive-in or stand-up type counter. A delicatessen or a "restaurant" selling food and beverages for consumption off the premises is not a "fast food eating establishment" provided such sale as described above is not the principal business of the establishment. 
"Floor Area" 
The horizontal area of a "story" of a "building," measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two "buildings," from the center line of such common walls, and including porches, balconies and raised platforms, but excluding atriums and cornices, roof overhangs, gutters or chimneys projecting not more than three feet, and steps and "terraces" not more than three feet above the average adjacent ground elevation. 
"Floor Area Ratio" (FAR) 
The "gross floor area" of all "buildings" on a "lot" divided by the "area" of such "lot." See Illustration III. 
"Frontage" 
See "Lot Frontage." 
"Front Lot Line" 
See "Lot Line, Front." 
"Front Yard" 
See "Yard, Front." 
"Garage, Parking" 
See "Parking Garage." 
"Garage, Private" 
An "accessory building" or part of a "main building" used only for the storage of motor vehicles belonging to residents, employees or visitors of the premises. 
"Golf or Country Club" 
A "membership club" which includes among its facilities an 18 hole golf course. 

"Grade" 
1)  For "buildings" adjoining one "street" only, the elevation of the curb at the center of the wall adjoining the "street." All walls approximately parallel to and not more than 15 feet from a "street" shall be considered as adjoining a "street." 
2)  For "buildings" adjoining more than one "street" the average of the elevations of the curbs at the centers of all walls adjoining "streets." 
3)  For "buildings" having no wall adjoining a "street," the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the "building." See Illustration IV. 
"Gross Floor Area" 
The sum of the "floor areas" of all "stories" of a "building," excluding any "floor area" housing mechanical or other equipment, or serving as on-site storage related to public "usable open space," and "floor area" devoted to parking or bicycle facilities, but including any "basement" or "cellar" used for the principal "use" if used as a "dwelling unit" by anyone, except for a janitor or watchman. 
"Gross Land Coverage" 
That percentage of the land area covered by the combined area of all "buildings," "structures" and paved areas on the "lot." 
"Half Story" 
See "Mezzanine." 
"Health Clubs" 
Membership facilities designed and used for body conditioning and rehabilitation, including activities such as aerobic and related class exercises. "Health Clubs" may contain equipment such as swimming pools, whirlpools, saunas, steam rooms, showers, locker facilities and, as an "accessory use," a health food bar. 
"Height" 
The vertical distance from "grade" to the level of the highest point of the roof if the roof is flat or mansard, or to the mean level between the eaves and the highest point of the roof if the roof is of any other type. Where "grade" is defined to be the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the "building," the average "height" of the "building" wall facing the "street" shall not exceed 1 1/4 times the maximum "height" allowed in that district. See Illustration IVa. 


"Hotel" 
A "building" or portion thereof, containing rooms, without individual kitchen facilities, occupied by transient guests who are lodged, with or without meals, which rooms have primary access from public halls, and in which "building" or portion thereof there are certain public rooms and halls for the use of all guests, and in which are provided such services as are incidental to the "use" thereof as a temporary residence. 
(See also "Extended Stay Hotel.") 
"Household Pet" 
An animal commonly kept in a "dwelling unit" by the inhabitants thereof for amusement or companionship, such as a dog, cat, bird, fish, gerbil, hamster or non-poisonous snake. Any other animal, such as a goat, pony, horse or sheep, or more than four dogs or cats over six months of age, more than ten gerbils or hamsters over two months of age, or more than three non-poisonous snakes, is not a "household pet." 
"Length of Building" 
The horizontal distance between the furthermost walls of a "building," including any carports or porches. 
"Loading Space" 
An off-"street" space available for the loading and unloading of goods, and complying with the requirements of Section 8 of this Ordinance. 
"Lot" 
A recorded piece, plot or parcel of land or assemblage of recorded contiguous parcels of land, all in common ownership and designated on the Assessor's records as a single parcel, occupied or to be occupied by "main" and "accessory buildings" and "uses," and including the "usable open space" required by this Ordinance. 
"Lot Area" 
The total horizontal area included within "lot lines." 
"Lot, Corner" 
A "lot" located at the junction of two or more intersecting "streets" where the interior angle formed by the intersection of the "streets" is 135 degrees or less. See Illustration V. 
"Lot Depth" 
The mean horizontal distance between the "front" and "rear lot lines" measured in the general direction of the "side lot lines." 

"Lot Frontage" 
The continuous extent of a "lot" along a "street," or the length within a "lot" of a continuous line parallel with the "street" and distant therefrom no more than the minimum required "front yard." See Illustration VI. 
"Lot Line" 
A property line bounding a "lot." 
"Lot Line, Front" 
In the case of a "lot" abutting upon only one "street," the "lot line" separating the "lot" from the "street." In the case of any other "lot," the owner may elect any "street" line as the "front lot line," except that where the majority of "lots" in any block are developed, the "front lot line" shall be the same as that used by such other "lots." See Illustration VII. In addition, in the case of a through "lot" having frontage on two "streets," the "front yard" setback and all other requirements of this Ordinance applicable to "front yards" shall apply for both "streets." 
"Lot Line, Rear" 
The "lot line" which is generally opposite the "front lot line." If the "rear lot line" is less than 10 feet in length, or if the "lot" comes to a point at the rear, the "rear lot line" shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the "front lot line," not less than 10 feet long, lying wholly within the "lot" and farthest from the "front lot line." 
"Lot Line, Side" 
Any "lot line" other than the "front lot line" and the "rear lot line." 


"Manufacturing, Light" 
The manufacturing, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts including the compounding, processing, assembly or disassembly, packaging or testing of goods or equipment, including research activities, conducted largely within an enclosed structure and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or vans and imposing a negligible impact on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust or pollutants. 
"Manufacturing, Organic" 
The processing or manufacturing of products predominantly from extracted raw materials, including, but not limited to, outdoor manufacturing, screening, or crushing of raw materials into compost, mulch, fertilizer, topsoil, gravel or fill, primarily for commercial resale. 
"Main Building" 
A "building" in which is conducted the principal "use" of the "lot" on which such "building" is situated. 
"Membership Club" 
A "not-for-profit corporation" organized to cater exclusively to its members and their guests, including land, "buildings," and facilities for recreational, athletic, social, professional and cultural purposes. The members of the organization shall have a financial interest in, and method of control of, the assets and management of the "membership club." 
"Mezzanine" 
An upper most "story" in which the "floor area" having a clear height of at least 7 1/3 feet is one-third or less of the "floor area" of the "story" next beneath it. 
"Mini-storage facility" 
A self-storage facility which is designed and operated to provide within one or more "buildings" or fully enclosed "structures" separate, secure, small, self-service storage units accessible and rented to "persons" for the storage of items brought to and retrieved directly from the self-storage units by the "persons" to whom the respective storage units are contracted, or by their duly authorized designees. These facilities are designed to accommodate access primarily from regular size passenger vehicles and two-axle trucks. 
"Minor Accessory Building" 
A "building" containing less than 750 cubic feet and customarily found accessory to a "dwelling unit," such as a garden house, tool house, playhouse or green house. 
"Mobile Home" 
As defined in Article 19-AA of the Executive Law of the State of New York. 
"Motor Home" 
A portable, temporary abode designed to be used for travel, recreation and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle, and measuring at least 227 inches in length, 85 inches in height and 80 inches in width. See also "Camper Trailer," "Mobile Home," "Travel Trailer," Pick-up Coach" and Illustration VIII. 

"Multi-family Dwelling" 
See "Dwelling, Multi-family." 
"Net Floor Area" 
The floor area of a premises open to the public excluding bathroom facilities. 
"Not-for-Profit Corporation" 
A corporation formed or existing under the Not-for-Profit Corporation Law of New York State. 
"Non-conforming Use" 
A "use" of a "building," "structure" or land that does not conform to any one or more of the applicable regulations as to "use" in the district in which it is located, which "use" was lawful under the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time the "use" was established. 
"Non-Conforming Dimensionally" 
The status of a "building" or "structure" that is conforming in "use" but does not conform to the "lot" dimension, "yard" dimension, "height," "building coverage," "floor area ratio," off-"street" parking, loading or similar dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and which conformed to such dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time such "building" or "structure" was established. 
"Nursery Business" 
An establishment, whose primary purpose is the sale and cultivation of trees, shrubs and other plants, including the replanting of said plants grown off-site, and the sale of accessory items such as mulch, fertilizer, top soil, loam, fill, gravel, stone, herbicides, pesticides, lawn tools and lawn, home and garden decorations. "Nursery Business" shall not include the processing or manufacturing of products such as, but not limited to, mulch, fertilizer, topsoil, loam, fill, gravel or stone. 
"Nursery School" 
A nonpublic school registered with the New York State Education Department that provides learning activities with varying program schedules for six or more children less than seven years old in an environment found by such Department to be under the supervision of qualified teachers and to be healthy and safe. 
"One Family Dwelling" 
See "Dwelling, One Family." 
"Overnight Shelter for the Homeless" 
A facility providing, without charge, single night, temporary lodging, with or without meals, for indigent adults with no ordinary or regular home or residence address. 
"Parking Lot" 
An off-"street" area at "grade" containing one or more "parking spaces" with passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto. 
"Parking Garage" 
A "building" for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and in which no other "use" is conducted. 
"Parking Space" 
An off-"street" space available for the parking of one motor vehicle on a transient basis. 
"Person" 
Any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and agencies. 
"Philanthropic Institution" 
An institution which is incorporated as a Type B public benefit "not-for-profit corporation" as defined in Article 2 Section 201 of the Not-for-Profit Corporation Law of the State of New York and which qualifies for exemption under Internal Revenue Code 501( c )(3); excluding those institutions which are penal or correctional institutions, "domiciliary care facilities," "community residences," or institutions owned or operated by a governmental agency. 
"Pick-up Coach" 
A device designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for occupancy as a temporary abode for travel, recreation and vacation. See also "Camper Trailer," "Mobile Home," "Motor Home," "Travel Trailer" and Illustration VIII. 
"Planned Campus Development" 
A master-planned mixed use development located in a "Planned Campus Development District" mapped in a C-O District on a "development site" consisting of one or more contiguous "lots" having a minimum combined "lot area" of 10 acres and which "development site" includes as permitted principal "uses" either multifamily residential or retail in combination with each other or in combination with offices "uses" and other "uses" permitted in a C-O District which are complementary to and supportive of one or more principal C-O District "uses", and which includes planned public and private open space, walkways and bike trails that link and are integrated into the "planned campus development" and the City's open space network, all as regulated under Section 5.9 "Planned Campus Development" of this Zoning Ordinance. 
"Planned Campus Development District" 
A master-planned mixed use development overlay district which may be mapped in a C-O District on a "development site" consisting of one or more contiguous "lots" having a minimum combined "lot area" of 10 acres and which "development site" includes as permitted principal "uses" either multifamily residential or retail in combination with each other or in combination with offices "uses" and other "uses" permitted in a Campus Office District which are complementary to and supportive of one or more principal Campus Office "uses", and which includes planned public and private open space, walkways and bike trails that link and are integrated into the "planned campus development" and the City's open space network, all as regulated under Section 5.9 Planned Campus Development" of this Zoning Ordinance. 
"Planned Senior Residential Development" 
An age restricted integrated senior residential community in a campus setting providing a variety of housing types, including at least two of the following; independent living units, "assisted living facility," and "domiciliary care facility," with healthcare support, including but not limited to availability of accessible units and assistance for residents with activities of daily living, and including other appropriate ancillary and "accessory uses" typically found in integrated senior residential communities, such as recreation and health club facilities restricted to residents of the "Planned Senior Residential Development" and their guests; dining facilities restricted to residents and employees of the "Planned Senior Residential Development" and the guests of the residents, and residential facilities for staff personnel, storage facilities, places of worship, gift shops, flower shops, newsstands, laundries, and other similar facilities for the exclusive use of residents and their guests, and staff. At least one of the primary occupants of an independent senior living unit shall be at least 60 years of age, and shall occupy the unit as the occupant's primary residence. 
In a "Planned Senior Residential Development," an ancillary "use" shall be defined as a "use" which is sponsored by an approved "Planned Senior Residential Development" and is typically found in an integrated senior residential community, and which is subordinate and complementary to, and supportive of, one or more of the principal "uses" in a "Planned Senior Residential Development." An ancillary "use" must be located on the same "lot" as the "Planned Senior Residential Development." 
"Planned Senior Residential Development District" 
A special residential zoning district in which the "use", dimensional standards and special regulations are set forth in Sections 3.7 and 5.8 and apply to the district in its entirety. 
"Private Elementary School" 
An institution conducting a regularly scheduled curriculum of study similar to that of the elementary "public schools" and operated in accordance with the Education Law of the State of New York. 
"Private Garage" 
See "Garage, Private." 
"Private Secondary School" 
An institution conducting a regularly scheduled curriculum of study similar to that of the public secondary schools and operating in accordance with a charter issued by the Board of Regents of the State of New York. 
"Professional Person" 
An attorney admitted to practice in the State of New York, or a certified public accountant, a professional engineer, an architect, a landscape architect, a physician, a dentist, a speech pathologist, an audiologist, a chiropractor, a podiatrist, a physical therapist, or an individual licensed to practice psychology, all as defined in the Education Law of the State of New York. 
"Protective Buffer Area" 
As regulated under Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance, an area surrounding a wetland, aquifer recharge area, or water resource defined in Section 3.5.2 of the Municipal Code with thresholds defined in Section 3.5.3 thereof, to be preserved and maintained, to the maximum extent practicable in its natural state. 
"Public School" 
An educational institution operated by a public school district in accordance with the Education Law of the State of New York. 
"Public Utility" 
Any "person" duly authorized to furnish to the public, under public regulation, electricity, gas, water, sewage treatment, steam, cable TV or telephone or telegraph service. 
"Real Estate Offices" 
Stores for sales at retail, or for lease or rent at retail, of one and two family residences, cooperative and condominium homes and apartments, rental apartments, and improved and unimproved land or lots for one and two family residences to individual purchasers and tenants for residential use. Real estate offices dealing exclusively in commercial property and/or in land for development shall be considered business offices and not stores for sales at retail. 
"Rear Lot Line" 
See "Lot Line, Rear." 
"Rear Yard" 
See "Yard, Rear." 
"Recreation Facilities" 
Facilities designed and used for active and passive participatory athletic and general recreation activities, such as gymnasia, dance halls, skating rinks, swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, bowling alleys and billiard rooms; excluded are facilities intended for spectator activities, such as stadia and arenas, and any "structure" in which is maintained for the amusement, patronage or recreation of the public more than three "electronic games." 
"Repair Shop" 
A business enterprise engaged in the servicing and repair of motor vehicles, including auto body repair, or the retail sale, direct to the motorist, of motor vehicle parts and accessories, including the installation thereof. 
"Restaurant" 
A business enterprise primarily engaged in preparing, cooking, and serving food and beverages on premises; selected from a full menu by patrons seated at a table or counter, served by a waiter or waitress, and consumed on the premises. See also "Cafeteria," "Cabaret," and "Fast Food Eating Establishment." 
"Restrictive Buffer Area" 
As regulated under Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance, an area surrounding a wetland, water resource, or aquifer recharge area defined in Section 3.5.2 of the Municipal Code with thresholds defined in Section 3.5.3 thereof, or a "protective buffer area" as defined in this Ordinance, in which the placement of "buildings," "structures," and "parking lots" are prohibited; and in which roads, driveways, residential parking, and site alterations as described in Section 3.5.4(1) of the Municipal Code shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable, with landscaping required pursuant to Section 4.4.19 of this Ordinance. 
"Retail Dry Cleaner" 
A business enterprise having facilities for the cleaning and pressing of clothing which deals directly with ultimate consumers, does not exceed 2,500 square feet of "gross floor area," uses only solvents with a flash point of not less than 138.2 degrees Fahrenheit, and has a total aggregate dry load capacity of machines not exceeding 60 pounds. 
"Retail Laundry" 
A business enterprise with facilities for the washing of clothing which deals directly with the ultimate consumers and which does not exceed 2,500 square feet of "gross floor area." 
"Roomer" 
An occupant of a "rooming unit." 
"Rooming House" 
Any "dwelling" containing three or more "rooming units." 
"Rooming Unit" 
One or more rooms, with or without private bathroom facilities, but without cooking facilities, which are rented or available for rent, and which are located within a "dwelling unit." 
"Service Station" 
A business enterprise engaged in the retail sale, direct to the motorist, of gasoline, and which may also include the sale of oil, tires, accessories and services for motor vehicles, including minor repair work. 
"Side Lot Line" 
See "Lot Line, Side." 
"Side Yard" 
See "Yard, Side." 
"Site Plan" 
A map showing the design for the layout, arrangement and "use" of "buildings" and land, including "accessory uses," facilities and services, and meeting the requirements of Section 7.3 of this Ordinance. 
"Social Service Centers for Homeless Persons" 
Facilities providing, without charge, counseling and referral services and a lounge and reception area, with or without meals, for indigent homeless families and individuals with no ordinary or regular home or residence address. 
"Story" 
That portion of a "building" included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost "story" shall be that portion of a "building" included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a "basement" or "cellar" is more than 6 feet above "grade," such "basement" or "cellar" shall be considered a "story." An intermediate floor between the floor and ceiling of any "story," and covering less than one-third of the "floor area" immediately below the intermediate floor shall be considered a "mezzanine," which shall not be counted as a "story." 
"Street" 
An existing State, County or City highway or road, or way shown on a subdivision plat approved by the Planning Board, or on a plat duly filed and recorded in the Office of the County Clerk prior to the appointment of the Planning Board and the grant to such board of the power to approve subdivision plats, including all of the land within the right-of-way. 
"Street Wall" 
The wall or portion of a wall of a "building" adjacent to a "street." 
"Structure" 
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. Included are "swimming pools," "parking garages" and tennis courts, but not anything requiring only simple paving or surfacing of the ground such as "parking lots," driveways or sidewalks. 
"Swimming Pool" 
A man made body of water or receptacle for water having a depth of more than 20 inches and a water surface area of more than 80 square feet, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above ground outside any "building." 
"Terrace" 
An uncovered flat platform of earth with a surface material. A "terrace" which has a roof and which is attached to a "building" shall be considered a porch. 
"Transitional Housing for Homeless Families" 
A special residential facility consisting of small "dwelling units" constructed in any multiple dwelling configuration of one or more "buildings" and including in the same or in separate "structures" on the site community and common spaces including, without limitation, child care, job counseling and training, social service referral and administrative operations, recreational opportunities and other functions as required. 
"Travel Trailer" 
A vehicular portable device built on a chassis, designed to be used primarily as a temporary abode for travel, recreation and vacation use, having a body width not exceeding 8 feet and a body length not exceeding 32 feet. See also "Camper Trailer," "Mobile Home," "Motor Home" "Pick-up Coach" and Illustration VIII. 
"Two Family Dwelling" 
See "Dwelling, Two Family." 
"University or College" 
An institution of higher education operated in accordance with a charter issued by the Board of Regents of the State of New York. 
"Usable Open Space" 
An outdoor area or areas, each containing not less than 250 square feet and with a minimum dimension of 10 feet, designed, constructed and maintained for active and passive pedestrian "use." It may include plazas, "courts," lawns, gardens sitting areas and similar types of areas, and shall be provided with such paving, planting beds, fountains, sculptures and works of art, seating, and comparable facilities as may be appropriate to the location. The design shall complement the architecture of the "building" or "buildings" on the same "lot." Up to 50 percent of the required "usable open space" may be beneath a "building" or overhang, canopy, arcade or similar projection at least 12 feet above such "space" provided it is fully open along at least 40 percent of its perimeter. All "usable open space" shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to be readily accessible. 
"Use" 
The specific purpose for which land, water, a "building" or a "structure" is designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
"Variance, Area" 
The authorization by the Board of Appeals for the "use" of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of this Ordinance. 
"Variance, Use" 
The authorization by the Board of Appeals for the "use" of land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by this Ordinance. 
"Yard" 
An open space on the same "lot" with a "building" or group of "buildings," which open space lies between the "building" or group of "buildings" and the nearest "lot line." In measuring a "yard," the line of a "building" shall be deemed to mean a line parallel to the nearest "lot line," drawn through the point of the "building" or group of "buildings" which is nearest to such "lot line," and the measurement shall be taken at right angles from the "lot line" to the nearest line of the "building." A required "yard" is that portion of a "yard" meeting the minimum "yard" requirements of Section 5.3, measured from the "lot line." See Illustration IX. The area within any minimum required perimeter setback as set forth in Section 5.7.3.4.1 is a required "yard." 
"Yard, Front" 
A "yard" extending across the full width of the "lot" and lying between the "front lot line" and the nearest point of the "building." See Illustration IX. 
"Yard, Rear" 
A "yard" extending across the full width of the "lot" and lying between the "rear lot line" and the nearest point of the "building." See Illustration IX. 
"Yard, Side" 
A "yard" between a "side lot line" and the nearest point of the "building" and extending from the "front yard" to the "rear yard," or, in the absence of either of such "yards," to the "front" and "rear lot line," as the case may be. See Illustration IX. 

( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1A ; Ord. of 12-5-16, § 1 ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1A ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1A ) 
Section 3 - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
    The City of White Plains is hereby divided into the following classes of districts (references in parentheses are to former residential zone designations): 
Residence Districts R1-30 Residential One Family R1-20 Residential One Family R1-12.5 Residential One Family R1-7.5 Residential One Family R1-5 Residential One Family R2-4 Residential One and Two Family R2-2.5 Residential One and Two Family RM-2.5 Residential Multi-Family RM-2 Residential Multi-Family RM-1.5 Residential Multi-Family RM-1.5T Residential Townhouse RM-1 Residential Multi-Family RM-0.7 Residential Multi-Family RM-0.4 Residential Multi-Family RM-0.35 Residential Multi-Family PSRDD Planned Senior Residential Development  
Business Districts C-O Campus Office PCDD Planned Campus Development O-R Office-Residential B-1 Restricted Business B-2 Neighborhood Business B-3 Intermediate Business BR-1 Business Residential-1 BR-2 Business Residential-2 CB-1 Core Business-1 CB-2 Core Business-2 CB-3 Core Business-3 CB-4 Core Business-4 TD-1 Transit Development-1 UR-4 Urban Renewal Central Business-4 B-6 Enclosed Mall  
Industrial Districts LI-M Light-Industrial-Mixed Use LI-M2 Light-Industrial-Mixed Use 2 LI Light Industrial  
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1A ; Ord. of 4-2-18, § 1A ; Ord. of 5-7-18, § 1A ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1B ) 

Sec. 3.2 - Zoning Map Establishment 
    The boundaries of these districts and special building lines are hereby established as shown on a map entitled Zoning Map, City of White Plains, New York, dated June 1, 1981, and as may be amended from time to time and certified by the City Clerk, which map accompanies and with all explanatory matter thereon is made a part of this Ordinance. The Official Copy of this map is kept by the City Clerk, with copies thereof kept by the Departments of Planning and Building. Copies at a reduced scale are included with copies of this Ordinance. Whenever the Common Council amends the Zoning Map, the City Clerk shall notify the Commissioner of Planning, who shall cause the amendment to be made to the Official Copy of the Zoning Map and to the copies kept by the Departments of Planning and Building. 
Sec. 3.3 - Interpretation of District Boundaries 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the location of any boundaries shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
3.3.1  District boundary lines follow "lot lines," "streets," municipal boundaries, rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way or watercourses, or are parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions, as shown on the Zoning Map. 
3.3.2  Where district boundaries are shown approximately following "streets," rights-of-way, railroad rights-of-way or watercourses, the center lines thereof shall be such boundaries. 
3.3.3  Where district boundaries are shown approximately following municipal boundaries or "lot lines," such municipal boundaries or "lot lines" shall be the district boundaries. 
3.3.4  Where district boundary lines divide a "lot," the location of any such boundary, if not indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the map scale appearing thereon. 
3.3.5  If the district classification of any property is in question, it shall be deemed to be in the most restrictive adjoining district. 
Sec. 3.4 - Order of Restrictiveness 
    Where zoning districts are referred to as more restrictive or less restrictive, the designations shall refer to the order in which the districts are named in Section 3.1, the first named being the most restrictive. 
Sec. 3.5 - "Lots" in Two or More Districts or Municipalities 
    Where a "lot" in one ownership of record is divided by one or more district or municipal boundary lines, the following shall apply: 
3.5.1  "Uses" permitted in one district or another municipality may not extend into another district of the City of White Plains where they would not otherwise be permitted. 
3.5.2  Except as otherwise provided in this Section, dimensional requirements permitted in one district or another municipality may not extend into another district of the City of White Plains where they would not otherwise be permitted. 
3.5.3  "Density" or "floor area ratio" for each section of a "lot" shall be determined by the dimensional requirements that are applicable to the district in which the section of the "lot" is located. 
3.5.4  "Density" or "floor area ratio" may not be transferred among sections of a "lot" unless the proposed "uses," "density" and "floor area ratio" are permitted in each district. 
3.5.5  "Building coverage" requirements permitted in one district may be extended into another district where it would not otherwise be permitted on issuance of a special permit pursuant to Section 6.7.27. 
Sec. 3.6 - Former Special Zones 
3.6.1  Special zoning conditions affecting individual properties or groups of properties and heretofore adopted as S Zones by the Common Council under the provisions of the previous Zoning Ordinance, where determined to be still applicable have been annotated on the Zoning Map by an asterisk (*) and are hereby incorporated by reference in this Ordinance. "Uses" established or "structures" constructed pursuant to such special zoning conditions shall be deemed conforming under the terms of this Ordinance. An index map annotating the properties affected by such conditions and containing the text of those conditions, or appropriate reference thereto, is kept by the City Clerk, with copies thereof kept by the Departments of Planning and Building. If the Common Council amends such index map, the City Clerk shall notify the Commissioner of Planning, who shall cause the amendment to be made to the map kept by the City Clerk and to the copies kept by the Departments of Planning and Building. 
3.6.2  In S Zones where approval of final plans, construction plans or other design documents was a condition of a change of zone, special determination or other zoning action, such design documents shall be deemed to be approved "site plans." Any amendments or changes to such design documents shall be treated as amendments to approved "site plans" in accordance with Section 7.7.2 of this Ordinance, provided that such amendments create no new non-conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 3.7 - "Planned Senior Residential Development District" 
3.7.1  "Uses," including ancillary and "accessory uses," and dimensions, including, but not limited to, "lot area," "frontage," "building coverage," "floor area ratio," "yard" setbacks, and building "height" approved by the Common Council as part of the approval of a "Planned Senior Residential Development" in a "Planned Senior Residential Development District," and "structures," parking lots and landscaping constructed pursuant to such approval, shall be deemed conforming under the terms of this Ordinance. 
3.7.2  "Planned Senior Residential Development" "site plan" documents showing the design for the layout, arrangement and "use" of "structures" and land, including, but not limited to ancillary and "accessory uses," and "accessory structures," landscaping, roadways and site access which meet the requirements of Section 7.3 of this Ordinance and have been approved by the Common Council, shall be deemed to be an approved "site plan" for the "Planned Senior Residential Development District." Any amendments or changes to such "site plan" documents which are in conformance with all of the "use" and dimensional regulations of the "Planned Senior Residential Development District" in which the "Planned Senior Residential Development" is located shall be treated as amendments to an approved "site plan" in accordance with Section 7.7.2 of this Ordinance, provided that such amendments create no new non-conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. 
3.7.3  Any amendments or changes to such "site plan" documents which are not in conformance with all of the "use" and dimensional regulations of the "Planned Senior Residential Development District" in which the "Planned Senior Residential Development" is located shall be treated as amendments to the "Planned Senior Residential Development District" in accordance with Section 12 of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 3.8 - "Planned Campus Development District" 
3.8.1  "Uses," including ancillary and "accessory uses", and dimensions, including, but not limited to, "lot area," "frontage," "building coverage," "floor area ratio," "yard" setbacks, and building "height" approved by the Common Council as part of the approval of a "planned campus development" in a "Planned Campus Development District," and "structures", parking lots and landscaping constructed pursuant to such approval, shall be deemed conforming under the terms of this Ordinance. 
3.8.2  "Planned Campus Development" "site plan" documents showing the design for the layout, arrangement and "use" of "structures" and land, including, but not limited to principal, ancillary and "accessory uses," and "accessory structures," landscaping, roadways and site access which meet the requirements of Sections 7.3, 7.5 and 5.9 of this Ordinance and have been approved by the Common Council, shall be deemed to be an approved "site plan" for the "planned campus development district." Any amendments or changes to such "site plan" documents which are in conformance with all of the "use" and dimensional regulations of the "planned campus development district" in which the "Planned Campus Development" is located shall be treated as amendments to an approved "site plan" in accordance with section 7.7.2 of this ordinance, provided that such amendments create no new non-conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. 
3.8.3  Any amendments or changes to such "site plan" documents which are not in conformance with all of the "use" and dimensional regulations of the "Planned Campus Development District" in which the "Planned Campus Development" is located shall be treated as amendments to the "Planned Campus Development District" in accordance with section 12 of this Ordinance. 
Section 4 - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 4.1 - Application of Regulations 
4.1.1  Conformity Required: No "structure" shall be erected, constructed, moved, "altered," rebuilt or enlarged, nor shall any land, water or "structure" be used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose except in conformity with this Ordinance. 
4.1.2  Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying this Ordinance, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare. 
4.1.3  Multiple Concurrent Applications: Notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, where an application requires more than one concurrent "site plan" and/or special permit approval which would otherwise be within the jurisdiction of more than one approving agency, there shall be one approving agency for all such concurrent approvals, as set forth herein. The approving agency shall be the Common Council if it would have been the approving agency for any of the approvals. In all other circumstances, the approving agency shall be the Planning Board. 
Sec. 4.2 - Relation to Other Regulations 
4.2.1  Other Applicable Codes, Standards and Regulations: There are many other applicable codes, standards and regulations of the City of White Plains in addition to this Zoning Ordinance. These include the Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans, the Building Code, the Fire Prevention Code, the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act ("SEQRA") and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, the Plumbing Code, the City Charter, the Ordinance Relating to the Erection and Maintenance of Outdoor Signs and Awnings, the Minimum Housing Standards Ordinance, the Ordinance Regulating and Prohibiting Unnecessary and Annoying Noises and Harmful Sounds, the Ordinance Licensing and Regulating Buildings Containing Rooming Units, the Air Pollution Control Ordinance, and the Ordinance to License and Regulate the Garaging of Auto Trucks or Light Delivery Cars in Residential Zones. 
4.2.2  Conflicting Standards: This Ordinance shall not be deemed to affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater or lesser restriction upon the "use" of "structures" or land, or upon the erection, construction, establishment, movement, "alteration" or enlargement of "structures" than are imposed by other ordinances, rules, regulations, licenses, certificates or other authorizations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the more restrictive requirements shall prevail. 
Sec. 4.3 - "Non-conforming Uses" and Other Non-conformities 
4.3.1  Continuing Existing "Uses," "Buildings" and "Structures" 
4.3.1.1  Except as otherwise provided herein, the lawfully permitted "use" of lands, "structures" or "buildings" and the lawfully permitted existence of "buildings" or "structures" at the time of adoption of this Ordinance may be continued although such "use," "building" or "structure" does not conform to the standards specified in this Ordinance for the district in which such lands, "buildings" or "structures" are located. Similarly, whenever a zoning classification or the restrictions affecting property within a district shall be changed hereafter so as to render "non-conforming" a "use," "building" or "structure" then presently or theretofore legally existing, such "use," "building" or "structure" may nevertheless continue subject to the conditions set forth below. 
Said "uses" shall be deemed "non-conforming uses" and said "buildings" and "structures" shall be deemed "dimensionally non-conforming." 
4.3.1.2  Any "use" in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance which is by this Ordinance made a special permit "use" in the district in which it is located shall be presumed to have a special permit to the extent such "use" is legally conforming as of the date immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
4.3.1.3  Section 4.3.1.2 notwithstanding, any "use" currently existing and meeting the definition of "Nursery Business," whether a permitted use, special permit use or non-conforming use, shall conform with all of the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance by December 31, 2021, or cease operations. 
4.3.1.4  All non-conforming uses in the residential districts meeting the definition of "Organic Manufacturing" shall cease and be discontinued on or before December 31, 2021. 
4.3.2  "Non-conforming Use" of Land, "Buildings" or "Structures": 
4.3.2.1  The "non-conforming use" of land may be continued, provided, however, that no such "non-conforming use" shall be physically enlarged or intensified, nor shall it be extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by such "use" at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, unless specifically allowed by other provisions in this Ordinance, nor shall any such "non-conforming use" be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the "lot" or parcel of land occupied by such "non-conforming use" at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance. 
4.3.2.2  A "building" or "structure" the "use" of which does not conform to the "use" regulations for the district in which it is situated shall not be enlarged, extended or "altered" structurally unless the "use" therein is changed to a conforming "use," or except to conform to an order of the Commissioner of Building to either correct an unsafe condition or to conform to the requirements of applicable laws or ordinances. 
4.3.2.3  No "non-conforming use" of a "building" or "structure" shall be enlarged or extended, except that any such "non-conforming use" may be extended throughout any parts of the "building" or "structure" which were obviously or manifestly arranged or designed only for such "use" at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
4.3.2.4  No "non-conforming use" shall be changed to another "non-conforming use," except as provided in Section 4.3.5. 
4.3.2.5  If a "non-conforming use" ceases for any reason for a total of 6 months during any 12 month period, or is changed to a conforming "use," any future "use" of the land, "building" or "structure" shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Substantial cessation of activities consistent with or required for the operation of such "non-conforming use" or substantial vacancy of the "building" or "structure" in which the "non-conforming use" was conducted, together with substantial cessation of activities consistent with or required for the operation of such "non-conforming use" shall be deemed to constitute a discontinuance thereof within the meaning of this Ordinance, irrespective of whether an intention to abandon the "non-conforming use" may exist. On application, however, the Board of Appeals may extend the period upon a finding that it is not reasonable in its application to the particular premises, taking into consideration the characteristics of the "use," the investment which has been made in it, the circumstances of the discontinuance and the suitability of the "structure" for a permitted or special permit "use." 
4.3.2.6  If any "building" or "structure" in which any "non-conforming use" is conducted or maintained is hereafter removed, the subsequent "use" of the land on which such "building" or "structure" was located and the subsequent "use" of any "building" or "structure" thereon shall be in conformity with the standards specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
4.3.3  Dimensional Non-conformity: A "lot," "building" or "structure" that is conforming in "use" but does not conform to the "lot" dimension, "yard" dimension, "height," "building coverage," "floor area ratio," off-"street" parking, loading, or similar dimensional regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which such "lot," "building" or "structure" is located, shall be deemed to be "dimensionally non-conforming." No permit shall be issued that will result in the increase of any such dimensional "non-conformity, but any "building" or "structure" or portion thereof may be "altered" to decrease its dimensional non-conformity. 
4.3.4  Reconstruction: 
4.3.4.1  Should a "building" or "structure," the use of which or the "use" of a portion of which is "non-conforming," or which is "dimensionally non-conforming," be destroyed or damaged by any means to an extent of more than 75 percent of the replacement cost of the entire "building" or "structure" used in connection therewith at the time of the reconstruction, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or used except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4.3.4.2  Should a "building" or "structure," the "use" of which or the "use" of a portion of which is "non-conforming" or which is "dimensionally non-conforming," be destroyed or damaged by any means to an extent of 75 percent or less of the replacement cost of the entire "building" or "structure" used in connection therewith at the time of the reconstruction, it may be reconstructed and any accompanying "non-conforming use" or "use" which is "dimensionally non-conforming" continued, provided that the reconstruction is commenced within 1 year of the date of such damage and completed within 2 years of said date, and further provided that it shall be reconstructed in accordance with a plan approved by the Board of Appeals so as to result, where reasonable, in greater conformity with this Ordinance. 
4.3.5  Change to Other "Non-conforming Use": On application, any "non-conforming use" of land, "buildings" or "structures" may be changed to another "non-conforming use" upon approval by the Board of Appeals, based on a finding that the proposed "non-conforming use" is more appropriate to the district than the existing "non-conforming use." In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may impose whatever conditions and safeguards it may deem necessary or appropriate to further the purposes of this Ordinance. 
4.3.6  Improvement of "Non-conforming Uses": In order that "non-conforming uses" may gradually be brought into greater conformity with this Ordinance and the adverse external effects of such "non-conforming uses" may be reduced, the owner of the land, "building" or "structure" so used may be permitted to make limited changes to such "building," "structure" or "non-conforming use" in conjunction with a "site plan" whereby through landscaped screening and buffer areas, control of noise, smoke, odors, lighting, architectural changes, location and layout of "parking lots" and access drives, or by any other appropriate means, these purposes may be achieved. Such plan shall be presented to the Board of Appeals (to the Common Council where the minimum parking requirement of this Ordinance for the subject "non-conforming use" exceeds 50 spaces) which may then grant approval or approval with modifications provided said agency finds that the purposes of this Section shall be met. 
4.3.7  Amortization of "Parking Lots" in Residence Districts: Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this Section, any "parking lot" which is no longer a permitted "use" under the terms of this Ordinance shall cease and be discontinued by the third anniversary of the effective date of this Ordinance and any subsequent "use" of the premises on which it is located shall conform to the "use" regulations of the district in which such premises are located. 
4.3.8  Applicability of Garaging of Auto Trucks or Light Delivery Cars: Except as otherwise specifically permitted, no auto truck or light delivery car shall be parked on property in any residential district except where a "private garage" accessory to a "dwelling" in a residential district has been authorized for such "use" for a particular vehicle duly licensed under an ordinance adopted May 2, 1977 and effective August 2, 1977, entitled An Ordinance to License and Regulate Garaging of Auto Trucks or Light Delivery Cars in Residential Zones. Such garage may continue to be used for the garaging of such vehicle licensed for "use" thereof as long as such vehicle continues to be licensed and so long as the ownership of the residentially zoned property to which the "private garage" is accessory remains unchanged. For the purposes of this Section, a change of title from one spouse to another or to a surviving spouse shall not be deemed a change in ownership. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1B ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1B ) 
Sec. 4.4 - General Regulations 
4.4.1  "Lot" for Every "Building": Every "building" hereafter erected shall be located on a "lot" and there shall be no more than one "main building" and its "accessory buildings" on one "lot," except in "conservation developments" and except for multi-family and non-residential "buildings" in districts where such "uses" are permitted. 
4.4.2  Subdivision of a "Lot": Where a "lot" is formed hereafter from part of a "lot" already occupied by a "building," such separation shall be effected in such manner as not to impair conformity with any of the requirements of this Ordinance with respect to the existing "building" and all "yards" and other required dimensional regulations in connection therewith, and no permit shall be issued for the erection of a "building" on the new "lot" thus created unless it complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance.Where the dimensions of two existing "lots" are changed and no additional "lots" are created, such change shall not be deemed a subdivision provided that the dimensions of both resulting "lots" comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4.4.3  Irregularly Shaped "Lots": Where a question exists as to the proper application of any of the requirements of this Ordinance to a particular "lot" because of its peculiar or irregular shape, the Board of Appeals shall determine how the requirements of this Ordinance apply as provided in Section 10.3.6 of this Ordinance. 
4.4.4  Obstructions to Vision at Intersections in Residential Districts: In accordance with the provisions of an ordinance entitled An Ordinance Regulating and Controlling Obstructions to Vision on the Corner Lots in Residence Districts in the City of White Plains, adopted August 4, 1980, nothing shall be placed or maintained within the restricted area of an intersection in a residential district in such a manner as to obstruct traffic visibility. 
4.4.5  New "Buildings" on "Lots" Smaller Than Minimum Required Area or Dimensions: A permit may be issued for the erection of a "building" for a permitted "use" on a "lot" for which a valid conveyance has been recorded prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, notwithstanding that the area or dimensions of such "lot" are less than that required for the district in which such "lot" is located, provided that: 
4.4.5.1  The "lot" met the zoning requirements at the time the deed to the "lot" was recorded or the title to the "lot" was conveyed; 
4.4.5.2  All "yard" setbacks and other "building" related requirements which are in effect at the time of the obtaining of the building permit are complied with; 
4.4.5.3  The ownership of such "lot" was not the same as any other "lot" or "lots" contiguous thereto at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance. If the opposite is the case, such other "lot" or "lots," or so much thereof as may be necessary, shall be combined with the first-named "lot" to make one or more conforming "lots," whereupon a permit may be issued, but only for such conforming "lots." 
4.4.5.4  Where the required area or dimensions of "lots" are changed by an amendment to this Ordinance, any "lot" legally in existence on that date and made non-conforming by such amendment may be built upon as provided in this Section. 
4.4.6  "Yard" for Every "Building": Except on a "development site," no "yard," "court," or other open space provided about any "building" for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included as any part of the "yard," "court" or open space for any other "building." Except on a "development site", no "yard," "court" or any other open space on one "lot" shall be considered as a "yard," "court" or open space for a "building" on any other "lot." 
4.4.7  Use of "Yards": No "building," "accessory building" or "structure" shall be permitted within any minimum required "yard" except for "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3, and except as may be specifically permitted in Section 5.3. No parking shall be permitted within any "yard" except as provided in Section 8. 
4.4.8  No Reduction of Required "Yards": No "lot" shall be so reduced in area as to make any "yard" or "court" smaller than the minimum required under this Ordinance. 
4.4.9  "Front" and "Side Yards" on "Corner Lots": The owner of a "corner lot" in a residence district may elect either "yard" fronting on a "street" as the "front yard," with any other "yard" fronting on a "street" then becoming a "side yard." However, where the majority of "lots" in any block are developed, the "front yard" shall be on the same side as the "front yards" of such other "lots." Also, if on the "street" chosen for the "side yard," the approving agency or the Commissioner of Building for a "one family" or "two family dwelling" and its permitted "accessory buildings," accessory "structures" and "accessory uses" finds that there is an average setback of existing "buildings," from which no "building" departs too greatly, the agency or Commissioner may require the "side yard" on such "corner lot" to be equal in depth to such average setback. 
4.4.10  "Side Yards" of Existing "Lots" Narrower Than 50 Feet: For each 1 foot by which a "lot" in a residential district is narrower than 50 feet, 1.5 inches may be deducted from the required minimum width of any "side yard" and 3 inches from the sum of the required widths of both "side yards" for "buildings" not exceeding 2 1/2 "stories," provided, however, that no "side yard" shall be narrower at any point than 5 feet in any case. 
4.4.11  "Rear Yards" of Existing "Lots" Shallower Than 100 Feet: For each 1 foot by which a "lot" in a residence district is less than 100 feet deep, 3 inches may be deducted from the required minimum depth of the "rear yard," provided, however, that no required "rear yard" shall be less than 15 feet deep in any case. 
4.4.12  Special "Building" Setbacks: All requirements of this Ordinance applicable to "front yards" shall apply within a special "building" setback. In addition, no "building" or "structure" may be located therein (either below or above ground), no projecting horizontal architectural features shall be allowed therein (Section 4.4.14.2 to the contrary notwithstanding), nor shall any "parking lot" be located therein (Section 8.6.1 to the contrary notwithstanding), except in the Central Parking Area as may be determined by the "site plan" approving agency to be consistent with the anticipated and desired "uses" and purposes of any such special "building" setback and approved by the approving agency as part of the "site plan." In cases where the "front yard" requirements in Column 9 of Section 5.3 of this Ordinance, Schedule of Dimensional Regulations, are greater than the special "building" setback, the requirements of Section 5.3 shall apply. 
4.4.13  "Courts": Any corner of a "court" area may be cut off between walls of the same "building," provided that the length of such diagonal cutoff wall does not exceed 6 feet. 
4.4.14  Structural Projections Permitted into Required "Yards" and "Courts": 
4.4.14.1  Limited walls and fences may be allowed in required "yards" and "courts," subject to the requirements of Section 4.4.16. 
4.4.14.2  The ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, chimneys, cornices, and eaves and other similar architectural features are allowed, provided that such architectural features shall not project more than 3 feet into any required "yard" and not be less than 5 feet from any "lot line," except for eaves which may be 4 feet from a "lot line." 
4.4.14.3  A "deck," "terrace," or steps, the top surface of which is not over 3 feet high above the average natural "grade" of the "lot" and which is not over 3 feet above the pre-existing "grade" directly below any such "deck" and which is distant at least 5 feet from every "lot line," may project into a required "yard." In residential districts such projections shall be at least 15 feet from any "front lot line" or "rear lot line." Any projecting "structures," including steps and "decks," shall be included in computing "gross land coverage." 
4.4.14.4  No other porch may project into any required "yard." 
4.4.14.5  Balconies may project into a required "yard," provided such projection is not more than 5 feet, extends no closer than 10 feet to any "lot line," and the sum of the length of such balconies on any "story" does not exceed one-fourth the length of the wall from which they project. 
4.4.15  Exceptions to "Height" Limitations: The "height" limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to the following: 
4.4.15.1  Churches, schools and "uses" of the City of White Plains in residence districts provided that for each 1 foot by which the "height" of such "building" exceeds the maximum "height" permitted in the district, the "side," "front" and "rear yards" required shall be increased an additional 1 foot. 
4.4.15.2  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, observation towers, chimneys, smoke stacks, derricks, flag poles, radio towers, masts and aerials, where not used for human occupancy. 
4.4.15.3  Rooftop bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water towers, water tanks, monitors, fire towers, hose towers, or cooling towers, and such other equipment as is deemed necessary by the Commissioner of Building, provided that such mechanical equipment shall be erected only to the height necessary to accomplish the purpose it is intended to serve. The maximum area covered by such mechanical equipment shall be as determined necessary and appropriate by the approving agency on recommendation from the Commissioner of Building, and where the "lot" on which such mechanical equipment is located is in or adjacent to a residence district such mechanical equipment shall be set back from the edge of the roof at least 1 foot for each 1 foot by which such features exceed the maximum "height" otherwise specified for the district in which they are located. 
4.4.15.4  Parapet walls or cornices which do not exceed the maximum "height" requirement for the district in which they are located by more than 4 feet. 
4.4.15.5  Solar energy systems installed pursuant to the requirements of Section 4.4.21 of this Ordinance, provided that such systems shall be erected only to the height necessary to accomplish the purpose they are intended to serve. 
4.4.15.6  The visual screening of mechanical equipment located above the horizontal area of the roof of "buildings" as required under Section 4.4.22 of this Ordinance. 
4.4.15.7  For "buildings" located in the CB-4 and UR-4 Districts within the Central Parking Area, on development sites over 200,000 square feet and at the absolute discretion of the Common Council as "site plan" approving agency, "uses" ancillary or accessory to permitted principal "uses" in the "building," other than dwelling units, hotel rooms, or facilities providing sleeping accommodations may be located above the maximum "height" of the "building" within an area enclosed by the visual screening of the mechanical equipment, as approved pursuant to Section 4.4.22, but in no case shall the area occupied by any "use" be greater than 80% of the horizontal area of any mechanical level on which such use is located. 
4.4.15.8  In the UR-4 and CB-4 districts within the Central Parking Area, on development sites of 200,000 square feet or greater, an increase in "height" resulting from a modification, "alteration," adjustment or change to an approved "site plan" which does not exceed any of the following thresholds as shown and approved on the approved "site plan": 
4.4.15.8.1  There is no increase in the number of "stories." 
4.4.15.8.2  There is no increase in the "gross floor area." 
4.4.15.8.3  There is no increase in the overall "height" of the "building" to the top of the approved visual screening of the mechanical equipment. 
4.4.15.8.4  There is no significant "alteration" of the essential characteristics of the design of any "buildings" or of the relationship of the project to the "street," adjacent properties and the area in general. 
4.4.15.9  "Multi-family dwelling", "Hotel" and "Extended Stay Hotel" Uses in the LI-M District 
In the LI-M district, the maximum permitted height of buildings for "Multi-family dwelling", " hotel" and " extended stay hotel" uses may be six (6) stories and 85 feet and limited to properties that lie between Westmoreland Avenue and the MetroNorth Railroad. 
4.4.15.10  "Multi-family dwelling" Use in the LI-M2 District 
In the LI-M2 district, the maximum permitted "height" of "buildings" for "Multi-family dwelling" use may be six (6) "stories" and 70 feet if at least 15% of the "lot area" or "development site" is designated as at-grade publicly accessible open space. 
4.4.16  Fences: Fences and walls, including retaining walls, are permitted within required "yards" and "courts" provided that: 
4.4.16.1  Such fences or walls do not exceed 4 feet in height if located in a required "front yard" or in any other required "yard" abutting a "street," and 6 feet in height in any other required "yard," except that a fence of not less than three-fourths open construction may have a maximum height of 8 feet where located in a non-residential district, and except that the Commissioner of Building may, where required for safety, require the addition to a retaining wall of a motor vehicle bumper guard or a fence, of not less than three-fourths open construction and not exceeding the above height limitations by more than 4 feet. A fence or wall not exceeding 8 feet in height shall be permitted for purposes of sound attenuation within a required "side yard" or "rear yard" which "yard" immediately abuts the following limited access roadways: I-287, the Bronx River Parkway, the Hutchinson River Parkway, and the Central Westchester Parkway or access ramps leading thereto, conditioned that both sides of the fence or wall be equally finished. 
4.4.16.2  The fence or wall meets the requirements of Section 4.4.4 of this Ordinance. 
4.4.16.3  If any such fence or wall located within a required "yard" has a finished or more attractive side, such side shall face the neighboring property or "street." 
4.4.16.4  All fences or walls must be inside all "lot lines." 
4.4.16.5  Electrically charged fences, barbed wire fences and other fences constructed of sharp materials are not permitted within residential districts. Barbed wire is permitted as a part of a fence in a non-residential district provided such barbed wire is located at least 6 feet above the ground. 
4.4.17  Security Grilles: 
4.4.17.1  Roll-up, folding or sliding doors or grilles of non-combustible construction, otherwise known as security grilles, may be attached to the exterior of "buildings" in the LI (Light Industrial) district, and may project from the "building" beyond the "lot line," provided: 
4.4.17.1.1  Such security grilles may project no more than 4 inches beyond the "lot line." An enclosure, motor or housing for said security grille may project up to 18 inches beyond the "lot line" provided that there is at least 8 feet of clearance between the lowest point of such projection and the ground or pavement below. 
4.4.17.1.2  All security grilles and accompanying enclosures, motors and housings shall be constructed so that they may be removed at any time without endangering the structural safety or fire safety of the "building." 
4.4.17.1.3  All security grilles shall be of one hundred percent open construction throughout, and must be located within a completely enclosed structure when not in use. 
4.4.17.1.4  All security grilles are subject to review and approval by the Design Review Board. 
4.4.17.2  As of the date of adoption of this Ordinance, roll-up, folding or sliding doors or grilles of non-combustible construction, otherwise known as security grilles, may not be installed on the exterior of any "building" within non-residential districts, but may be installed within the interior of such "buildings," subject to the following: 
4.4.17.2.1  All security grilles shall be of one hundred percent (100%) open construction (open mesh design) throughout. 
4.4.17.2.2  In lieu of the above, other similar security grates or devices may be installed within the interior of "buildings," subject to review and approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety and the Design Review Board. 
4.4.17.2.3  All security grilles in existence on August 6, 1984, which are not of one hundred percent (100%) open design (such as security grilles made up, in whole or part, of solid panels) shall be removed, and such use shall be discontinued on or before August 6, 1985. 
4.4.17.2.4  All security grilles in existence as of the date of the adoption of this Ordinance which are attached to the exterior of "buildings," except in the LI district, shall be removed at the time of any change in "use." 
4.4.17.2.5  No security grille or similar device shall be installed unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Building, following review and approval by the Design Review Board. 
4.4.18  Outdoor Storage: 
4.4.18.1  Except where otherwise specifically permitted by this Ordinance or by any other ordinance or regulation of the City of White Plains, no outdoor storage of any kind nor outdoor display of goods for sale shall be permitted in any district. 
4.4.18.2  No boat 18 feet or more in length may be stored or parked in any district. No "mobile home," "motor home," "travel trailer" or "pick-up coach" may be stored or parked in any district except that temporary use of such devices for offices is permitted for highway or municipal construction projects or for construction projects for which a building permit has been issued. 
4.4.18.3  "Camper trailers" or boats less than 18 feet in length may not be parked nor stored outdoors. They may, however, be store or parked within a completely enclosed "building," conditioned that the doors to such "building" shall be kept closed when such boat or "camper trailer" is parked or stored therein. 
4.4.19  Landscaping, Screening and Buffer Areas: 
4.4.19.1  All portions of "lots" and "development sites" subject to special permit review under Section 6 of this Ordinance or "site plan" review under Section 7 of this Ordinance which are not used for locations for "buildings," "structures," "parking lots," loading spaces," sidewalks or similar purposes, shall be suitably landscaped and permanently maintained with planting of ground cover, grass, trees and shrubbery, in accordance with specifications approved as a part of the "site plan." 
4.4.19.2  Any application to construct or "alter" any "building" or "structure" or to establish any "use" in any non-residential district or any non-residential "use" in any district shall include provisions for a buffer screening area at least 10 feet in width along any "lot line" abutting a "lot" in a residential district. Any application to construct a development of "multi-family dwellings" requiring more than 10 "parking spaces" shall include provisions for a buffer screening area at least 10 feet in width along any "lot line" abutting a privately owned "lot" in a one-family or two-family residential district. These requirements may be waived by the approving agency in situations where it determines that adjoining land "uses," topographic features or existing vegetation satisfy the same purpose. The approving agency may allow the substitution of a wall or fence of location, height, design and materials approved by it, and meeting the requirements of Section 4.4.14, for part or all of the required planting. Where such a buffer screening area is required, it shall be of evergreen planting of such type, height, spacing and arrangement as in the judgment of the approving authority will screen the activity involved from the neighboring residential area. Non-evergreen planting may seasonally supplement evergreen planting but not take its place. The plan and specifications for such planting shall be filed with the "site plan" approved by the approving agency for the "use" of the "lot" or "development site." 
4.4.19.3  All required landscaping shall be properly trimmed and maintained in good condition at all times. 
4.4.19.4  In the RM-1 District, a minimum of 20 percent of the area of "lots" subject to special permit review under Section 6 of this Ordinance or "site plan" review under Section 7 of this Ordinance shall be suitably landscaped and permanently maintained with planting of ground cover, grass, trees, and shrubbery, in accordance with specifications approved as part of the "site plan" approval. 
4.4.19.5  In the RM-1.5 and RM-2.5 Districts, a minimum of 25 percent of the area of "lots" subject to special permit review under Section 6 of this Ordinance or "site plan" review under Section 7 of this Ordinance shall be suitably landscaped and permanently maintained with planting of ground cover, grass, trees and shrubbery, in accordance with the specifications approved as part of the "site plan" approval. 
4.4.19.6  In a "Planned Campus Development in a Planned Campus Development District, landscaping shall be subject to the approval of the approving agency as part of the integrated "site plan." 
4.4.20  Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting accessory to multi-family or non-residential "uses," and all exterior lighting of "recreation facilities" accessory to residential "uses," including the lighting of signs, shall be of such type and location and have such shading as will prevent the source of light from being seen from any adjoining "streets" and residential properties and which will prevent objectionable glare observable from such "streets" or properties. 
4.4.21  Solar Access and Energy Considerations: 
4.4.21.1  Solar energy systems, which are devices used to capture the sun's radiation and transform it into usable heat or electricity, are permitted as a part of, and may be attached to, any "building." 
4.4.21.2  Except as otherwise provided by this section, installation of solar energy systems shall be subject to approval by the Design Review Board which shall, in its review pursuant to the requirements of Section 9 of this Ordinance, take into account the needs of energy conservation. Installation of solar energy systems for one or two family structures which do not require a variance, have a rated capacity of 12 kW or less, where the system is to be mounted parallel to the roof surface, or tilted with no more than an eighteen (18) inch gap between the module frame and the roof surface, shall not require approval by the Design Review Board. 
4.4.21.3  Access to sunlight for present and potential solar energy systems, both on and off site, as well as "building" siting, orientation and landscaping, shall be considered by all approving agencies as a part of their review of any application. 
4.4.21.4  New construction on any "lot" which would block access to sunlight between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time for existing approved solar energy systems or for solar energy systems for which a permit has been issued is prohibited except by permission from the Board of Appeals on a showing that other arrangements are infeasible or impractical, or that the degree of blocking is negligible. 
4.4.22  Mechanical Equipment to be Screened: Mechanical equipment located on and above the tops of "buildings" shall be visually screened in a manner approved by the agency approving the "site plan" on recommendation of the Design Review Board. 
4.4.22.1  For "buildings" located in the CB-4 and UR-4 Districts within the Central Parking Area on development sites of 200,000 square feet or greater, the following shall also apply: 
4.4.22.1.1  The visual screening of the mechanical equipment shall enclose "uses" approved pursuant to Section 4.4.15.7 hereof. 
4.4.22.2  The approving agency for the visual screening of mechanical equipment shall be the Common Council. 
4.4.23  Accessory "Dish Antenna": "Dish antennas" shall not be located, installed, constructed or maintained on any "lot," "building" or "structure" except when in compliance with all of the following requirements and any of the individual standards contained in Section 6.7.21, where applicable. 
4.4.23.1  Location: All "dish antennas" shall conform to the following requirements: 
4.4.23.1.1  A "dish antenna" shall not be located in any portion of a "front yard" and shall be no closer to any "lot line" than the minimum distance established for accessory "structures" for the district. It may be excluded from "side yards" if it is determined to be substantially visible from a "street." 
4.4.23.1.2  A "dish antenna" shall not be mounted on a roof or attached to a "building" or "structure" in any one or two family residential district, except if the applicant complies with the criteria set forth in Section 6.7.21.2. 
4.4.23.2  Size: The dish component of a "dish antenna" shall not be greater than 10 feet in diameter, nor greater than 10 feet in depth at its greatest point. 
4.4.23.3  Height: A "dish antenna" mounted on the ground shall not exceed 15 feet in height above the mean ground level. A "dish antenna" mounted on a "building" or roof shall not exceed 12 feet in height, nor shall any "dish antenna" project above the peak or highest point of the roof line in one and two family residential districts. The height of a "dish antenna" shall be measured from the bottom of its base or pad to the highest point of the "dish antenna" when in its most vertical position. 
4.4.23.4  Materials: All "dish antennas" shall be of mesh-type open design, and the construction of the device shall not be brightly colored, reflective or otherwise obtrusive. It shall be properly colored to conform to the surrounding areas and "buildings." 
4.4.23.5  Screening: All "dish antennas" shall be reasonably located and screened to minimize visibility from "streets" and the surrounding properties by using fencing, earth berms, landscaping and or architectural features. 
4.4.23.6  Other Requirements: All "dish antennas" shall conform to the following additional requirements: 
4.4.23.6.1  No more than one "dish antenna" shall be located on any "building," "structure" or "lot" in any residential district or within 25 feet of any residential district line or residential "use" in non-residential districts. 
4.4.23.6.2  A "dish antenna" shall be designed for the exclusive use of residents of the "main building" in one and two family residential districts. 
4.4.23.6.3  A "dish antenna" shall be located so as to minimize motor or other noises to the street, sidewalk or nearby properties. 
4.4.23.6.4  All "dish antennas" shall be designed, constructed and installed in conformance with all building, electrical, fire prevention, noise and other applicable codes and the Tree Preservation Guidelines adopted by the City of White Plains, as well as any other construction or performance standards, rules and regulations of any governmental entity having jurisdiction over such devices, including, without limitation, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
4.4.23.7  Application Requirements: All "dish antennas" shall conform to the following application requirements: 
4.4.23.7.1  A special permit shall be required for any "dish antenna" which has a dish component in excess of 4 feet in diameter or 4 feet in width, is located outside of the "rear yard," is mounted on any roof, "building" or "structure," or does not conform to all the requirements set forth in Section 4.4.23 as determined by the Commissioner of Building. 
4.4.23.7.2  A building permit may be issued for any "dish antenna" which is up to 10 feet in any dimension, is located outside of the "rear yard," is mounted on any roof, "building" or "structure," is of solid design and light or reflective color, when it is installed on a "building" or "structure" located in a C-O, O-R, B-3, CB-1, CB-2, CB-3, CB-4, B-6 or LI district, and the "dish antenna" is no closer than 100 feet from any "dwelling unit" or 25 feet from any residential district. 
4.4.23.7.3  No building permit for the installation of any "dish antenna" shall be issued or application deemed complete until a detailed design has been submitted to the Department of Building showing and justifying the location, elevations, the maximum swing of the operating arc and screening. The Commissioner of Building may request additional data if deemed necessary. 
4.4.23.7.4  All applications for a "dish antenna" shall be forwarded to the Design Review Board for review and report. 
4.4.24  Accessory "Swimming Pools": "Swimming pools" shall not be located, installed, constructed or maintained on any "lot" except when in compliance with all of the following requirements and any of the individual standards contained in Section 6.7.3 of this Ordinance, where applicable. 
4.4.24.1  "Swimming pools" installed above ground shall have a height no greater than 60 inches as measured from the mean ground level at the base of the pool to the rim of the pool. The exposed sides of such "swimming pool" shall be screened by evergreen landscaping whose height at the time of installation shall be at least equal to the height of the exposed portion of the "swimming pool," exclusive of "deck" rails. Such landscaping shall be no more than 5 feet away from the pool base and shall extend a minimum of 2 feet beyond the outer edge of any projecting "deck." Such "swimming pools" shall have adequate fencing, a minimum of 6 feet in height, with a self-closing and self-latching and locking gate (integral "deck" rails and hinged lockable ladders shall be a sufficient substitute for fencing). The fencing shall surround the pool and accessory equipment only. 
4.4.24.2  "Swimming pools" installed in the ground, where the rim of the pool is flush with the ground or with an on-ground "terrace," shall be required to have adequate fencing with a self-closing and self-latching and locking gate into the pool area and an evergreen screen which shall have a minimum height of 3 feet and shall be planted 3 to 4 feet on center around the "swimming pool" or property as specified by the Commissioner of Building. Fencing around "swimming pools" should be a minimum of 6 feet in height and of either metal or factory pressure-treated wood with preservatives. All posts, regardless of material, shall be embedded in concrete. 
4.4.24.3  All "swimming pools" as measured from the edge of the "deck" area, or from the pool rim if no "deck" is provided, shall be located no less than 15 feet from all "lot lines." 
4.4.24.4  All "swimming pools" shall be for the exclusive use of the occupant of the "main building" and his non-paying guests. 
4.4.24.5  The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Building that the proposed "swimming pool" will comply with the Plumbing Code for all sewerage and sanitary facilities, and with the specifications of the Westchester County Board of Health for maintenance and operation. 
4.4.24.6  The times of filling and emptying the "swimming pool," and pipe sizes to be used for such purposes, shall be specified in the permit, on recommendation of the Commissioner of Public Works. 
4.4.24.7  All "swimming pool" fences shall be located not more than 25 feet from the edge of the "swimming pool." 
4.4.24.8  The filter pump and electrical switch shall be in a locked enclosure at a location where noise will not emanate beyond the perimeter of the property, as determined by the Commissioner of Building. If applicable, the Commissioner of Building shall establish hours of operation. 
4.4.24.9  Where the construction of a lake or pond, which otherwise meets the definition of "swimming pool," is reviewed as a part of a subdivision, "site plan" or special permit application, that review shall suffice and a separate permit under this Section need not be obtained. 
4.4.25  "Environmentally Sensitive Sites and Features" 
4.4.25.1  Any proposed action under this Ordinance which action is on, involves, or may affect an "environmentally sensitive site or feature" defined and meeting the thresholds established in Chapter 3.5 of the Municipal Code shall be subject to the requirements of Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance, except as otherwise provided herein. 
4.4.25.2  In reviewing applications and granting any approvals under Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance, the approving agency shall, to the maximum extent practicable, avoid adverse environmental impacts upon any "environmentally sensitive sites or features" and where such avoidance is not practicable, shall minimize and mitigate such impacts. 
4.4.25.3  On an "environmentally sensitive site", where a certificate of use or occupancy has been issued or for which an approval under this Ordinance has been granted and remains in full force and effect, Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance shall not apply to the conduct of normal land maintenance and conservation measures or to the general maintenance and repair of improvements, including "buildings," "structures", parking, roads, and driveways except that these activities may be subject to regulation under Section 3-5-4(1) of the Municipal Code. 
4.4.25.4  Procedures: When reviewing an action which is on, involves or may affect an "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the approving agency for the proposed action shall follow the procedures set forth herein below: 
4.4.25.4.1  Any proposed action requiring approval under Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance shall be considered a Type I Action under the New York State Environmental Quality Review Act ("SEQRA"). 
4.4.25.4.2  For any proposed action requiring approval under Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance, the affirmative vote of two-thirds or more of the members of the approving agency shall be required. 
4.4.25.4.3  Notwithstanding provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary, and in addition to specific regulations pertaining to the approval of actions on, involving or which may affect an "environmentally sensitive site or feature," no such approval shall be given except following a public hearing held on due notice, provided, however, that no such hearing shall be required for minor amendments to "conservation developments" as set forth in Section 5.7 of this Ordinance, and minor amendments to "site plans" as set forth in Section 7.7.1 of this Ordinance. 
4.4.25.4.4  Notwithstanding the minimum acreage specifications in Section 5.7.2.2, the Planning Board may apply the provisions of Section 5.7, "Conservation Developments" to such extent as may be necessary to preserve and/or protect "environmentally sensitive sites or features." 
4.4.25.4.5  In considering for approval an application for a subdivision, special permit or "site plan" involving an "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the approving agency may make any reasonable changes to the minimum dimensions for "frontage," one "side yard" and two "side yards," "front yard" and "rear yard" as may be required to avoid or minimize impact upon such "environmentally sensitive site or feature." In the event the approving agency makes such change, it shall require the applicant to submit a plat or "site plan" which reflects such change. 
4.4.25.5  Individual Standards for "Environmentally Sensitive Features": The following standards and protection measures shall be applied with respect to individual "environmentally sensitive features" to avoid adverse environmental impacts, or, where avoidance is not practicable, to minimize and mitigate such impacts: 
4.4.25.5.1  For a wetland or an aquifer recharge area existing in its natural state, to the maximum extent practicable, the following shall apply: 
4.4.25.5.1.1  Where located on sites of three acres or less, or on sites greater than three acres not governed by Section 4.4.25.5.1.2 of this Ordinance, the preservation in its natural state of the wetland or aquifer recharge area, and the establishment and preservation of a 50 foot "protective buffer area" surrounding the wetland or aquifer recharge area; 
4.4.25.5.1.2  Where located in an R1-12.5, R1-20 or R1-30 Residential Zoning District on a site greater than 3 acres, the preservation in its natural state of a wetland or aquifer recharge area, and the establishment and preservation in its natural state of a 50 foot "protective buffer area" surrounding the wetland or aquifer recharge area, and the further establishment and preservation of either an additional 50 foot "protective buffer area" or an additional 50 foot "restrictive buffer area," as determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance to protect "environmentally sensitive sites and features" to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.4.25.5.2  For a wetland or an aquifer recharge area which has been altered from its natural state, to the maximum extent practicable, the following shall apply: 
4.4.25.5.2.1  Where located on sites of three acres or less, or on sites greater than three acres not governed by Section 4.4.25.5.2.2, the wetland or aquifer recharge area shall, at minimum, be maintained in its existing condition and either a 50 foot "protective buffer area" or a 50 foot "restrictive buffer area," shall be established and maintained surrounding the wetland or aquifer recharge area, as determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of protecting the "environmentally sensitive site and features" to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.4.25.5.2.2  Where located in an R1-12.5, R1-20 or R1-30 Residential Zoning District on a site greater than 3 acres, the wetland or aquifer recharge area shall, at minimum, be maintained in its existing condition and either a 50 foot "protective buffer area" or a 50 foot "restrictive buffer area", shall be established and maintained surrounding the wetland or aquifer recharge area, as determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of protecting the "environmentally sensitive site and features" to the maximum extent practicable, and a further 50 foot "protective buffer area" or "restrictive buffer area" shall be established and maintained around either the "protective buffer area" or "restrictive buffer area" established around the wetland or aquifer recharge area, as further determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of protecting the "environmentally sensitive site and features" to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.4.25.5.3  For a water resource in its natural state, to the maximum extent practicable, the following shall apply: 
4.4.25.5.3.1  Where located on sites of three acres or less, or on sites greater than three acres not governed by 4.4.25.5.3.2, the preservation in its natural state of the water resource and the establishment and preservation of a 25 foot "protective buffer area" on all sides of the water resource. 
4.4.25.5.3.2  Where located in an R1-12.5, R1-20 or R1-30 Residential Zoning District on a site greater than 3 acres, the preservation in its natural state of the water resource, and the establishment and preservation in its natural state of a 50 foot "protective buffer area" on all sides of the water resource, and the further establishment and preservation of either an additional 50 foot "protective buffer area" or an additional 50 foot "restrictive buffer area," as determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance to protect "environmentally sensitive sites and features" to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.4.25.5.4  For a water resource which has been altered from its natural state, to the maximum extent practicable, the following shall apply: 
4.4.25.5.4.1  Where located on sites of three acres or less, or on sites greater than three acres not governed by 4.4.25.5.4.2, the water resource shall, at minimum, be maintained in its existing condition and either a 25 foot "protective buffer area" or a 25 foot "restrictive buffer area," shall be established and maintained on all sides of the water resource as determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of protecting the "environmentally sensitive site and features" to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.4.25.5.4.2  Where located in an R1-12.5, R1-20 or R1-30 Residential Zoning District on a site greater than 3 acres, the water resource shall, at minimum, be maintained in its existing condition and either a 50 foot "protective buffer area" or a 50 foot "restrictive buffer area," shall be established and maintained on all sides of the water resource, as determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of protecting the "environmentally sensitive site and features" to the maximum extent practicable, and a further 50 foot "protective buffer area" or "restrictive buffer area" shall be established and maintained around either the "protective buffer area" or "restrictive buffer area" established around water resource, as further determined appropriate by the approving agency consistent with the objective of protecting the "environmentally sensitive site and features" to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.4.25.5.4.3  Piping of a water resource shall be avoided except for crossings of roads and driveways. 
4.4.25.5.5  For a rock outcropping or steep slope area, to the maximum extent practicable, the following avoidance, minimization and mitigation measures shall apply, as determined appropriate by the approving agency: 
4.4.25.5.5.1  Avoid impacts or minimize and mitigate the degree to which the proposed development of the area creates an unnatural shape to the slopes on the site; 
4.4.25.5.5.2  Avoid impacts or minimize and mitigate the degree to which the proposed development of the site would impact rock outcroppings and steep slopes, through terracing, landscaping, retaining walls or otherwise; 
4.4.25.5.5.3  Avoid impacts or minimize and mitigate the degree to which the proposed development of the site would impact the views of the steep slope and surrounding areas; 
4.4.25.5.5.4  Avoid impacts or minimize and mitigate the degree to which the proposed development would impact erosion and the stability of the steep slope, both during and after construction. 
4.4.26  "Consumer Financial Services Establishment": 
4.4.26.1  An applicant for a building permit as a "Consumer Financial Services Establishment" shall provide documentation satisfactory to the Commissioner of Building demonstrating that the proposed establishment meets the following criteria: 
4.4.26.1.1  The establishment predominantly serves individual purchasers or clients on a walk-in basis, and that services by telephone or other electronic media, and services to commercial and/or institutional clients are not significant proportions of the establishment's intended business. 
4.4.26.1.2  The establishment is not a bank. Indicia of a banking establishment include, but are not limited to, a charter issued by state or federal banking authorities and insurance on clients' deposits by the FDIC or other federal deposit insurance mechanisms, and physical characteristics including service counters, teller stations, automated teller machines, and the like. 
4.4.26.2  An establishment not qualifying as a "consumer financial services establishment" shall be classified as a business or professional office or a bank, as determined by the Commissioner of Building. 
4.4.27  Incidental Seating in Food-selling Establishments: 
4.4.27.1  Except as provided in Section 4.4.27.3 below, tables and seating may be placed for the use and convenience of customers in establishments which sell prepared foods, snacks and/or beverages for off-premises consumption. 
4.4.27.2  In any establishment described in Section 4.4.27.1, no more than three tables and/or seats for no more than six "persons" may be installed or provided unless the establishments is approved as a "restaurant," "cafeteria" or "fast food eating establishment." 
4.4.27.3  In the event that any establishment would qualify as a "fast food eating establishment" by the addition of seating as permitted under Section 4.4.27.1 above, no such seating shall be installed or provided unless the establishment is approved as a "fast food eating establishment." 
4.4.27.4  The installation or provision of incidental seating in accordance with this Section 4.4.27 shall not qualify an establishment as a "restaurant," "cafeteria" or "fast food eating establishment." 
4.4.28  "Mini-storage facility": 
4.4.28.1  For a "mini-storage facility" abutting a residential district: 
4.4.28.1.1  The "building" or enclosed "structure" wall of a "mini-storage facility," the location, "height," design and materials of which are approved by the approving agency, shall be deemed to be a wall under Section 4.4.19.2 of this Ordinance. 
4.4.28.1.2  To mitigate visual and noise impacts to residences in the abutting residential district, the approving agency may require that the "mini-storage facility use" be located in one "building" or enclosed "structure" and may permit the "coverage" of a "mini-storage facility" to be increased from 80% up to a maximum of 90%, and to permit the "floor area ratio" to be increased from 2.0 up to a maximum of 2.2. 
4.4.28.2  There shall be no open air storage of any kind permitted at a "mini-storage facility." 
4.4.28.3  Individual self-service storage units in a "mini-storage facility" shall not exceed 400 square feet in area. 
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1C ; Ord. of 4-2-18, § 1C ; Ord. of 5-7-18, § 1C ) 
Section 5 - DISTRICTS 
Explanation of Schedule of "Use" Regulations, List of "Use" Regulations and Schedule of Dimensional Regulations 
The accompanying Schedule of "Use" Regulations, List of "Use" Regulations and Schedule of Dimensional Regulations (Sections 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3) list and define the permitted "uses" of land, "buildings" and "structures," and the minimum and maximum dimensional requirements to be met in connection with such "uses." "Uses" are set forth in both the Schedule of "Use" Regulations and the List of "Use" Regulations. In the Schedule, "uses" are listed only once, and it is indicated in which districts and in what manner each is permitted. On the List, each district is listed only once, and it is indicated what "uses" are permitted and in what manner they are permitted for that district. Thus the Schedule is useful to determine where a given "use" may be permitted, while the List is useful to determine what "uses" may be permitted in a given district. In case of conflict between the Schedule and the List, the Schedule shall govern. Any "use" not specifically listed as being permitted shall be deemed to be prohibited. More than one Permitted Principal "Use" is permitted on a "lot" in a non-residential district. 

Sec. 5.1 - Schedule of Use Regulations 
ZONING DISTRICTS "USES" R1-30 R1-20 R1-12.5 R1-7.5 R1-5 R2-4 R2-2.5 RM-2.5 RM-2 RM-1.5 RM-1.5T RM-1 RM-0.7 RM-0.4 RM-0.35 C-O and 
PCD O-R B-1 B-2 B-3 BR-1 BR-2 CB-1 CB-2 CB-3 CB-4 TD-1 UR-4 B-6 LI-M LI-M2 LI RESIDENTIAL "One family dwelling" PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Conservation development" SEE SECTION 5.7 "Two family dwelling" PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP SP PP The keeping of not more than two "roomers" per "dwelling unit" PA PA PA PA PA The keeping of not more than one "roomer" per "dwelling unit" in a "one family" or "two family dwelling" PA PA PA PA PA PA "Multi-family dwellings" in a "Planned Campus Development" as regulated by Section 5.9 PP "Planned Senior Residential Development" SEE SECTION 5.8 The keeping of "household pets" PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA The keeping of "household pets" in a "Planned Campus Development" as regulated by Section 5.9 PA Accessory servants quarters SP SP SP SP "Minor accessory buildings" PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA RECREATION Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities such as playfields or stadia as accessory to a "private "school," "univer- 
sity," "college" or seminary SP SP SP SP SP SP Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PP Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" SP PP SP SP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Health clubs" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Health mainten- 
ance, rehabilitation and fitness centers not operated as "Health Clubs" SP Theaters PP SP SP PP PP PP PP PP SP PP PP Auditoria PA PP "Membership clubs" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP "Golf and country clubs" SP SP SP SP SP SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP PA SP SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Stables PA PA PA PA SEMI-PUBLIC Hospitals or sanitariums SP SP SP Churches or other places of worship PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA Parish houses or rectories PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA Convents PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Emergency shelters" SP* SP* SP SP SP SP SP* "Overnight shelters for the homeless" SP* SP* SP SP SP SP "Social service centers for homeless persons" SP* SP SP SP SP "Transi- 
tional housing for homeless families" SP SP COMMUNITY FACILITIES "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Public schools" PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Private secondary or elemen- 
tary schools" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP SP SP SP SP SP PP PP SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA SP PA PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries SP SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Dormi- 
tories as accessory to a "private school," "univer- 
sity," "college," seminary or convent PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA "Domiciliary care facilities," "community resi- 
dences" or "rooming houses" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP "Assisted living facilities" PP PP PP PP PP PP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP OFFICE Business or professional offices SP* PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Business or Professional Offices of "Professional Persons" PP PP PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP* PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Offices for indivi- 
dual or group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residen- 
tial "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Sec. 5.4.2 PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Business, administrative or head- 
quarters offices for "philan- 
thropic institutions" SP SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Scientific research, excluding manufacturing of products for sale on premises SP BUSINESS Stores for sales at retail or perfor- 
mance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retail sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automo- 
bile parts or accessories involving installation at the point of sale SP* PA PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Stores for sales at retail or perform- 
ance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retail sales, including "real estate offices", in a "Planned Campus Development" as regulated in Section 5.9, but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at the point of sale PP "Craft Food Market Hall" PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Banks SP* PP SP PP PP PP SP SP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP PP* PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Business or trade schools PP SP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Auction houses" as regulated by Sec. 6.7.15 SP SP SP PP "Hotels" SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP SP "Extended Stay Hotels" SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP SP Newsstands PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA Radio stations SP* PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Sec. 5.4.2 PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA "Restaurants" or "caféterias" SP* SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP PP PP PA PP PP PP PP PP Outdoor dining SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP "Fast food eating establishments" SP SP SP SP SP SP PP SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA "Accessory Cabarets" SP SP SP SP SP SP "Primary Cabarets" SP SP SP SP SP SP "Cafes" PP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP "Bars" PP PP PP PP PP "Accessory electronic games" PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA "Nursery Business" SP Mortuaries or funeral homes PP SP SP SP Veterinary hospitals, including boarding or care of small animals SP PP PP PP AUTOMOTIVE Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," "service stations" or outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP PP PP SP SP SP Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops", or accessary outdoor storage of motor vehicles for sale or rental in a "Planned Campus Development" as regulated in Section 5.9 SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Motor vehicle "repair shops" SP* SP SP SP Auto laundries SP Outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP SP INDUSTRIAL Manufacturing, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products PP "Organic Manufacturing" if more than 300 feet away from a residential zoning district PP Research, experi- 
mental or testing laboratories SP SP SP Medical laboratories PP PP PP PP PP SP SP SP SP SP PP PP PP PP Printing plants PP Wholesale businesses, storage or warehousing PP PP PP "Mini-storage facility" PP Outdoor storage of building or other materials PA PA SP Outdoor storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or construction equipment PA PA PP Manufacturing, light PP PP Laundry or dry cleaning plants PP "Public utility buildings or "structures" SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP PP PP PP Automobile wrecking, storage or treatment of junk, iron, bottles, scrap paper or similar materials, provided operations are within a "building" and the "use" is legally existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance SP PARKING "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" SP SP SP SP PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts SP SP SP SP SP SP SP Neighborhood parking (See Sec. 6.7.13) SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP PP Stacked attendant parking SP* SP SP* SP* SP* SP* SP* SP* SP* SP*  
KEY:  PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; SP = Special Permit "Use"; (R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; * = When in the Central Parking Area 
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1C : Ord. of 12-5-16, § 4 ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1C ; Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1D ; Ord. of 4-2-18, § 1D ; Ord. of 5-7-18, § 1D ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1D ) 
Sec. 5.2 - List of Use Regulations 
District: R1-30 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Conservation development" See Sec. 5.7 The keeping of not more than two "roomers" per "dwelling unit" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA Accessory servants quarters SP "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP "Golf and country clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: R1-20 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Conservation development" See Sec. 5.7 The keeping of not more than two "roomers" per "dwelling unit" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA Accessory servants quarters SP "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP "Golf and country clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Stables PA Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: R1-12.5 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Conservation development" See Sec. 5.7 The keeping of not more than two "roomers" per "dwelling unit" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA Accessory servants quarters SP "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP "Golf and country clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Stables PA Hospitals or sanitariums SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," seminaries or "colleges" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: R1-7.5 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Conservation development" See Sec. 5.7 The keeping of not more than two "roomers" per "dwelling unit" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA Accessory servants quarters SP "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP "Golf and country clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Stables PA Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: R1-5 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Conservation development" See Sec. 5.7 The keeping of not more than two "roomers" per "dwelling unit" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP "Golf and country clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Stables PA Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: R2-4 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP The keeping of not more than one "roomer" per "dwelling unit" in a "one family dwelling" or "two family dwelling" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities, such as playfields or stadia, as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college" or seminary SP Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP "Golf and country clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: R2-2. 5 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities, such as playfields or stadia, as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college" or seminary SP Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-2.5 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of not more than one "roomer" per "dwelling unit" in a "one family dwelling" or "two family dwelling" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial district SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-2 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-1.5 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of not more than one "roomer" per "dwelling unit" in a "one family dwelling" or "two family dwelling" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities, such as playfields or stadia, as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college" or seminary SP Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries SP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" SP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-1.5T 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities, such as playfields or stadia, as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college" or seminary SP Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Hospitals or sanitariums SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries SP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-1 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of not more than one "roomer" per "dwelling unit" in a "one family dwelling" or "two family dwelling" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities, such as playfields or stadia, as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college" or seminary SP Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries SP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" SP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" SP Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-0.7 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of not more than one "roomer" per "dwelling unit" in a "one family dwelling" or "two family dwelling" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Business or professional offices SP* Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" SP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retail sales, including "real estate offices" but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at the point of sale SP* Banks SP* "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" SP* "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" SP Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-0.4 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" SP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" SP Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: RM-0.35 
USE TYPE "One family dwelling" PP "Two family dwelling" PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of not more than one "roomer" per "dwelling unit" in a "one family dwelling" or "two family dwelling" PA The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities, such as playfields or stadia, as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college" or seminary SP Non-profit "recreation facilities" PA Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Transitional housing for homeless families" SP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries SP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians and dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" SP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" SP Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: C-O and PCD 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" in a "Planned Campus Development" as regulated by Section 5.9 PP The keeping of "household pets" in a "Planned Campus Development" as regulated by Section 5.9 PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" SP "Health Clubs" SP Health maintenance, rehabilitation and fitness centers not operated as "Health Clubs" SP Auditoria PA "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary" or "elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public" or "private secondary" or "elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public" or "private secondary" or "elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP Business or professional offices PP "Planned Campus Development" as regulated in Section 5.9 "Planned Campus Development" Offices for individual or group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 and Section 5.9 "Planned Campus Development" PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Scientific research, excluding manufacturing of products for sale on premises SP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobiles, automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PA Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," in a "Planned Campus Development" as regulated in Section 5.9, but not including sales of automobiles, automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Hotels" SP "Extended Stay Hotels" SP Newsstands PA "Restaurants" and "cafeterias" SP Outdoor dining SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," or accessory outdoor storage of motor vehicles for sale or rental in a "Planned Campus Development " as regulated in Section 5.9 SP Medical laboratories PP "Nursery Business" SP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger cars PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains PP Stacked attendant parking SP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: O-R 
USE TYPE "Two family dwellings" PP "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA "Minor accessory buildings" PA Non-profit "recreation facilities" incident to places of worship SP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Hospitals or sanitariums SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Assisted living facility" PP Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit PP Business or professional offices PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Banks SP Business or trade schools SP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Accessory electronic games" PA Medical laboratories PP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP Neighborhood parking (See Section 6.7.13) SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: B-1 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA "Health clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Emergency shelters" SP* "Overnight shelters of the homeless" SP* "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP Business or professional offices PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP Newsstands PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" SP Outdoor dining SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" SP "Accessory electronic games" PA "Accessory Food Laboratory" SP Outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP Medical laboratories PP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: B-2 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP Business or professional offices PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Auction houses" as regulated by Section 6.7.15 SP Newsstands PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" SP Outdoor dining SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" SP "Accessory electronic games" PA Motor vehicle "service stations" SP Outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP Medical laboratories PP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: B-3 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters PP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Emergency shelters" SP* "Overnight shelters for the homeless" SP* "Social service centers for homeless persons" SP* "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP* Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP* Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Hotels" SP "Extended Stay Hotels" SP Newsstands PA Radio stations SP* "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" SP Outdoor dining SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" SP "Bars" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Mortuaries or funeral homes PP Veterinary hospitals, including boarding or care of small animals SP Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," "service stations" or outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP Medical laboratories PP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: BR-1 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" SP "Health clubs" SP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business or Professional Offices of "Professional Persons" PP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks SP "Consumer financial service establishments" PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP Newsstands PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP Outdoor dining SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Mortuaries or funeral homes SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: BR-2 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" SP "Health clubs" SP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business or Professional Offices of "Professional Persons" PP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks SP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP Newsstands PA "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP Outdoor dining SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: CB-1 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters SP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Emergency shelters" SP "Overnight shelters for the homeless" SP "Social service centers for homeless persons" SP "Transitional housing for homeless families" SP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP "Assisted living facility" PP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Hotels" SP "Extended Stay Hotels" SP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP Outdoor dining SP "Fast food eating establishments" SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cabarets" SP "Cafes" PP "Bars" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Mortuaries or funeral homes SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP Medical laboratories SP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: CB-2 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters SP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Emergency shelters" SP "Overnight shelters for the homeless" SP "Social service centers for homeless persons" SP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP "Assisted living facility" PP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Hotels" SP "Extended Stay Hotels" SP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP Outdoor dining SP "Fast food eating establishments" SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cabarets" SP "Cafes" PP "Bars" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Mortuaries or funeral homes SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP Medical laboratories SP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: CB-3 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters PP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 PA Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Emergency shelters" SP "Overnight shelters for the homeless" SP "Social service centers for homeless persons" SP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" SP "Assisted living facility" PP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Auction houses" as regulated by Section 6.7.15 SP "Hotels" PP "Extended Stay Hotels" PP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP Outdoor dining SP "Fast food eating establishments" SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cabarets" SP "Cafes" PP "Bars" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," "service stations" or outdoor storage of motor vehicles PP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP Medical laboratories SP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: CB-4 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Non-profit "recreational facilities" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters PP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 PA Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Emergency shelters" SP "Overnight shelters for the homeless" SP "Social service centers for homeless persons" SP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP "Assisted living facility" PP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Hotels" PP "Extended Stay Hotels" PP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP Outdoor dining SP "Fast food eating establishments" SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cabarets" SP "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," "service stations" or outdoor storage of motor vehicles PP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP Medical laboratories SP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: TD-1 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Non-profit "recreational facilities" PA Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters PP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Emergency shelters" SP* "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP "Assisted living facility" PP Libraries, museums, or art galleries not operated for profit PP Business or professional offices PP Business or Professional Offices of "Professional Persons" PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Craft Food Market Hall" PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Hotels" PP "Extended Stay Hotels" PP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PA Outdoor dining SP "Fast food eating establishments" SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Accessory Cabarets" SP "Cafés" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Medical laboratories SP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "Parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: UR-4 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" PP The keeping of "household pets" PA Non-profit "recreational facilities" PP Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters PP Auditoria PP "Membership clubs" SP Accessory "swimming pools" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 SP Accessory tennis courts, paddle tennis courts or other similar courts SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Public schools" PP "Private secondary or elementary schools" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP "Universities," "colleges" or seminaries PP Dormitories as accessory to a "private school," "university," "college," seminary or convent PA Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit PP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Office in residence of a "professional person" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA Office space for physicians or dentists within the lowest "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" limited to not more than 50% of the "gross floor area" of that "story" and 10% of such area of the "building" SP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial services establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP "Auction houses" as regulated by Section 6.7.15 SP "Hotels" PP "Extended Stay Hotels" PP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Customary home occupations" as regulated by Section 5.4.2 PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP Outdoor dining SP "Fast food eating establishments" SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cabarets" SP "Cafes" PP "Bars" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP Stacked attendant parking SP*  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: B-6 
USE TYPE "Health Clubs" SP Theaters PP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retail sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP "Consumer financial service establishments" PP Business or trade schools PP Libraries, museums or art galleries PP Newsstands PA "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP "Fast food eating establishments" PP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA "Motor vehicle repair shops" SP* Medical laboratories PP "Public utility buildings or structures" SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: LI-M 
USE TYPE "Multi-family dwellings" SP Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters SP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" SP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incidental to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Auction houses" as regulated by Sec. 6.7.15 PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP Business or trade schools PP "Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit" PP "Libraries, museums or art galleries" PP "Hotels" and "Extended Stay Hotels" SP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Veterinary hospitals, including boarding or care of small animals PP Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," "service stations" with or without accessory outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP Motor vehicle "repair shops" SP Research, experimental or testing laboratories SP Medical laboratories PP Wholesale businesses, commercial storage and warehousing PP Outdoor storage of building or other materials PA Outdoor storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or construction equipment PA "Manufacturing, light" PP "Public utility buildings or structures" PP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District LI-M2 
USE TYPE "Multi-Family Dwellings" PP Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters PP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP Business or trade schools PP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Veterinary hospitals, including boarding or care of small animals PP Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," service stations" or outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP "Motor vehicle "repair shops" SP Research, experimental or testing laboratories SP Medical laboratories PP Wholesale businesses, storage or warehousing PP Outdoor storage of building or other materials PA Outdoor storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or construction equipment PA Manufacturing, light PP "Public utility buildings or structures" PP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
District: LI 
USE TYPE Commercial indoor "recreation facilities" PP "Health clubs" SP Theaters PP Accessory "dish antennas" as regulated by Sections 4.4.23 and 6.7.21 SP Churches or other places of worship PP Sunday schools or other similar religious schools PA Parish houses or rectories PA Convents PP "Uses" of the City of White Plains PP "Uses" of other governments, subject to the requirements of Section 5.6 PP "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" PA Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church or other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" SP Business or professional offices PP Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" PP Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" PP Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retails sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale PP "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" PP Banks PP Business or trade schools PP Newsstands PA Radio stations PP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" PP "Fast food eating establishments" SP "Restaurants" or "cafeterias" for employees PA "Cafes" PP "Accessory electronic games" PA Veterinary hospitals, including boarding or care of small animals PP Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," service stations" or outdoor storage of motor vehicles SP Motor vehicle "service stations" SP "Motor vehicle "repair shops" SP Auto laundries SP Manufacturing, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products PP "Organic Manufacturing," if more than 300 feet away from a residential zoning district. PP Research, experimental or testing laboratories SP Medical laboratories PP Printing plants PP Wholesale businesses, storage or warehousing PP "Mini-storage facility" PP Outdoor storage of building or other materials SP Outdoor storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or construction equipment PP Laundry or dry cleaning plants PP "Public utility buildings or structures" PP Automobile wrecking, storage or treatment of junk, iron, bottles, scrap paper or similar materials, provided operations are within a "building" and the "use" is legally existing as of the effective date of this Ordinance SP "Private garages," carports or open parking for private passenger vehicles PA "Parking lots" or "parking garages" PA Commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire SP "Parking lots" or "parking garages" of the City of White Plains or its Parking Department PP  
KEY: 
PP = Permitted Principal "Use"; 
PA = Permitted "Accessory Use"; 
SP = Special Permit "Use"; 
(R-A), etc. = Prior District designation; 
* = When in the Central Parking Area 
District: Planned Senior Residential Development 
USE TYPE "Planned Senior Residential Development" See Section 5.8  
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1D ; Ord. of 12-5-16, § 5 ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1D ; Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1E ; Ord. of 4-2-18, § 1E ; Ord. of 5-7-18, § 1E ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1E ) 

Sec. 5.3 - Schedule of Dimensional Regulations 
Zone Floor Area Ratio Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Minimum Frontage Mininum Lot Depth Front Yard Side Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Stories Feet Maximum Height 
R1-30 0.40 30,000 30,000 150 150 75 25 50 30 2-1/2 35 15 20 10 15 
R1-20 0.40 20,000 20,000 100 100 35 20 40 30 2-1/2 35 15 20 10 15 
R1-12 0.45 12,500 12,500 100 100 25 20 40 30 2-1/2 30 15 
R1-7 0.55 7,500 7,500 75 75 25 12 25 30 2-1/2 30 15 
R1-5 0.55 5,000 5,000 50 75 25 7 18 25 2-1/2 30 15 
R2-4a 0.60 5,000 5,000 50 75 25 7 18 25 2-1/2 30 15   
R2-4b 0.55 5,000 4,000 75 75 25 12 25 25 2-1/2 30 15
R2-2 0.65 5,000 2,500 50 75 20 5 15 25 2-1/2 30 15 
RM-2a 0.50 5,000 2,500 50 - 75 20 8 20 25 3 35 15 
RM-2b 0.60 20,000 2,000 100 100 - - - -  3 35 35 
RM-1a 0.80 5,000 1,500 50 75 25 10 25 30 3 35 15 
RM-1b - 5,000 1,500 50 100 20 8 20  25 3-1/2 35 15 
RM-1c 1.20 5,000 1,000 50 75 20 8 20 25 3 35  15 
RM-0a 0.80 - 700 - - 5 - - 25 3 35 15 
RM-0b 2.80 15,000 400 75 100 30 - - - 12 125 - 
RM-0c 3.20 10,000 350 75 75 10 15 30 30 6 125 15 


Sec. 5.4 - Additional Regulations for Residential Districts 
5.4.1  Purposes: The residential districts established in this Ordinance are designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare as more fully explained in Section 1 of this Ordinance. In addition, the following specific purposes are set forth for residential districts: 
5.4.1.1  To avoid, as far as possible, commercial traffic and through traffic of all kinds in residential areas. 
5.4.1.2  For one and two family districts, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where safe "streets" and quiet neighborhoods are of paramount importance. 
5.4.1.3  For the RM-2.5 District, to provide a regulatory framework which encourages the preservation and improvement of existing neighborhoods, at a density closely approximating the existing density of development, and which will prevent the inappropriate conversion to more intensive residential and non-residential "uses" which has previously occurred. 
5.4.1.4  For the RM-2 District, to encourage integrated development of parcels near the center of the City with medium density residential development of a low-rise character, accompanied by appropriate open space and recreational facilities. 
5.4.1.5  For the RM-1.5, RM-1, RM-0.4 and RM-0.35 Districts, to provide for a supply of "dwelling units" suitable for families of all sizes, in locations which are convenient to shopping, transportation and community facilities, and where higher densities will allow for the development of new housing at a more moderate cost. The "height" and density requirements of these districts are such that low-rise "buildings" are permitted in fringe areas near the center of the City, and the mid- and high-rise "buildings" are permitted in the center of the City, all in locations consistent with the "Comprehensive Plan." 
5.4.1.5.1  For the RM-0.35, CB-2, CB-3, CB-4, UR-4, TD-1 and LI-M2 Districts, in the Central Parking Area, to encourage the construction of additional "multi-family dwellings" serving a variety of income groups for both rental and ownership, and focusing on the needs of young professionals, seniors and others who would benefit from proximity to "restaurants," shops, employment opportunities, cultural opportunities and transportation, consistent with the "Comprehensive Plan," a minimum of 6 percent of new "multi-family dwellings" shall be affordable to moderate income families, based on income schedules published annually by the City of White Plains Department of Planning. Such affordable units must be provided in accordance with the City of White Plains Affordable Housing Program Rules and Procedures. 
5.4.1.6  For the RM-0.7 District, to provide low-rise, medium density "dwelling units" in locations convenient to employment, shopping, transportation and community facilities. It is intended to be a predominantly residential transition district between non-residential areas and established neighborhoods. 
5.4.1.7  For the RM-1.5T Residential Townhouse District, to provide attached townhouse-style housing along entrance corridors and along the edges of neighborhoods. The RM-1.5T District is intended to provide attached housing in continuous "street"-front configurations. 
5.4.2  Offices in Residences of "Professional Persons" and "Customary Home Occupations": One office of a "professional person" or a "customary home occupation" may be established in a "dwelling unit" as permitted in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of this Ordinance, subject to the following: 
5.4.2.1  Any such "use" must be located entirely within the "dwelling unit" of its practitioner and not elsewhere on the "lot" or in any "accessory building" or "structure." 
5.4.2.2  No signs shall be permitted for "customary home occupations." For offices of "professional persons," one sign meeting the requirements of the Ordinance Relating to the Erection of Outdoor Signs and Awnings shall be permitted. 
5.4.2.3  The primary individual involved in such "use" must be an inhabitant of the "dwelling unit." 
5.4.2.4  For a "customary home occupation," no non-resident partner, associate or employee shall be permitted to work on the premises. In the office of a "professional person," no more than 1 non-resident partner, associate or employee shall be permitted to work on the premises. 
5.4.2.5  No more than 1/4 of the "floor area" of 1 "story" of the "dwelling unit," or 400 square feet, whichever is less, shall be used for such purposes. 
5.4.2.6  The office of a "professional person" is prohibited above the first "story" of a "multi-family dwelling" unless it is so situated as to be independent from the rest of the "building" and to have a separate access. 
5.4.3  Improved Recreation Areas: Wherever there are 8 or more "dwelling units" hereafter erected on a "lot" in an RM-2, RM-0.4, RM-0.35, CB-1, CB-2, CB-3, CB-4, TD-1, or UR-4, District, there shall be provided improved recreation areas which may be included as part of any required "usable open space." 
5.4.4  "Multi-Family Dwellings": "Multi-family dwellings" shall meet the following requirements: 
5.4.4.1  Placement of "buildings" and the distance between them shall be as required by the agency approving the "site plan," but the distance between any two "buildings" must be at least 20 feet, and not less than the "height" of the taller "building." 
5.4.4.2  Where located in a "building" also containing a non-residential "use," the "multi-family dwellings" shall be separated from the non-residential "use" by unpierced firewalls and ceilings and shall be provided with a separate entrance. 
5.4.4.3  For development of "assisted living facilities" in the O-R District, the minimum "yard" dimension and the maximum "height" in "stories" and/or feet, shall be as required by the agency approving the "site plan." 
5.4.4.4  Minimum "yard" dimensions for development of 25 or more "dwelling units" in an RM-2.5 District shall be 60 feet for a "front yard," 50 feet for one "side yard," 125 feet for two "side yards" and 30 feet for a "rear yard." 
5.4.5  Special Regulations for the RM-1.5T District: In addition to the provisions of Section 5.3, the following provisions shall also apply in the RM-1.5T Residential Townhouse District: 
5.4.5.1  Individual attached townhouse "dwelling units" or "attached dwelling units" in a townhouse-over-flat configuration shall share in common side walls or walls with another "dwelling unit" or "units" in continuous rows generally parallel to the fronting "street", but no such row shall be longer than 8 units or 160 feet along its longest axis, whichever is less. 
5.4.5.2  Where a "lot" in the RM-1.5T District abuts a property in any other residential district, there shall be a minimum "side yard" setback equal to the required one "side yard" dimension for the abutting district. 
5.4.5.3  Except as provided for in Section 5.4.5.2, if units are attached by common or party walls in a continuous row the one "side" and two "side yard" dimensions may be reduced up to 0 feet one "side yard" and 0 feet two "side yards" by the approving agency, subject to (a) a finding by the approving agency that the "dwelling units" meet all Building and Fire Prevention Code requirements with respect to building separation; and (b) the design contributes to the enhancement of the corridor or area in which it is located. 
5.4.5.4  Separations between continuous rows of "dwelling units" shall be not less than 20 feet in width. 
5.4.5.5  The maximum "building length" shall be no more than 50 feet along the side of the "building" facing the "side yard." 
5.4.5.6  To the maximum extent practicable, driveways of units of a continuous row of "dwelling units" shall be combined so as to minimize the number and frequency of curb cuts into the public "street." 
5.4.5.7  To enhance the visual impact of a continuous row of "dwelling units" of three or more attached townhouse "dwelling units," or "attached dwelling units" in a townhouse-over-flat configuration for properties located on State or County roads, all off-"street" parking shall be provided in the rear of the "buildings." 
5.4.5.8  No garbage collection or recycling receptacles shall be permanently permitted in the "front yard." 
( Ord. of 7-2-18, §§ 1G, 1H ) 
Sec. 5.5 - Additional Regulations for Non-Residential Districts 
5.5.1  Purposes: The business and industrial districts established in this Ordinance are designed to promote the public health, safety and welfare as more fully explained in Section 1 of this Ordinance. In addition, the following specific purposes are set forth for non-residential districts: 
5.5.1.1  The C-O District is a low-density, campus-style predominantly office district which is intended to encourage the development of modern "buildings" containing a variety of office and non-residential "uses," along with ancillary and "accessory uses" in landscaped settings which respond to the demand for suburban-style sites appropriate to the role of the City as a regional office center. A "Planned Campus Development District" may be mapped by the Common Council on one or more properties located in the C-O District which "Planned Campus Development District" may include "uses" permitted in the C-O District and mixed residential, retail and office uses as defined and described in Section 5.9 of this Ordinance. 
5.5.1.2  The O-R District is a transitional type zone located between predominantly residential areas and predominantly non-residential areas. It allows a variety of "uses" with some of the characteristics of both the residential and non-residential areas, such as small office buildings, "two family" and "multi-family dwellings," hospitals, clubs, banks, etc. It is intended to halt the pressure for expansion of non-residential areas into residential neighborhoods by providing such a clearly defined transitional area. 
5.5.1.3  The B-1 District is a relatively low-density, predominantly retail district which encompasses large high-fashion department stores and smaller specialized retail shops and boutiques, "restaurants" and office "buildings," in addition to allowing "multi-family dwellings" convenient to places of work. 
5.5.1.4  The B-2 District is a low-density neighborhood retail district containing retail and service business "uses" of a limited nature appropriate to serve the convenience shopping needs of neighboring residential areas. 
5.5.1.5  The B-3 District is a general retail district containing a wide variety of retail, office and service business "uses" as well as "multi-family dwellings." The majority of "uses" in the district are of a service character and the district is located predominantly along the major arterial commercial "streets" of the City. 
5.5.1.6  The BR-1 and BR-2 Districts are primarily low- to mid-rise, medium-density residential districts in convenient proximity to the City's business areas and adjacent to established neighborhoods. They are designed to encourage the construction of additional "multi-family dwellings" serving a variety of income groups for both rental and ownership, and focusing on the needs of young professionals, seniors and others who would benefit from proximity to "restaurants" shops, employment opportunities, cultural opportunities and transportation, consistent with the "Comprehensive Plan," and with non-residential "uses" intended primarily for retail pedestrian shopping at the ground floor level. 
5.5.1.7  The CB-1 District is primarily a pedestrian-oriented, low to medium density retail and personal services business area located at the edge of the higher density sections of the City's central business district. This District is a gateway to the downtown area. 
5.5.1.8  The CB-2 District is a medium to high density residential, major retail, personal services, office and government "use" section of the central business district. It is designed to encourage a compatible and mutually supportive balance of non-residential and residential "uses" in such a way as to increase convenience and decrease reliance on the automobile. High-density hi-rise housing is encouraged to be built on large sites. 
5.5.1.9  The CB-3, CB-4 and UR-4 Districts are high-density, mixed-use areas encompassing the core of the City's central business district. Appropriate to the City's role as a regional center, these Districts permit a combination of residential, retail, office, government, business, service, cultural and entertainment "uses." These Districts also encourage high-density hi-rise housing to be built on larger sites. 
5.5.1.10  The B-6 District is designed for super-regional enclosed shopping malls, with accompanying parking and other facilities commonly found accessory to such "uses." 
5.5.1.11  The LI District is a light industrial district, located in areas of good highway or rail access which have already developed an industrial character. New residential development is excluded from this district, both to protect "dwellings" from an undesirable living environment and to ensure the reservation of adequate areas for light industrial "uses." 
5.5.1.12  The LI-M and LI-M2 Districts are mixed use districts located near public transportation centers, which are intended to: encourage vibrant neighborhoods with a mix of uses ranging from residential to light industrial; incentivize adaptive reuse of existing "buildings" for residential use to increase neighborhood vitality and retain existing character; revitalize vacant and/or underutilized properties; continue to provide areas for light industrial businesses to operate and serve the community; and protect adjoining residential uses from the negative impacts of incompatible manufacturing uses. 
5.5.1.13  In the LI-M2 District, a minimum of 6% of new "multi-family dwellings" shall be affordable to moderate income families based on income schedules published annually by the City of White Plains Department of Planning. Such affordable units must be provided in accordance with the City of White Plains Affordable Housing Rules and Procedures. 
5.5.1.14  The TD-1 District is a mixed-use district located in proximity to the White Plains TransCenter, including the Metro-North Railroad and Westchester County Bee-Line Bus Stations, within the downtown Central Parking Area (CPA), which is established to: promote transit use, walking, and biking; reduce reliance on motor vehicles; encourage the provision of publicly accessible open space; provide ground floor commercial uses that enhance the pedestrian experience; and implement design guidelines that ensure that new development is compatible with adjacent properties. 
5.5.2  Business Residential (BR), Core Business (CB), Transit Development (TD-1), and Urban Renewal (UR) Districts: For the purpose of preserving and enhancing the present and future pedestrian retail shopping pattern at the sidewalk level along commercial "street" frontage, the "use" of ground floor space in BR, CB, TD-1, and UR Districts shall, in general, be limited to retail stores, personal service businesses, eating and drinking establishments, cultural and entertainment facilities and other similar types of commercial "uses" permitted in the particular district in which the property is located. The specific type, location, design and arrangement of these "uses" shall be subject to review and approval by the approving agency as a part of the required "site plan" or special permit application. 
5.5.3  Additional Core Business (CB) District Dimensional Standards 
5.5.3.1  In the CB-2 or CB-3 Districts, setbacks from a "street" shall be as shown on the following table: 
"Height" "Frontage" on Mamaroneck Avenue or East Post Road All other "streets" CB-2 CB-3 CB-2 CB-3 Up to 45 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet 45 feet to 90 feet 25 feet 5 feet 15 feet 15 feet Over 90 feet 25 feet 25 feet 15 feet 15 feet  
5.5.3.2  In the CB-3, CB-4 and UR-4 Districts, for "development sites" or "lots" greater than 50,000 square feet, and where 50 percent or more of the "floor area ratio" is residential, the requirements set forth in the tables below shall apply. 
"Height" Maximum
"Building
Coverage""Usable Open Space" Sites from 50,000 to 99,999 square feet Up to 90 feet 85% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 180 feet 60% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 230 feet 40% To be determined by the approving agency Sites from 100,000 to 200,000 square feet Up to 90 feet 85% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 180 feet 60% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 230 feet 40% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 280 feet 30% To be determined by the approving agency, but no less than 20% Sites over 200,000 square feet Up to 90 feet 85% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 180 feet 40% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 230 feet 30% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 280 feet 20% To be determined by the approving agency, but no less than 20% by special permit 91 feet to 350 feet 20% To be determined by the approving agency, but no less than 20% Sites over 300,000 square feet located all or partially within the CB-4 District Up to 90 feet 85% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 180 feet 40% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 230 feet 30% To be determined by the approving agency 91 feet to 280 feet 20% To be determined by the approving agency, but no less than 20% by special permit 91 feet to 350 feet 20% To be determined by the approving agency, but no less than 20% by special permit 351 to 400 feet (residential only) 20% To be determined by the approving agency, but no less than 20%  
5.5.3.3  In the CB-2 District, for "development sites" or "lots" greater than 50,000 square feet and where 80 percent or more of the "floor area ratio" is residential, the requirements set forth in the table below shall apply. 
"Height" Maximum
"Building
Coverage""Usable Open Space" Up to 45 feet 85% To be determined by the approving agency 46 feet to 180 feet 60% To be determined by the approving agency 46 feet to 230 feet 40% To be determined by the approving agency  
( Ord. of 3-5-18, § 1G ; Ord. of 4-2-18, § 1G ; Ord. of 5-7-18, § 1G ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1I ) 
Sec. 5.6 - "Uses" of Other Governments 
5.6.1  Introduction: The City of White Plains recognizes the necessity, in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare, for governments other than that of the City to locate "uses" within the City of White Plains. Absolute immunity from the requirements of this Ordinance for other governments can, however, undermine one of the essential purposes of zoning, which is to rationally coordinate land "use" planning to promote orderly development and the preservation of property values. To ensure that other governments will not unnecessarily prejudice the welfare of the citizens of the City of White Plains in furtherance of the welfare of their constituencies, the Common Council will examine proposed "uses" of other governments and balance the competing public interests represented by such other governments against those represented by the City of White Plains. 
5.6.2  General Rule: No "use" of a government or public authority other than that of the City of White Plains may be established or enlarged without obtaining a governmental "use" permit from the Common Council. 
5.6.3  Application: Application for a governmental "use" permit shall be made in 10 copies to the Common Council at a meeting of the Council. It shall include a detailed development plan complying with the requirements of Section 7 of this Ordinance for "site plans," as well as a written statement describing the nature of the proposed "use" and how it will serve to implement the purposes of this Ordinance and further the public welfare. 
5.6.4  Review by Other Agencies: Upon receipt of a completed application, the Common Council may forward copies for review and report to such officials and agencies of the City as it deems appropriate. Such agencies shall have 30 days from the date of forwarding to submit a report. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with a notice of any public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board when such proposed development abuts a State or County highway, park, drainage channel or "building" site, and to the clerk of any abutting municipality where the property proposed for such development is located within 500 feet of such municipality, in accordance with Sections 277.61 and 277.71 of the Westchester County Administrative Code. 
5.6.5  Public Hearing: The Common Council may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing on an application for a governmental "use" permit. Any such public hearing shall be scheduled and conducted within 60 days of the date a completed application is received, unless this time limit is waived by the applicant. Public notice and notice to owners of property with the "area affected" shall be the same as that required for zoning amendments, as set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance. 
5.6.6  Common Council Action: Within 60 days of the date of any public hearing, or within 60 days of the receipt of a completed application if no public hearing is held, unless either time limit is waived by the applicant, the Common Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the application. The Common Council may approve the application and issue a governmental "use" permit where it finds that the standards of Section 5.6.7 have been met. The Common Council may approve such application conditionally, and issue a governmental "use" permit with conditions attached, where it finds such conditions necessary to insure initial and continual conformance with the standards of Section 5.6.7. 
5.6.7  Standards: A governmental "use" shall meet either of the following standards: 
5.6.7.1  It shall be essentially consistent with the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance for the district in which it is to be located; or 
5.6.7.2  In balancing the interests and needs of the citizenry represented by the applicant against those of the citizenry of the City of White Plains, it shall be clear that the interests and needs of the citizenry represented by the applicant are more vital with respect to the particular "use," taking into account: 
5.6.7.2.1  The public health, safety and welfare on a regional or Statewide basis, as applicable. 
5.6.7.2.2  Predicted effects on the area-wide land "use" pattern, the natural environment, noise, traffic congestion and public services. 
5.6.7.2.3  Expected impacts on surrounding landowners. 
5.6.7.2.4  The adequacy of accessory services and facilities proposed as a part of such governmental "use," such as parking and landscaping. 
5.6.7.2.5  The availability of feasible alternative locations for such proposed governmental "use" or of alternative methods of meeting the need for such "use." 
Sec. 5.7 - "Conservation Development" 
5.7.1  Purposes: It is the purpose of this section to encourage flexibility of design and development of land in such a manner as to preserve its natural and scenic qualities, minimize negative environmental impacts, facilitate the adequate and economical provision of "streets" and utilities, reduce flood hazards, improve the aesthetic quality of new residential development, provide for excellence in architectural design of residential "buildings," increase recreational opportunities, encourage the conservation of energy, and otherwise promote environmentally desirable housing in connection with the future development of the City's residentially zoned land by granting flexibility to the Planning Board to modify, change or supplement applicable provisions of this Ordinance, simultaneously with the approval of subdivision plats, as recommended in the "Comprehensive Plan." The Planning Board is hereby granted the powers and duties authorized by Section 37 of the General City Law, subject to the standards, conditions and limitations set forth herein. 
5.7.2  Eligibility: The following are the minimum requirements for establishing the eligibility of any property for "conservation development" approval by the Planning Board. 
5.7.2.1  Zoning Districts: This section applies only to properties within the R1-30, R1-20, R1-12.5, R1-7.5 and R1-5 Districts, excluding those which are designated in the category of Major Public and Private Recreation and Open Space on the Land Use Plan Map of the "Comprehensive Plan." 
5.7.2.2  Size of Property: Except pursuant to Section 4.4.25.3, this section applies only to properties of not less than 5 acres if the proposed "dwelling units" are all to be "detached" and not less than 10 acres if some or all of the proposed "dwelling units" are to be "attached." Properties separated by a "street" or "streets," other than a paper "street," shall be considered as separate parcels for the purposes of this Section. 
5.7.2.3  Applicant Request: Except in the case of a "conservation development" containing, involving or affecting an "environmentally sensitive site or feature," in which case neither a request nor consent by the property owner shall be required, a "conservation development" may be authorized only upon a written request from the property owner and only where the Planning Board determines that, as approved, the development will be in accordance with the standards contained herein and will be of benefit to the City by satisfying one or more of the purposes as set forth in Section 5.7.1 hereof. At any time during the application review process, but prior to the approval of the preliminary plat, the Planning Board may determine that the proposed "conservation development" would not meet the purposes as set forth in Section 5.7.1 hereof and shall thereupon send written notification of this determination to the applicant, which notification shall automatically terminate the "conservation development" review process. 
5.7.3  Development Standards and Controls: Except as modified by the Planning Board pursuant to the authority hereby conferred, all regulations normally applicable to residential "uses" in the zoning district in which the property is located shall apply. In addition, the following standards and controls are hereby established as the minimum/maximum requirements, as the case may be, but may be made more restrictive where such is determined appropriate by the Planning Board, based upon a consideration of the particular circumstances of the individual application, to satisfy the purposes as set forth in Section 5.7.1 hereof. 
5.7.3.1  Density: The number of "dwelling units" or building "lots" permitted shall in no case exceed the number which could be permitted, in the Planning Board's judgment, if the land were subdivided into "lots" conforming to all normally applicable requirements of this Ordinance, the Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans, and the Freshwater Wetlands Ordinance of the City of White Plains. The basis for this determination by the Planning Board shall be a sketch layout of a conventional subdivision of the subject property, prepared by a licensed professional engineer and submitted by the applicant, and including topography, wetlands, waterbodies, watercourses, other natural features, and such other information as may be required by the Planning Board to assist them in making their determination. 
5.7.3.2  Permitted "Uses": 
5.7.3.2.1  Permitted principal "uses" shall be limited to "detached dwelling units" and "attached dwelling units," plus recreation and open space "uses," and other commonly-owned or operated facilities. Commonly-owned "swimming pools" shall be limited to areas reserved and designated for active recreation purposes and shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 of this Ordinance, as may be modified by the Planning Board. A special permit shall not be required for such "swimming pool" but the minimum setback standards as set forth in Sections 5.7.3.4.1 and 5.7.3.9.3 below shall apply. 
5.7.3.2.2  Permitted "accessory uses" shall be limited to minor accessory "structures"; "private garages," carports and open parking for private passenger vehicles in number approved by the Planning Board, and parking for special vehicles pursuant to Section 5.7.3.6.5 of this Ordinance. 
5.7.3.2.3  Special permit "uses" shall be limited to a "swimming pool" as an "accessory use" to a detached "one family dwelling," except where a commonly-owned "swimming pool" is provided or planned. Any such accessory "swimming pool" shall be subject to Sections 4.4.24 and 6.7.3 of this Ordinance and the minimum setback standards as set forth in Section 5.7.3.4.1 below shall apply. 
5.7.3.3  "Building" Dimension Requirements: The maximum permitted "building" "height" requirements shall be the same as otherwise applicable in the zoning district in which the property is located. On properties containing less than 15 acres, all of the "dwelling units" shall be in "buildings" containing 3 or fewer "dwelling units" and having a maximum "length" along their longest axis of not exceeding 80 feet. On properties containing 15 acres or more, at least one-half of the "dwelling units" shall be in such "buildings" but the remainder may be in "buildings" containing 4 attached "dwelling units" and up to 100 feet in maximum "length." 
5.7.3.4  "Lot Area," "Coverage," "Yard" and Screening Requirements: The normally applicable minimum "lot area," maximum "coverage," and minimum "yard" requirements for "dwellings" in the zoning district in which the "conservation development" is located may be modified to the extent determined necessary or appropriate by the Planning Board to achieve the purposes of this authorization, provided, however, that: 
5.7.3.4.1  The minimum required setback for "buildings," "structures," and "parking lots" from the perimeter of the property line of any "conservation development" shall be as set forth in the following table: 
Minimum Required Setback (in feet) from Adjacent Properties and "Streets" in One or One and Two Family Residence Districts For: Property Size
(acres) "Detached
Dwelling
Units" "Attached
Dwelling
Units" "Accessory
Buildings,"
"Structures" and
"Parking Lots" 5-10 50 feet Not Permitted 50 feet 10-25 60 feet 80 feet 65 feet over 25 75 feet 100 feet 75 feet  
In any case, the Planning Board may require increased perimeter setbacks beyond the above minimums wherever said Board determines that such increased setbacks are warranted by the topography, the nature of existing vegetation, the relationship to neighboring properties and land "uses," and other such similar factors. 
5.7.3.4.2  The Planning Board may prohibit the location of roadways, driveways, "parking lots," "recreation facilities," or other such improvements within the above required "yard" areas, and may require the installation of such landscaping, fencing or other features as the Planning Board may determine appropriate for buffer screening purposes. 
5.7.3.4.3  The average "coverage" of the land with "buildings" over the entire property shall not exceed the amount permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
5.7.3.5  Distance Between "Buildings": The minimum permitted distance between "buildings" containing more than one "dwelling unit" within a "conservation development" shall be at least equal to the maximum height above ground level at any point of the highest wall of the "buildings," except that the Planning Board may allow a reduction in such "building" separation where said Board determines that a lesser distance will satisfy the intent of this requirement by virtue of topographic conditions, landscaping, or other special circumstances. 
5.7.3.6  Off-"Street" Parking: 
5.7.3.6.1  Off-"street" parking shall be provided within each "conservation development" at the rate of not less than 2 "parking spaces" for each "dwelling unit" plus 1/2 "parking space" per bedroom for each bedroom in excess of 2. 
5.7.3.6.2  Where determined appropriate by the Planning Board, additional "parking spaces" designed specifically for visitors and guests may be required to serve "one family detached dwelling units." 
5.7.3.6.3  No less than 1/2 nor more than 2/3 of the minimum required off-"street" "parking spaces" serving "attached dwelling units" shall be enclosed. Of the "parking spaces" not enclosed, an amount equal to at least 1/3 of the minimum required total number of "parking spaces" shall not be reserved for the "use" of the residents of specific "dwelling units" and shall at all times be open and available for the use of visitors and guests, as well as other residents. 
5.7.3.6.4  Off-"street" "parking lots" shall be appropriately located, designed, landscaped, lighted and screened so that they are well related to the topography and will harmonize with the residential character and scale of "buildings" on the property and on adjoining properties. In general, such "parking lots" shall not contain more than 10 contiguous "parking spaces" uninterrupted by landscaping or other forms of spatial or visual separation. 
5.7.3.6.5  In addition to the above requirements for the provision of off-"street" parking, upon the request of the applicant, the Planning Board may approve the location, design and construction of facilities specifically designated for the storage of special vehicles and equipment owned by and for the private "use" and enjoyment of the residents of the "conservation development," but excluding any vehicles or equipment except as otherwise permitted by this Ordinance as "accessory uses" to "one family dwellings" in the zoning district in which the property is located. 
5.7.3.7  "Streets": All "streets" may be offered for dedication to the City of White Plains. They shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the City Department of Public Works but may be reduced to not less than 80% of the normally required width of the paved travelway, or otherwise modified, if such change is recommended by the Planning Board and approved by the Commissioners of Public Works and Public Safety, based upon a determination that reasonable standards of safety are maintained, consistent with the anticipated nature and amount of traffic which will be using such "streets" and consistent with other environmental considerations. 
5.7.3.8  Driveways and "Parking Lots": All driveways, "parking lots" and related facilities which are to be privately owned and maintained shall also be constructed to the standards and specifications of the City Departments of Public Works and Building, and shall be similarly subject to modification as set forth in Section 5.7.3.7 above. 
5.7.3.9  Common Lands and Facilities: 
5.7.3.9.1  Where a "conservation development" approved pursuant to this authorization results in the permanent preservation of open spaces or the creation of other commonly used lands or facilities, including "streets," driveways and "parking lots," their location, design, ownership and "use" shall be as approved by the Planning Board, using as a guide the "Comprehensive Plan" and the concept of creating a coordinated system of open spaces, with public access between them, as well as the purposes as set forth herein and in Section 37 of the General City Law. 
5.7.3.9.2  Subject to such approval by the Planning Board, the ownership of common lands and facilities shall be held under one or a combination of the following arrangements: 
5.7.3.9.2.1:  As a general rule, all such lands and facilities shall be owned by a property owners association as described in Section 5.7.3.9.2.4 below. 
5.7.3.9.2.2:  The lands and facilities may be conveyed to a recognized conservation organization dedicated to the preservation and maintenance of open space, provided such organization has indicated its agreement to maintain such lands and further provided such organization is acceptable to the Common Council. 
5.7.3.9.2.3:  Such lands and facilities may be dedicated to the City of White Plains provided public access is assured and the Common Council has voted to accept such offer. 
5.7.3.9.2.4:  All or the balance of common lands which are not to be conveyed or dedicated in accordance with Sections 5.7.3.9.2.2. or 5.7.3.9.2.3 above, and any private common facilities, shall be owned and maintained by a property owners association, subject to the following requirements: 
5.7.3.9.2.4.1:  The property owners association shall be a legal entity including but not limited to a condominium corporation, cooperative corporation or a "not-for-profit" membership "corporation" created by a trust agreement or certificate of incorporation, approved as to form and sufficiency by the Corporation Counsel, and designed to assure the permanent preservation and protection of the common lands and any improvements thereon for their intended purpose. 
5.7.3.9.2.4.2:  The property owners association shall be made responsible for the continued future maintenance, ownership and "use" of all such common lands and facilities. 
5.7.3.9.2.4.3:  The property owners association shall not be permitted to be dissolved and shall not dispose of any common land or any improvements thereon or thereunder, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization established to own and maintain such common land and improvements as herein above referred to and subject to the same restrictions on maintenance and "use" as the first such legal entity, as well as approval by the Planning Board as set forth above. 
5.7.3.9.2.4.4:  The property owners association shall be subject to an agreement with the City providing that in the event it, or any successor organization, shall at any time after approval of the development fail to maintain the common land or any improvements thereon in reasonable order or condition in accordance with the approved plan, the City may serve written notice upon such legal entity or successor organization, or upon the property owners within the development, setting forth the manner in which the association has failed to maintain the common land or any improvements thereon and said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies be corrected within a designated time frame. If the deficiencies are not corrected within the designated time frame, the City of White Plains, in order to preserve the taxable values of the property within the development and to prevent the common land and improvements thereon from becoming a public nuisance may enter upon and take possession of said common land and improvements and maintain the same until such time as the Common Council shall determine that the property owners association is ready and able to maintain the common land and improvements in proper condition. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the common land or improvement except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the property owners association and the offer of dedication is accepted by the Common Council. The decision of the City with respect to the action described in this Section shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to review in accordance with the provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. The cost to the City of any such maintenance shall be assessed against the properties within the "conservation development" and, in the event of the failure or refusal of any property owner to pay any such charges when due, the unpaid amount thereof shall become a lien against his property and, together with interest from the due date thereof, shall be included in the annual tax levy of the City upon such property for each such fiscal year, and the amount so levied shall be collected in the same manner as other City taxes. 
5.7.3.9.2.4.5:  The property owners association agreement shall require that every property owner within the "conservation development" shall automatically be and become a member of the association and shall be subject to a charge for a proportionate share of expenses of the association's activities, including but not limited to the maintenance and operation of the common land and improvements thereon. The charge shall be a lien upon the residential property in the event it remains unpaid by the property owner for a period of more than 60 days after assessment thereof by the governing body of the property owners association. The obligation of each property owner to pay a proportionate share of the association's expenses may be enforced by an action in the name of the association or by the City as provided in Section 5.7.3.9.2.4.4, or in the name of both. 
5.7.3.9.3  In general, common open space land areas shall be preserved in their natural state and their "use" shall be limited to appropriate conservation and passive recreation purposes. A portion of such common open space, not to exceed 10% of the gross land area of the "conservation development," may be reserved and designated for active recreation purposes, provided the size, shape, access and location of such area is approved by the Planning Board. In so doing, the Planning Board shall require a location for such active recreation area which will minimize the potential noise impact of such "uses" upon existing neighborhood residences, consistent with other valid planning considerations, but in no case shall such active recreation area be closer than 150 feet from any existing single family residential "lot." Within a designated active recreation area, there may be located "swimming pools," ball fields, facilities for court games, club houses, playground equipment, and so forth, provided the "use" of all such facilities shall be limited to the residents of the "conservation development" and their guests, and further provided that such facilities shall be subject to "building plan" approval by the Planning Board. 
5.7.3.9.4  The permanent preservation of common open space lands and facilities for their intended purposes shall further be legally assured to the satisfaction of the Planning Board and the Corporation Counsel by the filing of appropriate covenants, deed restrictions, easements, or other forms of agreement. The permitted "uses" within such areas shall be limited to those specifically approved by the Planning Board and shown on the subdivision plat, plus "uses" customarily incidental and "accessory" thereto. Subsequent to the approval of the subdivision plat, the "uses" permitted within privately owned common land areas may be modified only upon approval by the Planning Board and only upon application by the entity owning such common land area. In each such case, a public hearing shall be held with the same notice as required by law for final subdivision plats. Such modification may permit a "use" in the same general category of "uses" previously approved or may allow a change in the location of a particular "use" from one portion of the common land areas to another. 
5.7.3.9.5  Dedication of the common land areas, including any common facilities or improvements thereon, to the common "use" of all property owners within the "conservation development" shall be recorded directly on the subdivision plat to include a declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions in a separate document recorded or to be recorded at or about the time of the filing of the approved subdivision plat. Such declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions shall permanently grant to each property owner in common with all other property owners within such "conservation development" an easement in and to the common land areas and the common facilities thereon and of the "use" thereof. 
5.7.4  Application Procedure: In addition to complying with the normally applicable procedures and requirements for subdivision plat review and approval as set forth in the Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans, applicants for "conservation development" approval shall also comply with the following additional requirements: 
5.7.4.1  Informal Review: Prior to submitting a formal application for approval, the applicant shall prepare and submit jointly to the Planning Board and the Department of Planning 6 copies of the following: 
5.7.4.1.1  A sketch of a conventional subdivision layout of the property prepared in accordance with Section 5.7.3.1 above; 
5.7.4.1.2  A sketch of the proposed development concept; and 
5.7.4.1.3  A brief analysis, in written and graphic form, explaining the nature and extent of the requested modifications of the zoning standards needed to implement the proposed development concept, the planning purposes of Section 5.7.1 hereof to be accomplished by the proposed plan, and the benefits to the City and to the immediately surrounding neighborhood of applying this approach as compared to allowing a conventional subdivision on the subject property. 
The applicant and the licensed professional engineer preparing the sketch shall attend a preliminary, informal meeting with the Planning Board and the Commissioner of Planning for the purpose of presenting and discussing this proposal. The Commissioner of Planning shall refer a copy of the informal proposal to such other City boards, agencies and departments as appropriate. The Commissioner shall also refer a copy of the informal proposal for review and comment to the neighborhood association(s), as shown on the Department of Planning map of neighborhood associations, representing the neighborhood(s) within which the proposed development is located and to those representing neighborhoods located within 500 feet of such development. In addition, the applicant shall send notice of the filing of the informal plan by certified mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision. The notice shall indicate that a complete copy of the informal proposal is available for public inspection in the office of the Planning Department during regular business hours. Following this, and within 35 days after submission of the informal proposal, the Planning Board shall respond to the applicant with general comments and the recommendations concerning the proposal and the potential applicability of this approach to the subject property. 
5.7.4.2  Preliminary Application: Application for preliminary approval pursuant to this Section shall be submitted and reviewed as required for a preliminary plat plan and application as set forth in the Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans, including compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 3-6 of the Municipal Code of the City of White Plains, such as the submission of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). In addition, each such application shall be accompanied by a preliminary "building plan" showing the maximum number of "dwelling units" that may exist on each proposed "lot" and in each proposed "building," the minimum "yard" requirements, proposals for the location and design of all "streets," "driveways", "parking lots," screening, landscaping, open spaces and recreation areas, architectural features (including size, design and materials) of all proposed "buildings," the relationship of the proposed development to adjacent land "uses," and such other information as the Planning Board determines may be reasonably related to the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
A copy of the application and the preliminary "building plan" shall be mailed to the neighborhood association(s) representing the neighborhood(s) within which the proposed "conservation development" is to be located and to any such association(s) representing a neighborhood located within 500 feet of such development, as well as to such City boards, agencies and departments as the Planning Board may determine appropriate. In addition, the applicant shall send notice of the filing of the "conservation development" application by certified mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision. Such notice shall indicate that a complete copy of the application and the development proposal is available for public inspection in the office of the Department of Planning during regular business hours. 
If the Planning Board finds that the appropriate "use" of adjoining land is reasonably safeguarded, that the proposed preliminary plat and "building plan" are consistent with the public health, safety and welfare and will achieve one or more of the purposes as set forth herein, that those plans are in accordance with these regulations and the "Comprehensive Plan," and that they comply with all other applicable standards and requirements, said Board may approve the preliminary application. If the Planning Board does not so find, the preliminary application shall either be disapproved or approved with modification designed to achieve such compliance. 
Prior to formally accepting the application for preliminary approval under this Section, it shall be reviewed by the Commissioner of Planning who shall verify whether it complies with all technical requirements for submission, including the certification by the Planning Board that all requirements of the State Environmental Quality Review Act ("SEQRA") have been met. Thereafter, all necessary notices, determinations and hearings required by the SEQRA shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements of that Act and coordinated to the maximum extent possible with review under this Section. 
5.7.4.3  Final Application: Application for final approval pursuant to this authorization shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures as required for a final plat plan in the Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans, including compliance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 3-6 of the Municipal Code of the City of White Plains, such as the submission of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). In addition, the applicant shall submit for approval the proposed "building plan" and the proposed final versions of all other related plans and documents approved as a part of the preliminary application. All such elements of the final application shall comply with the requirements of the preliminary approval. 
5.7.4.4  Public Hearing: In addition to the public hearing and notice requirements for final plats as contained in the Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans, (1) the distance requirement for the mailing of notice to neighboring property owners as set forth in Section 9.5 of those Requirements shall be increased to 300 feet; and (2) if a portion of the property is within the protectively zoned areas of a housing project authorized under the Public Housing Law or is within 50 feet of the City boundary, notice shall be sent to such other agencies and officials as required by Section 37 of the General City Law. 
5.7.4.5  Planning Board Action: Within 45 days of the date of submission of an application for final "conservation development" approval, the Planning Board shall act either to approve, modify and approve, or disapprove such application. If the action of the Planning Board is to grant approval for the "conservation development," such action shall include approval of the final "building plan," with or without modifications, including any conditions or requirements attached thereto. Such approval shall modify, change, or supplement the zoning regulations of the property shown on the final plat within the limitations as set forth herein. 
If a performance bond is approved by the Planning Board in lieu of the completion of the construction of required improvements prior to the filing of the final plat, the Planning Board may require such bond to be adequate in amount to cover the installation of landscaping and the construction of "recreation facilities," off-"street" "parking lots" and other site features and common facilities as shown on the approved final plans, as well as roads, utility lines, and other site improvements, as provided by Section 9.3 of the Requirements for Approval of Subdivision Plans of the City of White Plains. In addition, the Planning Board may require that a maintenance bond, equal in amount to 10% of the amount of the performance bond, be retained by the City for a period of 1 year from the date of final release of the performance bond to guarantee the satisfactory installation and performance of all such required improvements. 
5.7.4.6  Filing of Plat: The approved final plat shall be filed in the Westchester County Clerk's Office. Within 3 working days of such filing, a copy of the approved final plat shall also be filed in the City Clerk's Office, the Department of Public Works, the Department of Building and the Department of Planning, each of which shall be accompanied by a copy of the approved final "building plan." The restrictions and regulations promulgated by the Planning Board with respect to the property thereon by reason of the authority conferred upon it by the Common Council shall take the place of any other regulations previously established for such property. They shall be enforced in the same manner as other zoning regulations and shall be similarly subject to change. Any future change in the filed plat or the approved final "building plan" shall require approval by the Planning Board in accordance with the same procedure as set forth above for final application approval. 
5.7.4.7  Construction Progress Supervision and Reporting: At any time during or upon completion of the construction process, the Planning Board may request a report from the Commissioner of Building for compliance of work in relation to the Planning Board's requirements as set forth on the approved final "building plan," the filed plat and other related documents. Any deviations from those plans, lack of progress in complying with the Planning Board requirements, and other problems which may have arisen, shall be clearly identified. A copy of each report shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and to the Department of Public Works. The final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued nor shall the performance bond be released until the Commissioner of Building and the Commissioner of Public Works have determined that all of the requirements as shown on the approved final "building plan," filed plat and related documents have been fully complied with. 
5.7.5  Amendments: After approval of a "conservation development," the Planning Board shall consider for approval requests for modifications, changes or amendments. In every such request, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board 12 copies of such drawings, plans, descriptions, etc., as may be necessary and appropriate to illustrate and explain the proposed change. At its next scheduled meeting, the Planning Board shall determine if it has sufficient information with which to make an informed judgment whether the proposal represents a minor amendment. If it does not have sufficient information, the Planning Board shall identify to the applicant what additional information is needed. If the Planning Board finds it has sufficient information, it shall determine whether the proposal represents a minor amendment. If it so determines by majority vote, the Planning Board may approve the minor amendment without public hearing by majority vote (2/3 vote in the case of an "environmentally sensitive site or feature"), or it may approve with modifications or conditions, or it may deny approval. If a proposal is found to involve more than a minor amendment, the applicant shall submit a formal application for approval, which application shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. 
5.7.5.1  A minor amendment is a modification, "alteration," adjustment or change in an approved "conservation development" that does not exceed any of the following thresholds: 
5.7.5.1.1  There is no increase in the mandatory off-"street" parking or loading requirement. 
5.7.5.1.2  There is no diminution in the number or size of off-"street" parking or loading spaces required. 
5.7.5.1.3  There is no increase in "use," and no new "use" is established. 
5.7.5.1.4  There is no significant "alteration" of the essential characteristics of the design, layout or arrangement of "buildings," parking, circulation, landscaping, or relationship of the project to the "street," adjacent properties and the area in general. 
5.7.5.1.5  There is no greater adverse effect upon any "environmentally sensitive site or feature." 
5.7.5.1.6  There is no change in the approved subdivision plat. 
5.7.5.2  In its consideration for approval of a minor amendment, the Planning Board shall make referrals for comment to such other boards, councils, or City departments as the Planning Board may deem appropriate. In the event a proposed minor amendment involves the "alteration" of the exterior design of more than a single "dwelling unit," the Planning Board shall make a referral to the Design Review Board. In the event a proposed minor amendment involves an "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the Planning Board shall make a referral to the Conservation Board. 
5.7.5.2.1  Each department and agency to which such referral is made shall notify the Planning Board within 5 days of receipt of the referral whether it wishes to comment on such referral and, if it does, shall deliver such comments to the Planning Board within 10 days of receipt of the referral. Non-response to a referral shall be deemed to represent no objection to the proposed amendment referred. In the case of a referral to a board or commission, receipt of a referral shall be deemed to be the date of the next meeting of such board or commission. 
5.7.5.2.2  No minor amendment to an approved "conservation development" shall be approved by the Planning Board until there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations, and until all applicable conditions in the original "conservation development" approval have been met. 
5.7.5.2.3  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.7.5 herein above, during construction, the Commissioner of Building may authorize minor adjustments to the approved "conservation development" when such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations, the existence or materiality of which was first discovered during actual construction. Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the concepts of the approved "conservation development." 
Sec. 5.8 - "Planned Senior Residential Development" 
5.8.1  Purposes: A "Planned Senior Residential Development District" is established in this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety and welfare by facilitating the creation of an integrated senior community in a campus setting of sufficient size to provide a variety of housing types serving seniors, including independent living units and residential units for seniors requiring a range of health care services, as well as health care support and appropriate ancillary and "accessory uses", while ensuring orderly traffic circulation to the City's road network and compatibility with surrounding land uses, and thereby achieving the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. It is the purpose of this section to encourage flexibility of design and development of land in a manner that suits the unique needs of a senior citizen community. All development shall be undertaken in conformity with a site-specific Master Plan. 
5.8.2  Reserved 
5.8.3  General Provisions: In harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Section, and in order to achieve the purposes of the District, a special set of regulations is established for such District, controlling "uses", including ancillary and "accessory uses," "height," "coverage" and bulk, accessory parking facilities and accessory loading facilities. Such regulations are contained in this Section 5.8 and in other provisions of this Ordinance incorporated into this Section by cross-reference. All dimensional requirements shall apply to the entire District and are not applied to any individual areas notwithstanding subdivision or divided ownership of areas within the District. Subdivision and/or conveyance of any portion of the property by deed must be in conformance with the approved management plan required pursuant to Section 5.8.10 of this Section. 
5.8.4  Uses: The permitted principal "uses" in the "Planned Senior Residential Development District" include a variety of age restricted housing types including, but not limited to, independent living facilities which may be "one family or multi-family dwellings," life care communities, "assisted living facilities," "domiciliary care facilities" and rehabilitation facilities operated, or with services provided, by appropriately licensed home care or long term care service providers, as required by New York State Law, and approved by the Common Council. Such "Planned Senior Residential Development District" may also include any medical or rehabilitation facility designated by the Common Council, in its sole discretion, as a medical or rehabilitation facility serving a critical community need. A "Planned Senior Residential Development District" may also include non-residential ancillary "uses" including medical offices and related diagnostic and treatment facilities, physical therapy and wellness care facilities serving the residents of the "Planned Senior Residential Development" and the general public. Such "Planned Senior Residential Development" may also include as "accessory uses" recreation health club facilities restricted to residents of the "Planned Senior Residential Development" and their guests, and dining facilities restricted to residents and employees of the "Planned Senior Residential Development" and the guests of the residents, residential facilities for staff personnel, storage facilities, places of worship, gift shops, flower shops, newsstands, laundries, and other similar facilities for the exclusive use of residents and their guests, normally accessory to a senior residential community. 
5.8.5  Density: The densities for the permitted "uses" and "accessory uses" are as follows: 
5.8.5.1  The maximum "floor area ratio" for all "uses," including all residential, non-residential, ancillary "uses" and "accessory uses," but excluding any existing facility determined by the approving agency to meet a critical community need, such as the Carvel Children's Rehabilitation Center, shall not exceed 0.70. 
5.8.5.2  The combined number of beds in all "assisted living facilities" and "domiciliary care facilities" shall not exceed 45% of the total number of independent living units in the district, based on a maximum number of independent living units in the "Planned Senior Residential Development District" of 329 units. 
5.8.5.3  The maximum "floor area ratio" for all "accessory uses" shall not exceed 0.05. 
5.8.5.4  The maximum "floor area ratio" for "assisted living" and "domiciliary care facilities" shall not exceed 0.15. 
5.8.5.5  The maximum "floor area ratio" for all independent living residential "uses" shall not exceed 0.45. 
5.8.5.6  The maximum "floor area ratio" for nonresidential "uses" (excluding any special medical or rehabilitation facility designated by the Common Council, in its sole discretion, as a medical or rehabilitation facility serving a critical community need) shall not exceed 0.10. 
5.8.5.7  The minimum fraction of "lot area" attributable to each independent living dwelling unit shall be 3,000 square feet. 
5.8.5.8  Six (6) percent of all independent living residential "dwelling units" shall be made available for sale to or rent by households who are income qualified under the City's Affordable Rental Housing Assistance Program or Affordable Home Ownership Program, in perpetuity. 
5.8.6  Height: The maximum permitted "height" shall be six "stories," but not exceed 65 feet, and two "stories" but not exceed 35 feet for "accessory buildings and structures." In connection with its approval of a "site plan," the approving agency may permit a fence or wall to exceed the "height" requirements of Section 4.4.16. 
5.8.7  "Lot Area," "Frontage," "Coverage" and "Yard" Requirements: 
5.8.7.1  The minimum required "lot area" for all "uses" including all ancillary "uses" and "accessory uses" in a "Planned Senior Residential Development District" shall be 20 acres. The minimum "frontage" shall be 700 feet, with 75% of the entire "frontage" located on a State or County road and sole access (other than for emergency vehicles) shall be to and from a State or County road. 
5.8.7.2  The "front yard" shall measure at least 75 feet in depth, except that the approving agency may permit accessory "parking garages" within said setback, but with not less than 45 feet from a property line, if adequate screening from adjoining streets, as determined by the approving agency, is provided. 
5.8.7.3  The "rear yard" shall measure at least 55 feet in depth. 
5.8.7.4  For residential "uses" the side yard shall measure 75 feet in depth. For non-residential uses, the side yard shall measure 100 feet in depth. 
5.8.7.5  Where the "Planned Senior Residential Development District" abuts a "one or two family dwelling" or residential district, "accessory" structures up to a height of 25 feet may be within 40 feet of the rear or side lot line if adequate screening, as determined by the approving agency, is provided. 
5.8.7.6  The maximum "building coverage" shall not exceed 20% for all "buildings," excluding any existing facility determined by the approving agency to meet a critical community need. 
5.8.7.7  Dimensional requirements not otherwise specified shall be determined by the approving agency in connection with its approval of a "site plan" application. 
5.8.8  Parking and Loading: Parking requirements for the "uses" permitted in the "Planned Senior Residential Development District" shall be as follows: 
5.8.8.1  For each independent senior living unit in a "Planned Senior Residential Development," 1.25 spaces. 
5.8.8.2  For "assisted living facilities" 0.4 spaces per "dwelling unit." 
5.8.8.3  For "domiciliary care facilities" 0.33 spaces per bed. 
5.8.8.4  For non-residential medical facilities 5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of "gross floor area." 
5.8.8.5  For non-residential medical or rehabilitation facilities determined by the approving agency to represent a critical community need, 2.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. "gross floor area." 
5.8.8.6  For "assisted living facility" and "domiciliary care facility," one loading space for every 100,000 square feet. 
5.8.8.7  For medical office "uses," one loading space for every 100,000 square feet of "gross floor area." 
5.8.8.8  The Common Council, as approving agency, may, at its sole discretion, permit all or a portion of the required parking to be provided by means of stacked attendant parking, subject to: 
5.8.8.8.1  a parking management plan approved as part of the traffic management plan required pursuant to Section 5.8.10.6. 
5.8.8.8.2  as part of the management plan required pursuant to Section 5.8.10: 
5.8.8.8.2.1  a copy of the operating agreement between the owner and the operator of the stacked attendant parking. 
5.8.8.8.2.2  a legal instrument satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel assuring the continued existence and operation of the stacked attendant parking in connection with the "uses" and "structures" that they serve. Such instrument shall provide that it is the responsibility of the owner of the property to ensure that off-"street" "parking spaces" for the "uses" on the property are maintained and identifying the operator of the stacked attendant parking and assuring the continued existence and operation of the stacked attendant parking in connection with the "uses" and "structures" that it serves. 
5.8.9  Master Plan: Any application for a "Planned Senior Residential Development" or an amendment thereto, shall be accompanied by a master plan for the total development of the entire parcel of land. Such master plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 200' and shall include the following: 
5.8.9.1  Terrain conditions on the property, to include topographic data with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet, an indication of generalized soil types, and the location of existing water courses, wetlands, wooded areas, major rock outcroppings, and other significant existing features. 
5.8.9.2  The proposed arrangement of "uses," including the location, nature and general extent of areas to be developed and areas to be preserved as natural open space. 
5.8.9.3  The general configuration of the road system planned to serve the property. 
5.8.9.4  The total gross area encompassed by the entire property, and approximate land area to be occupied by each type of "use." 
5.8.9.5  The total number of "dwelling units" and facilities for each housing type proposed and the proposed breakdown of these "dwelling units" and facilities according to type. 
5.8.9.6  A generalized time schedule for the staging and completion of the proposed "uses." 
5.8.9.7  A statement with respect to the relationship of this master plan to the "Comprehensive Plan," explaining the reasons for any inconsistency between the two and the justification for any such inconsistency. 
5.8.9.8  Such other additional information as deemed necessary by the Common Council to properly study and evaluate the Plan. 
5.8.10  Management Plan: Prior to the issuance of any Certificates of Occupancy for any independent senior living "dwelling units," "assisted living facility," or "domiciliary care facility" in a "Planned Senior Residential Development" located in a "Planned Senior Residential Development District," the applicant for the "Planned Senior Residential Development" or its designated agent shall submit to the approving agency a management plan describing the ownership and operation of the "Planned Senior Residential Development," which management plan is designed to assure the operation of all "uses," and "accessory uses" and ancillary "uses" in the "Planned Senior Residential Development," in accordance with the requirements for a "Planned Senior Residential Development District," as set forth in this Ordinance. 
5.8.10.1  The management plan shall include, among other things, the following: 
5.8.10.1.1  The form of ownership and rights of occupancy and "use" of the independent senior living component and the "accessory uses" thereto, and the rights and obligations of the individual senior independent living "dwelling unit" owners under this ownership, including the rights of residents qualifying for residency on the basis of their relationship to an age qualified owner, if the age qualified owner is no longer in occupancy of the unit, as a primary residence. Submission of a copy of an offering plan approved by the New York State Attorney General shall satisfy this requirement; 
5.8.10.1.2  The owner and operator of the "assisted living facility," including proof that operator is duly licensed by the appropriate New York State regulating agency; 
5.8.10.1.3  The owner and operator of the "domiciliary care facility," if such a component is provided, including proof that the operator is duly licensed by the appropriate New York State regulating agency; 
5.8.10.1.4  Any easements, leases or license agreements by and among the residential "uses"; 
5.8.10.1.5  The ownership of any non-residential "uses," and the relationship of such non-residential "uses" to the residential "uses," including any joint use of facilities, such as parking, and any easements, leases or licenses related to such nonresidential "uses." 
5.8.10.1.6  A directory of names, addresses, contact persons, and contact numbers for all owners of the "Planned Senior Residential Development," excluding owners of the individual independent senior living "dwelling units," and of any licensed care provided providing services as part of the approved "Planned Senior Residential Development." 
5.8.10.2  With respect to any "assisted living facility" or "domiciliary care facility," located in a "Planned Senior Residential Development," the management plan shall include a description of the operation of each proposed "assisted living facility" or "domiciliary care facility," including personnel, supervision, maintenance and operating plans. 
5.8.10.3  The management plan, along with a certification from the applicant that the management plan fulfills the requirements of this Section 5.8.10 shall be submitted to the approving agency for its review and approval prior to the issuance of any Certificates of Occupancy for the "Planned Senior Residential Development." 
5.8.10.3.1  The approving agency shall have sixty (60) days to review and accept, accept with conditions, or reject, the management plan as in compliance with the requirements of this Section 5.8.10. 
5.8.10.3.2  If changes to the management plan are required by the approving agency, the approving agency review of the management plan shall be extended by thirty (30) days from the receipt of the revised management plan. 
5.8.10.4  No material changes shall be made in the management plan or in the operation of the "Planned Senior Residential Development," as described in an accepted management plan, except upon prior acceptance of the change by the approving agency. 
5.8.10.4.1  All proposed changes to an accepted management plan, including changes in ownership, or changes in the identity of any licensed care provider for the "assisted living facility" or "domiciliary care facility," shall be submitted in writing to the Corporation Counsel. 
5.8.10.4.2  The Corporation Counsel shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of a written request for a change to an accepted management plan to issue a report to the approving agency that such change constitutes a material change in the accepted management plan. Failure to issue such report within the thirty (30) day period shall constitute approval of the change as a nonmaterial change to the accepted management plan. 
5.8.10.4.3  Where the Corporation Counsel has determined that a change to an accepted management plan constitutes a material change, the change shall be reviewed under the procedure set forth in Section 5.8.10.3 herein above. 
5.8.10.5  The owner(s) of the "uses" operated within the "Planned Senior Residential Development," or their designated agents shall submit annually to the Corporation Counsel, in a written form acceptable to the Corporation Counsel, a certification of compliance of the "Planned Senior Residential Development" with the approved management plan. 
5.8.10.6  A traffic management plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the approving agency as part of "site plan" review and approval, pursuant to Section 7 of this Ordinance. 
5.8.11  Review and Approval Procedures: Any changes to an approved "Planned Senior Residential Development District" shall be subject to Section 3.7 of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 5.9 - Planned Campus Development 
5.9.1  Purposes: "Planned Campus Development" is established as a design based, master-planned mixed-use development within a "Planned Campus Development District" that has been mapped by the Common Council pursuant to Section 3 of this Ordinance on one or more properties within a C-O District to promote the public health, safety and welfare by facilitating the creation of integrated, master-planned, mixed use development in campus settings of sufficient size to provide a variety of uses and support appropriate ancillary and "accessory uses", with environmentally sustainable building and site design, while ensuring orderly traffic circulation both on site and onto the City's road network, compatibility with surrounding and Core Area land uses, and with public and private open space integrated into the City's open space network, thereby achieving the objectives of the Campus Office District as described in Section 5.5.1.1 of this Ordinance and in the City's Comprehensive Plan, as amended, It is the purpose of this overlay district to encourage flexibility of design and development of land in a manner that suits the needs of the community. All development shall be undertaken in conformity with the strategies for the Campus Office District as articulated in the Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and with an approved site-specific Master Plan as described in Section 5.9.8. 
5.9.2  General Provisions: In harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Section, and in order to achieve the purposes of "Planned Campus Development" in a "Planned Campus Development District" described in Section 5.9.1, a special set of regulations is established for a "Planned Campus Development", controlling "uses", including "uses", "accessory uses", "height", "gross land coverage", bulk, and parking standards. Such regulations are contained in Sections 2, 4.4.19.6, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.5.1.1, this Section 5.9 and Sections 7.2.1.5, 8.3 and 8.5.4 of this Ordinance and are incorporated into this Section by cross-reference. All dimensional requirements shall apply to the entire "Planned Campus Development" as a single "development site" and are not applied to any individual areas notwithstanding subdivision or divided ownership of areas within the "Planned Campus Development District". 
5.9.3  Uses: 
5.9.3.1  The "Planned Campus Development" District is an overlay district which can be mapped by the Common Council in the C-O District to expand the major categories of "uses" permitted in the C-O District including those listed in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 of this Ordinance, and shown as being regulated by this Section 5.9, to enable mixed use development in integrated, designed development, including a mix of office, residential and retail "uses" but only as part of "Planned Campus Developments" which are site-specific master planned mixed use developments. 
5.9.3.2  The "uses" permitted as principal permitted "uses" in a "Planned Campus Development District" which are not otherwise permitted in the C-O District are "multi-family dwellings" and "stores for sale at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retail sales, including "real estate offices" (but not including sales of automobiles, automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale), in combination with each other or in combination with offices "uses" and other appropriate "uses" permitted in a Campus Office District which are complementary to and supportive of one or more principal Campus Office "uses", and which include planned public and private open space, walkways and bike trails that link and are integrated into the "Planned Campus Development" and the City's open space network, all as regulated under Section 5.9 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
5.9.3.3  The "use" permitted as a permitted "accessory use" in a "Planned Campus Development District" which is not otherwise permitted in the C-O District area is the keeping of household pets." 
5.9.4  Density: The densities for the permitted principal "uses" and "accessory "uses" in a "Planned Campus Development" are as follows: 
5.9.4.1  The maximum "floor area ratio" for all non-residential "uses", including all non-residential, "accessory uses", shall not exceed 0.30. 
5.9.4.2  The maximum "floor area ratio" for all residential "uses", including all residential "accessory uses" shall not exceed 0.2. 
5.9.4.3  The maximum combined "floor area ratio" for all "uses" including "accessory uses" shall not exceed 0.4. 
5.9.5  Affordable Housing. Ten (10) percent of all independent living residential "uses" shall be made available for sale or rent to households who are income qualified under the City's Affordable Rental Housing Assistance Program or Affordable Home Ownership Program, in perpetuity. 
5.9.6  Height: 
5.9.6.1  The maximum permitted "height" for non-residential "uses", excluding "accessory uses" shall not exceed 50 feet. 
5.9.6.2  The maximum permitted "height" for residential "uses", excluding accessory "uses" shall not exceed 65 feet. 
5.9.6.3  The maximum permitted "height" for non-residential "accessory uses" and "structures" shall not exceed 35 feet. 
5.9.6.4  In connection with its approval of a "site plan", the approving agency may permit a fence or wall to exceed the height requirements of Section 4.4.16. 
5.9.7  "Lot Area", "Frontage" and "Yard" Requirements. The "lot area", "frontage", and "yard" requirements for a "Planned Campus Development" shall be the same as provided for the C-O District in Section 5.3 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations: non-residential. 
5.9.8  Dimensional requirements not otherwise specified shall be determined by the approving agency in connection with its approval of a site plan application for the "Planned Campus Development." 
5.9.9  Master Plan: Any application for a "Planned Campus Development," or an amendment thereto, shall be accompanied by a master plan for the entire development site. Such master plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 200' and shall include the following: 
5.9.9.1  Terrain conditions on the development site, to include topographic data with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet, an indication of generalized soil types, and the location of existing water courses, wetlands, wooded areas, major rock outcroppings, and other significant existing features. 
5.9.9.2  The proposed arrangement of "uses," including the location, nature and general extent of areas to be developed and areas to be preserved as natural open space. 
5.9.9.3  The general configuration of the road system planned to serve the property. 
5.9.9.4  The total gross area encompassed by the entire property, and approximate area to be occupied by each type of "use." 
5.9.9.5  The area of the development site to be made available for public and private recreation or open space use, including walkways, bike trails, parklets and play areas. 
5.9.9.6  The total number of "dwelling units" and the proposed breakdown of these "units" according to type. 
5.9.9.7  A generalized time schedule for the staging and completion of the proposed development. 
5.9.9.8  A statement with respect to the relationship of the "Planned Campus Development" and master plan to the "Comprehensive Plan," detailing the consistency of the master plan with the applicable vision, objectives and strategies of the Comprehensive Plan, as amended, with respect to the Campus Office District. 
5.9.9.9  Such other additional information as deemed necessary by the Common Council to properly study and evaluate the Plan. 
5.9.10  Parking and Loading: Parking and loading requirements for the "uses" permitted in a "Planned Campus Development" shall be as follows: 
5.9.10.1  For non-residential "uses" in a "Planned Campus Development" parking and loading requirements shall be as provided for such "uses" in Section 8.3 Off-"street" Parking and Loading Requirements. 
5.9.10.2  For residential "uses" in a "Planned Campus Development" the parking requirement shall be 1 per "dwelling unit" plus 1/2 per bedroom and the approving agency for the "site plan" may reduce the total number of parking spaces required by up to 1/3rd of the required parking spaces subject to Section 8.5.3. 
5.9.10.3  There are no loading requirements for residential "uses" in a "Planned Campus Development." 
5.9.10.4  The Common Council, as approving agency, may, at its sole discretion, permit all or a portion of the required parking to be provided by means of stacked attendant parking, subject to: 
5.9.10.4.1  a parking and traffic management plan approved by the Common Council. 
5.9.10.4.2  a copy of the operating agreement between the owner and the operator of the stacked attendant parking. 
5.9.10.4.3  a legal instrument satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel assuring the continued existence and operation of the stacked attendant parking in connection with the "uses" and "structures" that they serve. Such instrument shall provide that it is the responsibility of the owner of the property to ensure that off-"street" "parking spaces" for the "uses" on the property are maintained and identifying the operator of the stacked attendant parking and assuring the continued existence and operation of the stacked attendant parking in connection with the "uses" and "structures" that it serves. 
Sec. 5.10 - Transit Development District (TD-1) 
5.10.1  A TD-1 District application for designation and mapping shall include a Conceptual Development Plan ("CDP") as described in Section 5.10.2, which shall be reviewed and approved by the Common Council in accordance with the mandatory Design Standards and recommended Design Guidelines stated below. 
5.10.1.1  TD-1 Design Standards require the following: 
5.10.1.1.1  "Building Coverage" 
5.10.1.1.1.1  "Building coverage" shall not exceed 85% of the "lot area," except that such "building coverage" may be increased to 100% if an area totaling at least 15% of such "lot area" is improved as exterior open space, which is open during reasonable times of the day and is publicly accessible from the "street" at a height not more than 15 feet above "grade." 
5.10.1.1.1.2  The total "building coverage" for any portion of a "building" or "buildings" above 150 feet shall be no more than 40% of the "lot area." 
5.10.1.1.2  "Building" "Height" 
The maximum "height" of any "building" shall not exceed 150 feet, except that the maximum "height" of any "building" adjacent to a State or County Road, and extending 225 feet therefrom, may extend up to, but shall not exceed 280 feet. 
5.10.1.1.3  Any portion of a "building" rising above 150 feet shall: 
a)  Not have a "street wall" length in excess of 225 feet. 
b)  Be separated by a minimum of 60 feet from any other portion of a building above 150 feet. 
5.10.1.1.4  "Street walls" at ground floor level shall extend no more than 15 feet in length without incorporating windows, transparent glazing, or pedestrian or vehicular entry(ies) with views into a building, or other architectural treatment to provide pedestrian interest. 
5.10.1.1.5  No dwelling units shall be located at the street level. Entry lobbies and residential amenity space shall be permitted at the street level. 
5.10.1.1.6  Onsite bicycle facilities must be provided and may include secure short and long-term bicycle parking/storage, lockers, changing rooms, bike repair/workshop area, rentals/sales, and public bikeway information. 
5.10.1.2  TD-1 Design Guidelines should be incorporated into a CDP to substantially achieve the purpose of the TD-1 District stated in Section 5.5.1.14. 
5.10.1.2.1  Substantial public amenities, such as on-site plazas, patios, courtyards, terraces, gardens, cafes, information kiosks, landscaping planters, architectural fountains, street trees, seating, tables, bicycle racks, awnings, and umbrellas within the private and/or public portions of the site, as well as usable open space, should be encouraged, subject to approvals and licensing, as applicable, by City agencies. 
5.10.1.2.2  Buildings located on corners should be positioned to activate the public space and add visual interest to the pedestrian environment. Entrances at the corners of buildings should be oriented to create a seamless transition to capture pedestrian activity from both street frontages. 
5.10.1.2.3  The design of the "street wall" of any "building" should implement architectural features and facade treatments that segment the structure so that it relates to pedestrian scale. 
5.10.1.2.4  Parking facilities should incorporate screening to the extent reasonably practicable to minimize the visibility of the structures, as well as lighting therein, from pedestrian views. 
5.10.1.2.5  Rooftop amenities, such as private and/or public open space, public art displays, gardens, venues for public assembly, and cafes/restaurants, as well as improvements that provide stormwater management and/or facilitate energy conservation or generation, are encouraged. 
5.10.1.2.6  If a TD-1 development is proposed to be constructed in phases, then the completion of any such public amenities, including but not limited to sidewalks and streetscape features, should be phased in a manner proportional to the number of dwelling units or nonresidential floor area to be occupied during any given phase of such development. 
5.10.2  Review Procedures for TD-1 District Designation and Mapping: An application for designation and mapping of the TD-1 District shall be submitted to the Common Council and shall include a Conceptual Development Plan ("CDP"). The application then shall be processed in accordance with the procedures for amending the Zoning Ordinance. The application must include the following, among other things: 
5.10.2.1  A statement of the objectives to be achieved by the proposed project, including evaluation of its consistency with the City's Comprehensive Plan and TD-1 Design Standards and Guidelines. 
5.10.2.2  A legal description of the property(ies) involved, including a survey signed and sealed by a licensed New York State surveyor or professional engineer. Minimum requirements shall include property lines and measurements, tax lot designation(s), street designations, easements, existing "structures," locations of utility lines and connection points, curb cuts, site topography, and a north arrow. 
5.10.2.3  Submission of a CDP to the City Council must include the following elements, and any other information determined necessary or appropriate by the approving agency in order to provide for the proper administration and enforcement of this Ordinance. 
5.10.2.3.1  A zoning compliance table, including parking and loading data, area of proposed public and/or private open space, and area devoted to nonresidential uses; 
5.10.2.3.2  Conceptual site plan drawings, including: 
5.10.2.3.2.1  The location and dimensions (length, width, and "height" in feet and in "stories") of proposed "structures," with floor plan diagrams depicting use by floor level; 
5.10.2.3.2.2  Conceptual architectural renderings of proposed "buildings"; 
5.10.2.3.3  A description of on-site open space areas (public, semipublic, and private), including the location of all points of access to public and semi-public areas; 
5.10.2.3.4  Proposed vehicular circulation for access to off-street parking and loading, as well as emergency access; 
5.10.2.3.5  Proposed design and "uses" of sidewalks and paths; 
5.10.2.3.6  A conceptual landscape plan; and 
5.10.2.3.7  A plan showing the proposed development and surrounding land uses, traffic circulation, and public facilities, etc. 
5.10.2.3.8  An analysis of the existing water and sanitary sewer infrastructure and a statement of the capacity to support the proposed CDP. 
5.10.2.3.9  A preliminary stormwater management report with details of existing drainage system(s), catch basins, drywells, retention basins, and other related facilities, and a statement of the capacity to support the proposed CDP. 
5.10.2.3.10  A traffic impact report including an existing conditions survey and an analysis of the potential impacts and mitigation measures to address impacts from the proposed development on the traffic and transportation systems. 
5.10.2.4  The Common Council, in its review of the application and its consideration of the request to map a property in the TD-1 District, shall determine whether the CDP meets the goals and objectives of the District as stated in Section 5.5.1.13. 
5.10.3  After approval of a Conceptual Development Plan (CDP) and designation of a property as TD-1, a "site plan" shall be submitted to the Common Council for review in accordance with Sections 7.4 and 7.5 hereof, and Chapter 3-6 of the City of White Plains Municipal Code - Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control. 
If the Common Council determines that the proposed "site plan" does not substantially conform to the approved CDP, the Common Council may require additional documentation detailing whether the inconsistent aspects of the "site plan" nevertheless meet the goals and objectives of the TD-1 District and are compatible with the initial TD-1 District determination and approval of the CDP. If the "site plan" is not consistent therewith, then the Common Council may require the "site plan" to be modified, and if it is not so modified, may deny the "site plan" application. 
5.10.4  Amendments: The Common Council may approve minor amendments to the CDP and/or "site plan" consistent with the requirements of Section 7.7 hereof. 
5.10.5  Affordable Housing: Dwelling units shall be made available for sale or rent to households in accordance with the City of White Plains Affordable Housing Program Rules and Procedures, as set forth in Section 5.4.1.5.1. 
( Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1J ) 
Section 6 - SPECIAL PERMIT "USES" 

Sec. 6.1 - General Provisions 
    Special permit "uses" for which conformance to additional requirements is mandated by this Ordinance (see Sections 5.1 and 5.2) shall be deemed to be permitted "uses" in their respective districts, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions and standards set forth in this Section in addition to all other requirements of this Ordinance. All such "uses" are declared to possess characteristics of such unique and special form that each specific "use" must be considered as an individual case. 
Sec. 6.2 - Approving Agencies 
    Except as provided in Section 4.1.3, the approving agency for special permit "uses" shall be the Board of Appeals, except as follows: 
6.2.1  The approving agency for the following listed special permit "uses" shall be the Common Council: 
6.2.1.1  Hospitals or sanitaria. 
6.2.1.2  "Universities," seminaries or "colleges." 
6.2.1.3  Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities such as playfields or stadia as accessory to a "university," "college" or seminary. 
6.2.1.4  "Domiciliary care facilities" or "community residences" of over 30 beds. 
6.2.1.5  "Auction houses." 
6.2.1.6  "Hotels" and "Extended Stay Hotels." 
6.2.1.7  Outdoor dining. 
6.2.1.8  "Fast food eating establishments." 
6.2.1.9  Accessory parking adjoining business or industrial districts. 
6.2.1.10  Neighborhood parking. 
6.2.1.11  In the CB-4 and UR-4 Districts, commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire. 
6.2.1.12  "Stories" over 6 in the RM-0.35 District. 
6.2.1.13  Increased "floor area ratio" in the B-3, BR-1, BR-2, CB-1 and CB-2 Districts. 
6.2.1.14  "Emergency Shelters." 
6.2.1.15  "Overnight Shelters for the Homeless." 
6.2.1.16  "Primary and Accessory Cabarets." 
6.2.1.17  Increased "height" in the RM-1, RM-0.7, in th B-3 in the Central Parking Area and in the UR-4 Districts. 
6.2.1.18  "Social Service Centers for Homeless Persons." 
6.2.1.19  Outdoor storage of motor vehicles 
6.2.1.20  "Parking lots" and "parking garages" to contain more than 25 "parking spaces." 
6.2.1.21  "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in the R1-12.5, R2-4 and C-O Districts. 
6.2.1.22  "Golf and country clubs." 
6.2.1.23  "Transitional housing for homeless families." 
6.2.1.24  "Dish antennas" in the CB-4 District and "S" zone properties which do not meet the requirements of Section 4.4.23.7.2. 
6.2.1.25  Stacked attendant parking. 
6.2.1.26  Increased density in the RM-0.35 District. 
6.2.1.27  "Building coverage" for "lots" in more than one zoning district. 
6.2.1.28  Substitution of "dwelling units" for non-residential "floor area" in the BR-1 and BR-2 Districts. 
6.2.1.29  Theatres. 
6.2.1.30  In the RM-07 District, within the Central Parking Area, sidewalk level, ground floor business or professional offices, stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services clearly incident to retail sales, including "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts or accessories involving installation at point of sale. 
6.2.1.31  In the B-3 District, within the Central Parking Area, radio stations. 
6.2.1.32  Increased "coverage" in the B-3, CB-2 and CB-3 Districts. 
6.2.1.33  Transfer of "excess gross floor area" in the CB-3, CB-4 and UR-4 Districts. 
6.2.1.34  "Restaurants" and "Cafeterias" in the C-O District. 
6.2.1.35  "Health Clubs" in the Central Parking Area and in all B-6 Districts 
6.2.1.36  "Multi-family dwelling" uses in the LI-M District. 
6.2.1.37  "Accessory Food Laboratory." 
6.2.2  The approving agency for the following listed special permit "uses" shall be the Planning Board. 
6.2.2.1  Banks. 
6.2.2.2  "Restaurants" and "cafeterias." 
6.2.2.3  Veterinary hospitals. 
6.2.2.4  Outdoor storage of building or other materials. 
6.2.2.5  "Public utility buildings or structures." 
6.2.2.6  In districts other than CB-4 and UR-4, commercial "parking lots" for private passenger vehicles, but not for storage of used or new motor vehicles for sale or for hire. 
6.2.2.7  "Health clubs" outside the Central Parking Area and outside any B-6 District. 
6.2.2.8  Mortuaries or funeral homes. 
6.2.2.9  "Cafes." 
6.2.2.10  "Nursery Business." 
6.2.3  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Section 6.2 or any other provision of this Ordinance, the Common Council may, by adoption of a resolution, reclaim jurisdiction as approving agency for any special permit "use" upon the finding, in the Common Council's absolute discretion, that such special permit "use" is of substantial public importance. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1E ; Ord. of 12-5-16, § 2 ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1E ) 
Sec. 6.3 - Application 
    Applicants are encouraged to submit a preliminary, informal application and to discuss it with the approving agency prior to formal submission of a complete and detailed special permit application. Formal and informal applications for a special permit shall be made to the Department of Building, in 35 copies when the Common Council is the approving agency, in 20 copies when the Board of Appeals is the approving agency, and in 20 copies when the Planning Board is the approving agency. It shall include a "site plan," as well as a written statement describing the nature of the proposed "use" and how it will serve to implement the purposes of this Ordinance. The "site plan" included in the application shall indicate by mapping, and the application shall state the area to the nearest multiple of 10 square feet, of any "environmentally sensitive site or feature." 
    If determined to be complete, the application shall be forwarded by the Department of Building to the approving agency. An application shall be considered officially submitted and received on the date of the next meeting of the approving agency following such forwarding. 
Sec. 6.4 - Review Procedure 
    Review and approval by the approving agency shall be in accordance with the following procedure: 
6.4.1  Review by Other Agencies: Upon receipt of a complete application, other than an application for a "swimming pool" or a tennis court, the approving agency shall forward copies to the Planning Board and the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering for review and report. Where the "site plan" includes a new "building" or a change in the cubic content or exterior appearance of an existing "building," the approving agency shall forward copies to the Design Review Board for review and report. In the event that the area involved in any application for a special permit "use" includes and/or would affect any "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the approving agency shall forward copies to the Conservation Board, if it exists, for review and report. The approving agency may also forward copies for review and report to such other agencies and officials of the City as it deems appropriate. All such agencies and officials shall have 30 days from the date of forwarding to submit reports. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with a notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board when such proposed development abuts a State or County highway, park, drainage channel or building site, and to the clerk of any abutting municipality where the property proposed for such development is located within 500 feet of such municipality, in accordance with Section 277.61 and 277.71 of the Westchester County Administrative Code. 
6.4.2  Public Hearing: A public hearing on an application for a special permit shall be held by the approving agency within 45 days of the date the complete application is received. No public hearing may be held until all requested reports have been received by the approving agency, or the 30 days specified in Section 6.4.1 above have elapsed, whichever is first. Public notice and notice to owners of property within the "area affected" shall be the same as that required for Zoning Ordinance amendments, as set forth in Section 12 of this Ordinance. 
6.4.3  Action: Within 90 days of the date the complete application is received, the approving agency shall make its decision and shall file with the Commissioner of Building a written report setting forth the facts of the case and its findings, conclusions and decision on the application. A copy thereof shall be mailed to the applicant. The approving agency may authorize the issuance of a special permit, provided it finds that the standards of Sections 6.5 and 6.7 have been met. In the event that the area involved in any application for a special permit "use" includes and/or would affect any "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the application shall be subject to the regulations contained in Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance. 
6.4.4  Extensions of Time Periods: The applicant may grant extensions of any of the above stipulated time limits, provided however that any extension of time granted to an official or agency making a report to the approving agency shall equally extend any time limit for the approving agency. 
6.4.5  Variances in Conjunction with a Special Permit "Use": 
6.4.5.1  No application shall be deemed complete unless it complies with all the requirements of this Ordinance and any necessary variances have been granted by the Board of Appeals. 
6.4.5.2  In cases where an application requires one or more variances, the applicant shall be so advised by the Department of Building, which shall also advise the applicant of the procedures and requirements to be followed in seeking any necessary variance(s) from the Board of Appeals. No further action shall be taken with respect to an application unless and until all required variances have been approved by the Board of Appeals. 
6.4.5.3  After approval by the Board of Appeals of any necessary variances, an application for a special permit may be submitted and processed in accordance with Section 6.3. 
Sec. 6.5 - Standards 
    All special permit "uses" shall comply with the following standards in addition to the "site plan" standards of Section 7.5. The approving agency shall attach such additional conditions and safeguards to any special permit as are, in its opinion, necessary to insure initial and continual conformance to all applicable standards and requirements. 
6.5.1  The location and size of the special permit "use," the nature and intensity of the operations involved in it or conducted in connection with it, the size of the site in relation to it, and the location of the site with respect to "streets" giving access to it are such that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the area in which it is located. 
6.5.2  The location, nature and "height" of "buildings," walls and fences and the nature and extent of existing or proposed plantings on the site are such that the special permit "use" will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and "use" of adjacent land and "buildings." 
6.5.3  Operations in connection with any special permit "use" will not be more objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, traffic, fumes, vibration or other characteristics than would be the operations of permitted "uses" not requiring a special permit. 
6.5.4  "Parking lots" will be of adequate size for the particular special permit "use," properly located and suitably screened from adjoining residential "uses," and the entrance and exit drives shall be laid out so as to achieve maximum convenience and safety. 
6.5.5  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any entity or person issued a special permit "use" to operate such "use" in violation of the terms and standards of Section 6.7, or to operate in a manner inconsistent with the conditions imposed or plans approved pursuant to Section 6 of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1F ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1F ) 
Sec. 6.6 - Expiration, Temporary Permits, Inspection, Change and Renewal 
6.6.1  A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular "use" specified in the permit and, unless other provisions are specifically set forth by the approving agency, the special permit shall expire if said "use" shall cease for more than 1 year for any reason, or if substantial construction, in accordance with the special permit, has not been completed within 1 year from the date of issuance, or if all such required improvements are not maintained and all conditions and standards complied with throughout the duration of the special permit "use." 
6.6.2  On request of an applicant, for a "use" intended to be temporary, the approving agency may issue a special permit for a specific period of time. 
6.6.3  In connection with issuance of a special permit, the approving agency may establish a schedule of inspections by the Department of Building of a special permit "use" to determine continued compliance with this Ordinance. 
6.6.4  Any change in "use" or reduction in "lot" size requires amendment to the special permit, following the application and review requirements of this Section, except that the Commissioner of Building may issue building permits as requested, without amendment of the special permit, where he finds that: 
6.6.4.1  There is no change in the "use," or that the "use" proposed falls within the definition of the existing special permit "use," and that 
6.6.4.2  The change would require less than 10 "parking spaces." 
Notwithstanding the above, the Commissioner of Building may require that application be made for amendment to the special permit where he finds that the proposed change will be a significant change in the essential characteristics of the existing layout, arrangement or "use" of "buildings" or land. 
6.6.5  On written application, a special permit may be renewed by the Commissioner of Building upon notice to the approving agency which authorized the issuance of the special permit, provided that no such renewal shall be made by the Commissioner of Building unless there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. The Commissioner of Building shall notify in writing the approving agency which authorized the issuance of the special permit 45 days prior to the effective date of such renewal. No such renewal shall be made upon written objection by a majority vote of the approving agency or other vote as required by law. 
Sec. 6.7 - Individual Standards and Requirements for Certain Special Permit "Uses" 
    The following individual standards and requirements are hereby established for certain special permit "uses." They must, if applicable, be met before issuance of a special permit, except that when the Common Council is acting as the approving agency, it need only give consideration to and generally be guided by them. 
6.7.1  "Domiciliary Care Facilities" or "Community Residences" of Over 30 Beds: 
6.7.1.1  "Building coverage" by the "main building" shall not exceed 30 percent. 
6.7.1.2  Each "side yard" shall be at least 15 feet. 
6.7.1.3  No office of a "professional person" shall be permitted except for the treatment of residents of the special permit "use." 
6.7.1.4  The special permit "use" must serve a community need or convenience. 
6.7.2  "Rooming Houses," or "Domiciliary Care Facilities" or "Community Residences" of 30 Beds or Less: 
6.7.2.1  A "rooming house" shall be limited to 15 "roomers," and shall be located on a "lot" with a "frontage" of at least 50 feet. There shall be a minimum of 500 square feet of "lot area" per "roomer." 
6.7.2.2  No such special permit "use" shall be located within 400 feet of any other such "use." 
6.7.2.3  Any such "use" shall particularly comply with An Ordinance Licensing and Regulating Buildings Containing Rooming Units in the City of White Plains, adopted November 1, 1976. 
6.7.2.4  The approving agency may, as a condition of issuance of a special permit, place a time limit on such permit, which time limit shall be appropriate in light of the investment to be made in such "use." 
6.7.2.5  Any change of such a "use" or "alteration" of a "structure" housing such a "use" shall require a new special permit. 
6.7.3  "Swimming Pools": 
6.7.3.1  A special permit shall be required prior to the installation or construction of any "swimming pool" except those meeting the criteria set forth in Section 4.4.24. Notwithstanding the above, the Commissioner of Building may withdraw as the approving agency where the Commissioner finds the impact of any such "swimming pool" to be significant. 
6.7.3.2  The approving agency may grant a special permit for the installation or construction of a "swimming pool" where the applicant demonstrates that topographical or similar constraints prohibit compliance with all the requirements set forth in Section 4.4.24. In such cases the approving agency shall determine that the deviation from the standards is the minimum necessary to achieve the purposes of the application. 
6.7.3.3  Above ground lights, slides, and diving boards shall be prohibited except where the approving agency finds that factors such as distance from "lot lines," topographic conditions or existing or proposed landscaping are sufficient to mitigate any visual or adverse impacts to nearby properties. If applicable, the approving agency shall establish hours of operation. 
6.7.3.4  The applicant shall demonstrate that the location and design of the "swimming pool" minimizes the visual impact to adjacent properties and will not create a nuisance. 
6.7.4  "Membership," "Golf and Country Clubs": 
6.7.4.1  "Recreation facilities" shall be located out of doors except where the approving agency finds that the scale and setbacks of "buildings" housing such facilities are such that they will relate harmoniously to the character of the district in which they are located. In any case, "recreation facilities" shall be set back from adjacent residential "lot lines" at least twice the minimum "yard" requirement for residential "buildings" in said district, except that the approving agency may permit a reduction of this additional setback requirement where, because of topography, the installation of additional buffer landscaping or fencing, or the particular nature of the "use," any potential adverse external effect of such "use" will be minimized. 
6.7.4.2  A "building" in which is located a "membership club," other than a "golf and country club," shall not be located within 300 feet of the nearest point of a residential property in a residential district, nor within 200 feet of any "lot line" or a school, place of worship, hospital, "domiciliary care facility" or "community residence." 
6.7.5  Hospitals or Sanitaria: 
6.7.5.1  Hospitals and sanitaria are defined as institutions for the purpose of serving general medical, surgical, psychiatric, physical therapy and rehabilitation purposes. Such "use" may include as ancillary hospital or sanitarium "uses" out-patient clinics or nursing, teaching, medical research, convalescent or extended care facilities sponsored by or affiliated with such a hospital or sanitarium, and may include as "accessory uses" residential facilities for staff personnel, including retired workers, nuns or students in hospital training programs; accessory storage facilities with a "gross floor area" not in excess of 20 percent of the "gross floor area" of the "main building"; places of worship; or accessory vehicle parking facilities, vehicle maintenance facilities, "recreation facilities," cafeterias," gift shops, flower shops, newsstands, laundries, power plants or other similar facilities normally accessory to a hospital or sanitarium. 
6.7.5.1.1  In the R1-12.5 District, all ancillary hospital or sanitarium "uses" defined in Section 6.7.5.1 shall be located on the same "lot" or "lots" as the sponsoring or affiliated hospital or sanitarium "use." 
6.7.5.1.2  In the R1-12.5 District, the combined number of beds in all ancillary convalescent and extended care facilities sponsored by or affiliated with the hospital or sanitarium "use" shall not exceed 100 percent of the total number of in-patient beds licensed to the sponsoring or affiliated hospital or sanitarium "use" located in the City of White Plains. 
6.7.5.1.3  In no case shall there be more than 1 new extended care or convalescent care facility constructed on the same "lot" or "lots" as the sponsoring or affiliated hospital or sanitarium. 
6.7.5.2  Notwithstanding the requirements of Sections 5.1 and 5.2, existing hospitals and sanitaria and any ancillary hospital or sanitarium "uses" or "accessory uses" as defined in Section 6.7.5.1 shall be permitted principal "uses" to the extent each meets the "use" and dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance as of the date immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. Any change to such a hospital or sanitarium "use" or any change, modification to or addition of any ancillary hospital or sanitarium "uses" or "accessory uses" shall require application for a special permit for the change only, pursuant to the requirements of Section 6 of this Ordinance, except that the Commissioner of Building may issue building permits as requested, without application for a special permit, where he finds that the requirements of Section 6.6.4 with reference to amending a special permit have been met. 
6.7.5.3  The minimum required "lot area" for a hospital or sanitarium "use," including all ancillary hospital and sanitarium "uses" and "accessory uses" shall be 5 acres in an R1-12.5 District and 20,000 square feet in an O-R District. 
6.7.5.4  In an R1-12.5 District, "front" and "rear yards" shall measure at least 75 feet in depth, and each "side yard" shall measure at least 30 feet in depth, except that any "structure" exceeding 1 story in "height" shall be set back from the boundary of an adjacent residential district an amount equal to the applicable "yard" requirement plus 10 feet for each "story" of the "structure" in excess of 1. 
6.7.5.5  In an O-R District, the maximum "building coverage" shall not exceed 80 percent for all "buildings." In an R1-12.5 District, the maximum "building coverage" shall not exceed 25 percent for all "buildings." Within such maximum "coverage, there shall be no limit on the "coverage" by "accessory buildings." 
6.7.5.6  The "floor area ratio" for a hospital or sanitarium "use," including all ancillary hospital and sanitarium "uses" and "accessory uses" in an O-R District shall not exceed 5.4, and in an R1.12.5 District shall not exceed 0.8. 
6.7.5.7  In an O-R District, the maximum "height" shall be 10 stories and 125 feet, provided that the "building coverage" for all "buildings" does not exceed 60 percent. In an R1-12.5 District, the maximum permitted "height" shall be 8 stories and 90 feet, provided that the "building coverage" for all "buildings" does not exceed 20 percent. In connection with its approval of a special permit application, the approving agency may permit a fence or wall to exceed the height requirements of Section 4.4.16. 
6.7.5.8  The parking requirement for "multi-family dwellings" shall apply to residential facilities. If approved, required "parking spaces" may be provided off-site within 600 feet of the "main building." 
6.7.5.9  Dimensional requirements not otherwise specified shall be determined by the approving agency in connection with its approval of a special permit application. 
6.7.5.10  Any future development involving a hospital or sanitarium "use" or any ancillary hospital or sanitarium "use" as defined in Section 6.7.5.1 which involves the construction of new "floor area" generating a requirement for 10 or more "parking spaces" shall be accompanied by a master plan for the total future development of the entire parcel. Such master plan shall meet the requirements of Section 6.7.5.11 of this Ordinance. 
6.7.5.11  Any future development involving a "use" not a part of a hospital or sanitarium as defined in Section 6.7.5.1, or, in an R1-12.5 District, any subdivision of the parcel on which a hospital or sanitarium is located shall require the submission of an application to the Common Council for amendment to or issuance of a special permit, which application shall be accompanied by a master plan for the total future development of the entire parcel. Such master plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 100' and shall include the following: 
6.7.5.11.1  Terrain conditions on the property, to include topographic data with a maximum contour interval of 2 feet, an indication of generalized soil types, and the location of existing water courses, wetlands, wooded areas, major rock outcroppings, and other significant existing features. 
6.7.5.11.2  The proposed arrangement of "uses," including the location, nature and general extent of areas to be developed and areas to be preserved as natural open space. 
6.7.5.11.3  The general configuration of the road system planned to serve the property. 
6.7.5.11.4  The total gross area encompassed by the entire property, and approximate area to be occupied by each type of "use." 
6.7.5.11.5  The total number of "dwelling units" proposed and the proposed breakdown of these "dwelling units" according to size. 
6.7.5.11.6  A generalized time schedule for the staging and completion of the proposed "uses." 
6.7.5.11.7  A statement with respect to the relationship of this master plan to the "Comprehensive Plan," explaining the reasons for any inconsistency between the two and the justification for any such inconsistency. 
6.7.5.11.8  Such other additional information as deemed necessary by the Common Council to properly study and evaluate the Plan. 
6.7.6  "Universities," Seminaries or "Colleges": The minimum "parking space" and "loading space" requirements shall be determined by the approving agency, based on consideration of at least the following: "floor area"; expected number of students and staff; capacity of classrooms and places of public assembly; scheduling of classes; availability of public transit; availability of public parking in the immediate area; and expected number of students to be resident on campus. 
6.7.7  "Hotels": 
6.7.7.1  In a hotel, occupancy for any guest shall be limited to not more than 30 days in any 90 day period. 
6.7.7.2  Each sleeping room in a "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" shall have an area, inclusive of bathroom and closet space, of at least 225 square feet. 
6.7.7.3  Off-"street" parking for a "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" shall be provided as follows: 
6.7.7.3.1  1 "parking space" for each sleeping room. 
6.7.7.3.2  1 "parking space" for every 4 seats in permanent dining rooms. 
6.7.7.3.3  1 "parking space" per 100 square feet devoted to assembly or conference rooms which may be used for dispensing food or drink. 
6.7.7.3.4  1 "parking space" per 300 square feet of "floor area" devoted to retail "use." 
6.7.7.3.5  The total minimum of "parking spaces" shall be 80 percent of the sum of the "parking spaces" required in Sections 6.7.7.3.1 through 6.7.7.3.4 above, but in no event less than 1 "parking space" for each sleeping room. 
6.7.7.4  Each "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" shall be provided with at least 1 off-"street" "loading space" but in any case not less than 1 "loading space" for each 200 sleeping rooms or major fraction thereof. 
6.7.7.5  In a C-O District, the following additional standards and requirements shall apply: 
6.7.7.5.1  Any "building" containing a "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" shall have sole vehicular access from a State or County Road. 
6.7.7.5.2  A "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" may not occupy more than one-third of the permitted "gross floor area" of the property on which it is located. 
6.7.7.5.3  No "building" containing an "extended stay hotel" or "hotel" shall be located within 300 feet of any residential district, or of any "lot line" of a school or place or worship. 
6.7.7.5.4  No signage or exterior lighting for an "extended stay hotel" or "hotel" shall be located on the side of any "building" facing a residential district, or a "lot line" of a school or place of worship. 
6.7.7.5.5  No exterior lighting shall be permitted which would cause illumination beyond the boundaries of the property. Hours of lighting may be limited by the approving agency. 
6.7.7.6  In a B-3, CB-1 or CB-2 District, the minimum "lot area" for a "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" shall be 20,000 square feet. 
6.7.8  Outdoor Dining: 
6.7.8.1  Outdoor "cabarets," and outdoor dining in conjunction with a "fast food eating establishment" are specifically prohibited. 
6.7.8.2  The approving agency may prohibit or limit the hours of operation of any activities which would cause an adverse impact on adjacent or nearby residential properties, such as dancing, the operation or use of musical instruments or sound reproduction devices, or any noise emanating from the outdoor dining area. 
6.7.8.3  No exterior lighting shall be permitted which would cause illumination beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located in excess of 0.5 foot candles. Hours of lighting may be limited by the approving agency. 
6.7.8.4  Off-"street parking spaces" shall be provided as required for "restaurants" in Section 8.3 of this Ordinance, except that where outdoor seating represents only a relocation of indoor seating and there is no increase in overall capacity of the "restaurant" or where the outdoor seating will be in the form of a sidewalk café on public property, no additional off-"street parking spaces" need be provided. 
6.7.8.5  Outdoor dining located on public property, such as a sidewalk, may be permitted pursuant to a separate ordinance adopted by the Common Council for such purposes. Where so permitted no approval under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be required. 
6.7.8.6  A sidewalk café incident to and in conjunction with a bona fide "restaurant" is permitted on public property only in the White Plains Promenade System and such other "streets" as may be designated for such "use" in the separate ordinance adopted by the Common Council for such purposes, but only in the zoning districts of such "streets" where "restaurants" are permitted. 
6.7.8.7  Notice of a public hearing associated with an Outdoor Dining Special Permit shall be given as set forth in Section 12.7 of this ordinance except that notices to property owners (as shown by the tax assessment roll) within the affected area for a renewal of Outdoor Dining Special Permit shall be mailed to all such owners via certified mail (return receipt requested) except that notice to owners of residential condominium units may be given via certified mail without return receipt requested. 
6.7.9  "Fast Food Eating Establishments": 
6.7.9.1  No "fast food eating establishments" shall be located within 300 feet of any residential district, or of any "lot line" of a school, place of worship or another "fast food eating establishment." 
6.7.9.2  Adequate receptacles shall be provided for the deposit of all waste materials. 
6.7.9.3  There shall be provided a landscaped strip 10 feet in width across the front of any "parking lot," which shall be planted in a staggered double row with evergreen shrubs, such as taxus or equivalent, at least 24 inches high and on 3-foot centers. 
6.7.9.4  Any accessory "parking lot" shall be enclosed except across the "street frontage," with a 4-foot or higher chain link fence of at least 9-gauge material, which shall be braced top and bottom. 
6.7.9.5  Access drives shall have two concrete filed steel posts at least 4 feet high connected by a galvanized chain or steel gate which shall be locked when the "parking lot" is not in use. 
6.7.10  "Cabarets" 
6.7.10.1  Each applicant shall submit floor plan(s) prepared and signed/sealed by a New York State Design Professional in accordance with the following: 
6.7.10.1.1  The plans shall be drawn to scale, be legible and be no smaller than 11x17; 
6.7.10.1.2  Indicate the area for any proposed dance floor including the square footage; 
6.7.10.1.3  Indicate the area for any proposed DJ, band or entertainer including the square footage; 
6.7.10.1.4  Indicate all tables and seating (permanent or fixed); 
6.7.10.1.5  Indicate the code required egress paths through the space to each legal exit. The egress paths shall not traverse areas identified for Entertainment purposes. The paths shall be clearly identified by shading or cross hatching on the plan(s); 
6.7.10.1.6  Provide occupancy calculations for the restaurant configuration and cabaret configuration. Egress paths square footage shall be excluded when calculating occupancy. Any proposed occupancy of 300 persons will require a smoke purge system in accordance with the White Plains Building Code; and 
6.7.10.1.7  The temporary storage of tables and/or seating shall be identified on the plan(s) if the creation of a "cabaret" requires the relocation of these items. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any "cabaret" to alter or deviate from the approved site plan or floor layout. 
6.7.10.2  "Cabarets" shall not be located within 150 feet of any residential district, nor within 200 feet of any "lot line" of a place of worship, hospital, "domiciliary care facility" or "community residence," nor shall any "primary cabaret" be located within 300 feet of any "dwelling unit." 
6.7.10.3  "Cabarets" shall only be located at grade level. 
6.7.10.4  The special permit may be renewed by the Commissioner of Building in accordance with Section 6.6.5, provided that the Commissioner shall have the authority to decline the renewal based on any violation of this section 6.7.10, the Municipal Code Title IV, Chapter 4-4, or of any conditions set forth in the special permit resolution adopted by the Common Council. 
6.7.10.5  A special permit to operate a "cabaret" may be suspended or revoked after a hearing, with at least five days notice to the special permit holder, held by the Commissioner of Buildings, the Chief of Fire and the Chief of Police, or their duly appointed representative, whereby it is determined that there was a violation of: this section 6.7.10; the Municipal Code Title IV, Chapter 4-4; any conditions set forth in the special permit resolution; or that the operation of the "cabaret" poses a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community. 
6.7.11  Motor Vehicle "Service Stations" or "Repair Shops": 
6.7.11.1  No motor vehicle "service station" or "repair shop" shall be located within 200 feet of any "lot line" of a place of worship, hospital or school. No part of any "building," equipment or pump shall be located within 25 feet of any residential district, or within 15 feet of any "lot line." In the LI District, the approving agency may permit a new or existing motor vehicle "service station" or "repair shop" to be located closer than 200 feet to any place of worship, hospital or school, and may permit part of any "building," equipment or pump to be located within 25 feet of any residential district or closer than 15 feet to any "lot line" where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving agency that topographical or site constraints, or the need to improve the "building" or "use" to introduce new technology or to comply with local, County, State or federal codes, prohibit compliance with these standards, and that the operation of the motor vehicle "service station" or "repair shop" will not adversely impact any abutting residential district or the operation of the place of worship, hospital or school or the health or safety of the users of these facilities. In such cases, the approving agency shall determine that the deviation from this standard is the minimum necessary to achieve the purposes of the application and will not create a nuisance. 
6.7.11.2  Where a motor vehicle "service station" or "repair shop" is accessory to motor vehicle sales, it shall be located within a totally enclosed and soundproofed "structure." 
6.7.11.3  A motor vehicle "repair shop" accessory to motor vehicle sales in a B-3 District shall be permitted only where the site has "frontage" on and access to a State highway or County road. 
6.7.11.4  In the B-6 District, when in the Central Parking Area, a "motor vehicle repair shop" shall only be permitted in conjunction with a permitted principal establishment containing not less than 100,000 square feet of "floor area." 
6.7.12  "Public Utility Buildings or Structures": 
6.7.12.1  When proposed in a residential district, "public utility buildings or structures" shall be subject to a finding, in addition to the standards of Section 6.5, that a public necessity exists for such "use," and that "use" of the particular site for which application is made is necessary from the public standpoint. 
6.7.12.2  The approving agency may require that such "use" be enclosed by protective fencing with a gate which shall be closed and locked except when necessary to obtain access thereto. 
6.7.12.3  The installation shall be so designed, enclosed, painted and screened with evergreens that it will be harmonious with the area in which it is located. The entire property shall be suitably landscaped and maintained in reasonable conformity with the standards of property maintenance of the surrounding neighborhood. 
6.7.13  Neighborhood Parking: 
6.7.13.1  Any neighborhood "parking lot" shall be restricted to private passenger vehicles of residents of the neighborhood in which it is located. 
6.7.13.2  Such "parking lot" shall be subject to requirements as to lighting, hours of operation, fencing and landscaping as the approving agency deems necessary to meet the requirements of Section 6.5. 
6.7.13.3  Any special permit granted shall be for a period designated by the approving agency, which shall be no less than 3 years nor more than 5 years. Extensions may be granted for periods of up to 5 years each after review pursuant to Section 6.4 of this Ordinance. 
6.7.14  Accessory Parking Adjoining Business or Industrial Districts: 
6.7.14.1  Accessory parking adjoining a business or industrial district shall be permitted only if it is accessory to a "use" in the adjacent business or industrial district, is located on a "lot" which abuts or is directly across the "street" from a business or industrial district and is within 500 feet of the "use" to which it is accessory. 
6.7.14.2  Such accessory parking shall be subject to requirements as to lighting, hours of operation, fencing and landscaping as the approving agency deems necessary to meet the standards of Section 6.5. A landscaped strip shall be provided across the front of the "lot" at least 10 feet in depth, except where driveway access may be permitted. 
6.7.14.3  Such accessory parking may be limited to locations which will minimize traffic impact on residential streets, consistent with traffic safety considerations. 
6.7.14.4  Any special permit granted shall be for a period of 3 years. Extensions may be granted for periods of 3 years each, after review pursuant to the requirements of Section 6.4 of this Ordinance. 
6.7.15  "Auction Houses": 
6.7.15.1  In the B-2 District, "auction houses" may be permitted only on sites locate within an enclosed mall within the Central Parking Area and shall not exceed 20% of the "gross floor area" of the enclosed mall. 
6.7.15.2  The buying and selling of goods and merchandise shall take place within a fully enclosed "building" or "structure." 
6.7.15.3  The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the approving agency that the nature and hours of operation of the proposed "use" will create traffic patterns which will be off-peak with respect to the traffic patterns of the neighborhood in which it is located, and that it will not create significant traffic flow on residential "streets." 
6.7.15.4  "Auction houses" permitted in a district other than the B-2 district shall not be located within 300 feet of any residential district. 
6.7.15.5  The approving agency may limit the days and hours of operation of "auction houses" except that the hours of operation of "auction houses" located within a "building" or "structure" within 300 feet of any residential district shall exclude Sundays before 12:00 noon and after 6:00 p.m., weekdays after 7:00 p.m., and Fridays and Saturdays after 10:00 p.m. 
6.7.16  Business, Administrative or Headquarters Offices for "Philanthropic Institutions": 
6.7.16.1  Permitted offices may be used for administrative functions only. No sales are permitted. 
6.7.17  "Nursery Schools" or "Day Care Centers" in the R1-12.5 District: 
In the R1-12.5 district, "nursery schools" or "day care centers" may be established provided that: 
6.7.17.1  The "nursery school" or "day care center" is designed to accommodate not less than 50 children at the same time. 
6.7.17.2  Not less than 4 acres of land are owned, leased, operated or managed by the operator of the "nursery school" or "day care center" for the facility. 
6.7.17.3  Not more than 75 children may be accommodated per acre of land owned, leased, operated or managed by the operator of the "nursery school" or "day care center" for the facility. 
6.7.17.4  Any "nursery school" or "day care center" shall comply fully with all requirements of the State Education Department and all applicable State, County and City codes, other ordinances and regulations. 
6.7.17.5  Vehicular access must be from either a County or State highway or a local roadway having a minimum pavement width of 40 feet. 
6.7.17.6  There must be provided, on-site, at least sufficient outdoor play space in quantity and with improvements to meet applicable standards of supervisory state agencies and, in addition, on-site standing area for loading and unloading of school buses, without obstructing other access ways, at a ratio of one bus space per 60 children to be accommodated or one bus space per 3,000 square feet of "floor area," whichever is greater. 
6.7.18  "Health Clubs": 
6.7.18.1  Any masseur or masseuse employed by a "health club" shall be licensed in accordance with Article 155 of the New York State Education Law, and any physical therapist shall be licensed in accordance with Article 136 of the New York State Education Law, and proof of such license shall be clearly displayed in the "Health Club". 
6.7.18.2  The approving agency shall establish a minimum number of supervisory personnel to be present during the hours of operation of a "health club." The minimum number shall be based on the "floor area" of the "health club," the number of members and the types of equipment available. 
6.7.18.3  A "health club" shall be located within a totally enclosed and soundproofed "structure." 
6.7.18.4  No cooking or alcoholic beverages shall be permitted in any health food bar, nor shall the area utilized by the health food bar exceed 5% of the "gross floor area" of the "health club." 
6.7.19  "Emergency Shelters": 
6.7.19.1  Any "emergency shelter" shall comply fully with all requirements of applicable State, County and City codes, ordinances, and regulations relating to transient occupancies specifically including the Minimum Housing Standards Ordinance of the City, and shall be fully equipped with emergency lighting, sprinklers, smoke detectors and alarms, emergency exits, and other safety devices required by the White Plains Building Code. 
6.7.19.2  Any food preparation, service or distribution facilities in an "emergency shelter" shall be licensed or approved by the Westchester County Board of Health. 
6.7.19.3  Any "emergency shelter" shall be contained within the "structure" of, and operated by, a "not-for-profit corporation" or charitable organization, as the same are defined by applicable statute. 
6.7.19.4  An "emergency shelter" shall be available as a year around facility that is open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and shall accept individuals and/or families without regard to race, religion, ethnic background, gender, marital status, age, or condition of disability or parentage. 
6.7.19.5  No "emergency shelter" shall be located on a site less than 400 feet from another site on which is located another "emergency shelter," or on which is located an "overnight shelter for the homeless," or "community residence" or "domiciliary care facility," except that any institution, "not-for-profit corporation" or charitable organization may accommodate and operate one "emergency shelter" and one "overnight shelter for the homeless" on the same premises. 
6.7.19.6  No "emergency shelter" may accommodate more than 19 "persons." 
6.7.19.7  Any "emergency shelter" shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Department of Building and the Fire Prevention Bureau of the City of White Plains, which shall determine compliance with all codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. 
6.7.19.8  An "emergency shelter" shall be well located with respect to public transportation and public and other social services, such as job placement, counseling, and other services necessary to serve the intended population. 
6.7.19.9  An "emergency shelter" shall provide for continuous accommodation of an individual or family for a period of up to 30 days and nights, with one extension of up to 30 days in the event of urgent necessity, as determined by the operator. 
6.7.19.10  An applicant shall submit with its permit application a Management Program for the operation of its proposed facility, including personnel, supervision, maintenance and operating plans, and shall certify to the approving agency the adequacy of the Management Program. 
6.7.19.11  A special permit for any "emergency shelter" shall expire one year after issuance, but upon application may be renewed annually by the Commissioner of Building upon notice to the Common Council, provided that no such renewal shall be made by the Commissioner of Building unless there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. The Commissioner of Building shall notify the Common Council of his intent to renew a permit 45 days prior to the effective date of such renewal. No such renewal shall be made upon objection by majority vote of the Common Council. 
6.7.20  "Overnight Shelters for the Homeless": 
6.7.20.1  Any "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall comply fully with the requirements of the applicable State, County and City codes, ordinances and regulations relating to transient occupancy, and shall be fully equipped with emergency lighting, sprinklers, smoke detectors and alarms, emergency exits and other safety devices required by the White Plains Building Code. 
6.7.20.2  Any food preparation, service or distribution facilities in an "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall be licensed or approved by the Westchester County Board of Health. 
6.7.20.3  Any "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall be contained within the "structure" of, and operated by, a "not-for-profit corporation" or charitable organization, as the same are defined by applicable statute. 
6.7.20.4  An "overnight shelter for the homeless" may be a seasonal facility, open and operated during months of cold weather, generally from 15 October to 15 April, or it may be a year-round facility. 
6.7.20.5  An "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall be open and accept adult individuals only for single night occupancies, no earlier than 7:30 p.m. and shall permit occupancy no later than 7:30 a.m. While open, and for one hour before opening and for one hour after closing, an "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall be adequately staffed by the operating organization such that applicants may be efficiently accepted and accommodated, order and sanitation maintained at all times, and "persons" who cannot be admitted for any legitimate reason, including lack of capacity, are referred or transported to other facilities. These provisions shall be reflected in the Management Program required under Section 6.7.20.10 below. 
6.7.20.6  An "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall accept adult individuals without regard to race, religion, ethnic background, gender, marital status, age or condition of disability or parentage. 
6.7.20.7  No "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall be located on a site less than 400 feet from another site on which is located another "overnight shelter for the homeless," or on which is located an "emergency shelter," "community residence" or "domiciliary care facility," except any institution, "not-for-profit corporation" or charitable organization may accommodate and operate one "emergency shelter" and one "overnight shelter for the homeless" on the same premises. 
6.7.20.8  No "overnight shelter for the homeless" may accommodate more than 19 "persons." 
6.7.20.9  Any "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall be subject to periodic inspections by the Department of Building and the Fire Prevention Bureau of the City of White Plains, which shall determine compliance with all codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. 
6.7.20.10  An applicant shall submit with its permit application a Management Program for the operation of its proposed facility, including personnel, supervision, maintenance and operating plans, and including the information necessary to demonstrate that the requirements in Section 6.7.20.5 above will be satisfied. The applicant shall certify to the approving agency the adequacy of the Management Program. 
6.7.20.11  A special permit for any "overnight shelter for the homeless" shall expire one year after issuance, but on application may be renewed annually by the Commissioner of Building upon notice to the Common Council, provided no such renewal shall be made by the Commissioner of Building unless there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances regulations and conditions of the special permit. The Commissioner of Building shall notify the Common Council of his intent to renew a permit 45 days prior to the effective date of such renewal. No such renewal shall be made upon objection by majority vote of the Common Council. 
6.7.21  Accessory "Dish Antenna": 
6.7.21.1  A special permit shall be required prior to the installation or construction of any "dish antenna" except those meeting the criteria set forth in Section 4.4.23.7. 
6.7.21.2  A "dish antenna" may be mounted on a roof or attached to a "building" or "structure" in any one or two-family residential district if a registered architect or licensed engineer, with input from a qualified "dish antenna" installer, demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the approving agency, that locating the "dish antenna" in conformance with the provisions of Section 4.4.23 would obstruct the "dish antenna's" reception window or otherwise excessively interfere with reception by not allowing receipt of at least 70% of the programming capable of being received by the proposed "dish antenna" and such obstruction or interference involves factors beyond the applicant's control, or the cost of meeting the standards set forth in Section 4.4.23 is excessive relative to the purchase and installation cost of the "dish antenna." 
6.7.21.2.1  The application shall include site drawings, a narrative and appropriate photos to demonstrate why the "dish antenna" must be mounted on a roof or attached to a "building" or "structure" and why other location options which conform to the provisions of Section 4.4.23 are infeasible due to obstructions that block or limit the "dish antenna's" operational line of sight requirements. 
6.7.21.2.2  The site drawings and narrative shall show and describe the alignment parameters (i.e., elevation and azimuth), operational line of sight and objects which might block or limit the "dish antenna's" line of sight to the satellite arc. This information shall be provided for the proposed location and to demonstrate that other locations which would conform to the provisions of Section 4.4.23 are infeasible due to obstructions. 
6.7.21.2.3  The application shall include a site drawing showing the extent to which the proposed "dish antenna" will be visible from "streets" and surrounding properties, and a proposal to minimize its visibility by use of fencing, planting or architectural features. 
6.7.21.2.4  The approving agency may prescribe such conditions or restrictions as it may deem necessary to minimize visual and other impacts to properties in the neighborhood and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
6.7.21.3  All "dish antennas" shall conform to all the requirements set forth in this Section and Section 4.4.23, except that the approving agency may grant a special permit for the installation of a "dish antenna" that does not conform to the size, height or materials requirements where the applicant demonstrates that technological or similar constraints prohibit the acquisition or installation of a "dish antenna" which complies with these standards. In such cases the approving agency shall determine that the deviation from the standards is the minimum necessary to achieve the purposes of the application and that the alternate design meets all other requirements of the Ordinance and will not create an adverse visual impact or a nuisance. 
6.7.21.4  The applicant shall demonstrate that the location and design of the "dish antenna" minimizes the visual impact and motor noise from all "streets" and adjacent properties. 
6.7.21.5  A special permit may be denied by the approving agency in the event the applicant cannot meet all of the standards set forth in Section 6. The ability of the applicant to meet these standards, find an unobtrusive location for, or screen the "dish antenna" and justify all facets of the proposed installation shall be a principal factor in determining if a special permit is granted by the approving agency. 
6.7.22  "Social Service Centers for Homeless Persons": 
6.7.22.1  "Social service centers for homeless persons" shall be available as year round facilities open from 7:30 a.m. to at least 8:00 p.m., 7 days a week. 
6.7.22.2  "Social service centers for homeless persons" shall comply with the requirements of the applicable State, County and City codes, ordinances and regulations relating to occupancy and shall be fully equipped with all safety devices required by the White Plains Building Code and Fire Codes. 
6.7.22.3  "Social service centers for homeless persons" shall be contained within the "structure" of, and operated by a "not-for-profit corporation," as the same is defined in applicable statutes. 
6.7.22.4  Any food preparation, service or distribution facilities in "social service centers for homeless persons" shall be licensed or approved by the Westchester County Board of Health. 
6.7.22.5  While open, a "social service center for homeless persons" shall be adequately staffed by the operating organization such that clients may be accommodated according to the terms of an approved Management Plan as described in Section 6.7.22.9; order and sanitation are maintained at all times; and "persons" who cannot be admitted for any legitimate reason, including lack of capacity, are referred or transported to other facilities. 
6.7.22.6  "Social service centers for homeless persons" shall accept adult individuals without regard to race, religion, ethnic background, sex, marital status, age or condition of disability or parentage. 
6.7.22.7  No "social service center for homeless persons" shall be located on a site less than 400 feet from another site on which another "social service center for homeless persons" is located or on which is located an "emergency shelter," "overnight shelter for the homeless," "community residence" or "domiciliary care facility," except any institution, "not-for-profit corporation" or charitable organization may accommodate and operate one "social service center for homeless persons," one "emergency shelter" and/or "overnight shelter for the homeless" on the same premises. 
6.7.22.8  "Social service centers for homeless persons" are not shelters and shall not provide any sleeping accommodations. 
6.7.22.9  An applicant shall submit with its permit application a Management Plan for the operation of its proposed facility, including hours of operation, personnel, supervision, maintenance and operating plans, and shall certify to the approving agency the adequacy of the Management Plan. No special permit for any "social service center for homeless persons" shall be issued without an approved Management Plan. 
6.7.22.10  A special permit for a "social service center for homeless persons" shall expire one year after issuance, but on application may be renewed annually by the Commissioner of Building upon notice to the Common Council, provided than no such renewal shall be made by the Commissioner of Building unless there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. The Commissioner of Building shall notify the Common Council of his intention to renew a permit 45 days prior to the effective date of such renewal. No such renewal shall be made upon objections by majority vote of the Common Council. 
6.7.23  Outdoor Storage of Motor Vehicles: 
6.7.23.1  The provision of Section 6.7.23 shall apply to and permit only the outdoor storage of new motor vehicles. 
6.7.23.2  Motor vehicles to be stored must be driven under their own power to and from the site, and not delivered by truck or other means. 
6.7.23.3  No inspection of stored motor vehicles may be made on the site. 
6.7.23.4  Such outdoor storage shall be subject to requirements as to lighting, hours of operation, fencing and landscaping as the approving agency deems necessary to meet the standards of Section 6.5. 
6.7.23.5  In the B-1 district, the outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall be limited to the roof level of a "parking garage." 
6.7.23.6  In the B-1 district, no motor vehicles may be moved to or from the site on Saturdays or Sundays. 
6.7.23.7  In the B-1 district, a special permit for outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall expire one year after issuance, but on application may be renewed annually by the Commissioner of Building upon notice to the Common Council, provided that no such renewal shall be made by the Commissioner of Building unless there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. The Commissioner of Building shall notify the Common Council of his intent to renew a permit 45 days prior to the effective date of such renewal. No such renewal shall be made upon objection by majority vote of the Common Council. 
6.7.23.8  In the B-2 district, the outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall be permitted only on sites adjoining the B-3 district and only where such site or sites are adjacent to a motor vehicle sales or rental special permit "use" and where the outdoor storage of motor vehicles is an "accessory use" to that special permit "use." 
6.7.24  "Parking Lots" or "Parking Garages" in RM Districts: 
6.7.24.1  "Parking lots" or "parking garages" in RM Districts shall provide off-"street" "parking spaces" for rental, lease or sale to residents of the neighborhood in which they are located. 
6.7.24.2  "Parking lots" or "parking garages" in RM Districts shall provide off-"street" parking to tenants and owners of spaces 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, year-round. Vehicles shall be accessible for removal and for parking at all times without exception or interruption. 
6.7.24.3  "Parking spaces" may be rented to non-residents on a part-time basis only so long as no "parking space" is denied to any resident upon demand at any time. 
6.7.24.4  Any "parking lot" shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all dimensional criteria in Section 8.7 of this Ordinance, and shall be lighted, fenced and landscaped as the approving agency deems necessary to meet the standards of Section 6.5. 
6.7.24.5  Any "parking garage" shall be designed and constructed in accordance with dimensional criteria in Section 8.7 of this Ordinance, and shall be lighted, landscaped and architecturally treated as the approving agency deems necessary to meet the standards of Section 6.5. In considering any "parking garage," the approving agency shall particularly examine the location, configuration and arrangement of ventilation machinery and equipment, and shall consider the potential noise and emissions therefrom. In addition, the approving agency shall consider the effect, if any, of headlights of vehicles as well as the lighting of the "parking garage" upon adjoining and nearby residential "uses." 
6.7.24.6  A special permit granted for a "parking lot" shall be for a term of 3 years and may be renewed in 3-year terms in accordance with Section 6.6.5. 
6.7.24.7  A special permit granted for a "parking garage" shall be for a term of 10 years and may be renewed in 5-year terms in accordance with Section 6.6.5. 
6.7.25  "Transitional Housing for Homeless Families" 
6.7.25.1  Any "transitional housing for homeless families" shall be well located with respect to public transportation, convenience food shopping and other retail and personal service establishments. 
6.7.25.2  Any "transitional housing for homeless families" shall provide for thorough on-site security and, in this regard, the approving agency is authorized to disregard the limitations of Section 4.4.16.1 on the heights of fences and the nature thereof. 
6.7.25.3  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8 herein below with respect to mandatory off-"street" parking and loading, the mandatory parking and loading requirements for each "transitional housing for homeless families" facility shall be established by the approving agency in considering the specific and unique needs and circumstances of each such facility and upon the recommendation of the Commissioner of Planning, the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering and the Planning Board. 
6.7.25.4  An applicant shall submit with its permit application a Management Program for the operation of each proposed "transitional housing for homeless families" facility, including personnel, supervision, maintenance and operating plans, and shall certify to the approving agency the adequacy of the Management Program. 
6.7.25.4.1  The Management Program shall specify that only families, as defined in Part 900 of the Regulations of the New York State Department of Social Services (18 NYCRR §§900 et seq), shall be accepted for residence, and shall specify occupancy limits for housing units based on the size of the housing units. 
6.7.25.4.2  The Management Program shall specify that the management of the proposed facility shall carefully screen applicants for admission and shall exclude individuals who are identified to be substance abusers or who reasonably may be expected to endanger themselves, other residents, and/or residents of the surrounding community. 
6.7.25.4.3  The Management Program shall specify that the proposed facility shall be operated with a Community Advisory Board, consisting of 7 members to be selected by the City, with Common Council approval, with which the sponsor/applicant shall meet monthly for the first 3 years of operation and quarterly thereafter to discuss the management and operation of the facility. 
6.7.25.4.4  The City of White Plains shall have the authority to approve the designated operator of the facility, and shall be authorized to require the replacement of an operator at the end of a 2-year contract who fails or refuses to operate any such facility in accordance with the Management Program and/or the regulations of other agencies authorized to regulate the facility. In the event of the replacement of an operator, the City shall approve the new operator, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. 
6.7.25.4.5  No material changes shall be made in a Management Program except upon prior approval of the City of White Plains. 
6.7.25.4.6  The Management Program shall be submitted to the City for its review, which review shall be completed within 30 days of receipt. The applicant shall incorporate any and all reasonable comments into the Management Program. In the case of a facility to be funded and operated pursuant to Part 900, the Management Program shall be submitted to the Departments of Social Services of Westchester County and New York State for review and modification to comply with Part 900. No reasonable requirement of the City shall be removed from the Management Program unless such requirement conflicts with or contradicts an applicable provision of Part 900. 
6.7.25.4.7  The Management Program shall provide for removal from residency of individuals who violate the rules and regulations of the operator and/or of the Management Program. In the event of a facility to be funded and operated pursuant to Part 900, the Westchester County Department of Social Services may delegate such removal authority to the facility operator. 
6.7.25.4.8  If the applicant is granted an operating license pursuant to Part 900, the procedures set forth herein shall be repeated biannually. 
6.7.25.5  A special permit for any "transitional housing for homeless families" shall expire 2 years after issuance, but upon application shall be renewed annually by the Commissioner of Building upon notice to the Common Council if there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions of the special permit. Compliance with the requirements of Part 900 and with the provisions of the accepted Management Plan as set forth herein above shall be deemed to constitute compliance with all such codes, ordinances, regulations and conditions. 
6.7.26  Stacked Attendant Parking 
6.7.26.1  The minimum dimension for any "parking space" shall be 8 feet in width by 17 feet in length. 
6.7.26.2  The "parking lot" shall be designed so that the backing of cars into the "street" shall not be necessary or permitted. 
6.7.26.3  The application must be accompanied by a management plan for the "parking lot." 
6.7.26.4  The application must be made by the owner of the "building" or the owner's agent for the entire site on which the "building" is located. 
6.7.27  "Building Coverage" for "Lots" in More than One Zoning District 
6.7.27.1  A special permit shall be required prior to the granting of "site plan" approval for any application involving "lots" located in more than one zoning district where the "building coverage" on a "lot" located in any one district exceeds the "building coverage" requirements for that district as set forth in Section 5.3. 
6.7.27.2  The approving agency may grant a special permit for "building coverage" in excess of that permitted on a "lot" located in any one district where the applicant demonstrates that topographical, environmental or similar constraints prohibit compliance with the "building coverage" requirements set forth in Section 5.3. In such cases, the approving agency shall determine that the deviation from the requirements is the minimum necessary to achieve the purposes of the application. 
6.7.27.3  In no case shall the total aggregate "building coverage" for the "lot" in more than one district exceed the total aggregate permitted "building coverage" for such "lot" in the districts in which such "lot" is located. 
6.7.28  Transfer of "Excess Gross Floor Area" 
6.7.28.1  The transfer of "excess gross floor area" shall be permitted only in the CB-3, CB-4 and UR-4 Districts. 
6.7.28.2  "Excess gross floor area" on a "lot" or on a designated "development site" may be transferred to a non-contiguous designated "development site," subject to the following: 
6.7.28.2.1  The "lot" or designated "development site" from which "excess gross floor area" may be transferred (referred to herein as the sending site) must be located in an urban renewal project area designated by the Common Council pursuant to Article 15 of the General Municipal Law. 
6.7.28.2.2  The designated "lot" or "development site" to which the "excess gross floor area" may be transferred (referred to herein as the receiving site) must be located in an urban renewal project area designated by the Common Council pursuant to Article 15 of the General Municipal Law. 
6.7.28.2.3  The urban renewal plan(s) approved pursuant to Article 15 of the General Municipal Law for the urban renewal project area(s) in which the sending site and receiving site are located must permit the transfer of "excess gross floor area." 
6.7.28.2.4  The urban renewal plan approved pursuant to Article 15 of the General Municipal Law for the urban renewal project area in which the sending site is located must contain a determination that the transfer of "excess gross floor area" from an identified "lot" or designated "development site" within the urban renewal project area is appropriate or must clearly delineate areas containing multiple "lots" or "development sites" within the designated urban renewal project area within which a "lot" or designated "development site" may be appropriate to be designated by the "site plan" or special permit approving agency as a sending site. 
6.7.28.2.5  The urban renewal plan approved pursuant to Article 15 of the General Municipal Law for the urban renewal project area in which the receiving site is located must contain a determination that the transfer of "excess gross floor area" from an identified "lot" or designated "development site" within the urban renewal project area is appropriate or must clearly delineate areas containing multiple "lots" or "development sites" within the designated urban renewal project area within which a "lot" or designated "development site" may be appropriate to be designated by the "site plan" or special permit approving agency as a receiving site. 
6.7.28.2.6  The urban renewal plan(s) for the urban renewal project area(s) in which the transfer of "excess gross floor area" is permitted must establish the standards and conditions for such transfers, including, but not limited to, the minimum and maximum amount and type of "excess gross floor area" (residential or non-residential) that may be transferred. 
6.7.28.2.7  Prior to the approval of any transfer of "excess gross floor area," the controlling entity of the receiving site must be designated as the qualified and eligible sponsor, pursuant to Article 15 of the General Municipal Law, for the receiving site. 
6.7.28.3  The transfer of "excess gross floor area" must be from a specified sending site to a specified receiving site, and such transfers must occur simultaneously. Development rights may not be purchased from one location and held for a future sale to another, as yet unspecified, location. 
6.7.28.4  An application for a special permit for the transfer of "excess gross floor area" shall include a "site plan" for the sending site as it is proposed to exist or be developed with "excess gross floor area" and a "site plan" for the receiving site as it is proposed to be developed with the addition of the "excess gross floor area" transferred from the sending site. 
6.7.28.5  No "site plan" approval shall be granted for the sending site unless all existing or new development shown on the "site plan" for the sending site, net of the "excess gross floor area" being transferred, is in full compliance with all of the dimensional requirements set forth in Section 5.3 of this Ordinance and the parking requirements set for in Section 8.3 of this Ordinance. 
6.7.28.6  No "site plan" approval shall be granted for the receiving site unless all existing or new development shown on the "site plan" for the receiving sending site, including all development resulting from the transfer of the "excess gross floor area" from the sending site, is in full compliance with all of the dimensional requirements, other than "floor area ratio" set forth in Section 5.3 of this Ordinance and the parking requirements set for in Section 8.3 of this Ordinance. 
6.7.28.7  If any or all of the existing "buildings" or "structures" on the sending site are to be removed as a condition of "site plan" approval for the transfer of "excess gross floor area," a building permit shall not be issued for development of the "excess gross floor area" on the receiving site until all "gross floor area" to be demolished on the sending site has been demolished and all modifications to the sending site required by the "site plan" approval have been made and a new Certificate of Use and Occupancy for the sending site, reflecting the reduced floor area, has been issued. 
6.7.28.8  Any transfer of 50,000 or more square feet of "excess gross floor area" shall be considered a Type I Action under the New York State Environmental Quality Review (SEQR) regulations. 
6.7.28.9  Before the special permit approving agency can consider the transfer of "excess gross floor area" from a sending site, the applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the approving agency, that the "excess gross floor area" proposed to be transferred could, in fact, be developed on the sending site within the dimensional requirements of Section 5.3 of this Ordinance and the parking requirements of Section 8.3 of this Ordinance, such demonstration to include, but not be limited to: 
6.7.28.9.1  Submission of a conceptual development plan for the sending site, prepared by a licensed professional architect or engineer, demonstrating that the "excess gross floor area" proposed to be transferred could be developed on the sending site along with any existing development on the sending site which is not proposed to be demolished, and satisfy the dimensional requirements of Section 5.3 of this Ordinance and the parking requirements of Section 8.3 of this Ordinance. 
6.7.28.9.2  Submission of a conceptual development plan for the receiving site, prepared by a licensed professional architect or engineer, demonstrating that the "excess gross floor area" proposed to be transferred could be developed on the receiving site along with any existing development on the receiving site which is not proposed to be demolished, and satisfy the dimensional requirements of Section 5.3 of this Ordinance and the parking requirements of Section 8.3 of this Ordinance. 
6.7.28.9.3  An analysis, in written and graphic form, explaining the nature and extent of the requested transfer of "excess floor area," the planning purposes and relationship to the "Comprehensive Plan" and appropriate urban renewal plan(s) and the benefits to the City and the Central Business District as compared to not permitting the transfer of such "excess gross floor area." 
6.7.28.9.4  Prior to any formal submission or application to the City for development on either the sending site or receiving site, the applicant and architect or engineer who prepared the conceptual development plan shall meet, informally, with the special permit approving agency to present and discuss the proposal. 
6.7.28.9.5  In addition to the application requirements set forth in Sections 6 and 7 of this Ordinance, the formal application for the transfer of "excess gross floor area" shall include the following: 
6.7.28.9.5.1  A traffic study covering an appropriate study area, as determined by the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering, encompassing both the sending site and the receiving site. 
6.7.28.9.5.2  A visual analysis of development on both the sending site and the receiving site, with and without the transfer of "excess gross floor area." 
6.7.28.9.5.3  A SEQR Long Form evaluation for both the sending site and the receiving site. 
6.7.28.10  The Certificate of Use and Occupancy and the deed or other recorded instrument, including, but not limited to, a zoning lot development agreement evidencing the transfer of "floor area ratio" for the sending site shall carry a notation of the "excess gross floor area" transferred from the site and the reduced "floor area ratio" applicable to the site as a result of such transfer. 
6.7.28.11  The Certificate of Use and Occupancy and the deed or other recorded instrument, including, but not limited to, a zoning lot development agreement evidencing the transfer of "floor area ratio" for the receiving site shall carry a notation of the "excess gross floor area" transferred to the site and the increased "floor area ratio" applicable to the site as a result of such transfer. 
6.7.29  "Restaurant" and "Cafeteria" in the C-O District: 
6.7.29.1  Any "building" containing a "restaurant" or "cafeteria" which is not an accessory "use," shall have sole vehicular access from a State or County Road. 
6.7.29.2  The total "gross floor area" of all "restaurants" and "cafeterias," excluding "accessory" "restaurant or cafeteria uses," may not occupy more than five percent (5%) of the total permitted "gross floor area" of the property on which it is located. 
6.7.29.3  No "building" containing a "restaurant" or "cafeteria," which is not an "accessory use" shall have a "restaurant" access point located within 300 feet of any residential district, or of any "lot line" of a school or place of worship. 
6.7.29.4  No signage or exterior lighting for a "restaurant" or "cafeteria" shall be located on the side of any "building" facing a residential district, or a "lot line" of a school or place of worship. 
6.7.29.5  No exterior lighting shall be permitted which would cause illumination beyond the boundaries of the property. Hours of lighting may be limited by the approving agency. 
6.7.30  "Nursery School" or "Day Care Centers" in the R2-4 District: 
In the R-2 district, "nursery schools" or "day care centers" may be established provided: 
6.7.30.1  The "nursery school" or "day care center" is located on a County or State highway. 
6.7.31  "Multi-family dwelling", "Hotel" and "Extended Stay Hotel" uses in the LI-M District: 
6.7.31.1  Existing building s may be converted to include "Multi-family dwelling", "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" uses subject to meeting the following conditions: 
6.7.31.1.1  A minimum of one floor of the building shall be converted. 
6.7.31.1.2  Off-street parking is provided in accordance with Section 8. No parking exemptions shall apply. 
6.7.31.1.3  The conversion is consistent with the character of the area and retains its original exterior appearance to the maximum extent practicable. 
6.7.31.1.4  The maximum "Floor Area Ratio" (FAR) shall be 3.5. 
6.7.31.2  "Multi-family dwelling," " hotel" or " extended stay hotel" uses are permitted in expanded buildings subject to meeting the following conditions: 
6.7.31.2.1  "Multi-family dwelling and related accesso1y uses are prohibited on the ground floor of the building, except for access to such " Multi-family dwelling" use. 
6.7.31.2.2  Off-street parking is provided in accordance with Section 8. No parking exemptions shall apply. 
6.7.31.2.3  The expansion is consistent with the character of the area and retains its original exterior appearance to the maximum extent practicable. 
6.7.31.2.4  The maximum "Floor Area Ratio"(FAR) shall be 3.5. 
6.7.31.3  "Multi-family dwelling," "hotel" or "extended stay hotel" uses are permitted in new buildings subject to meeting the following conditions: 
6.7.31.3.1  "Multi-family dwelling" and accessory uses are prohibited on the ground floor of the building, except for access to such "Multi-family dwelling" use. 
6.7.31.3.2  Off-street parking is provided in accordance with Section 8. No parking exemptions shall apply. 
6.7.31.3.3  The proposed building shall contain a ground floor space that fronts on a street and is at least 20 percent of the lot area in size, which space is dedicated to non-residential uses. 
6.7.31.3.4  Parking within the footprint of the building is permitted provided it is screened from the street by the facade of the building. 
6.7.31.3.5  The facade and exterior features are in keeping with the historic or architectural character of the neighborhood. 
6.7.31.3.6  The minimum "Lot" "Area" in square feet per "Dwelling Unit" shall be 350. 
6.7.32  "Accessory Food Laboratory" 
6.7.32.1  An "accessory food laboratory" shall be permitted on a lot of at least 5 acres, classified in the B-1 (Restricted Business) District as an "accessory use" to an existing or proposed office operated by the same, or an affiliated entity on the same "lot". 
6.7.32.2  An "accessory food laboratory" may not exceed 20 percent of the total gross floor area leased, owned or operated by the entity occupying the associated principal office situated on the same premises. 
6.7.32.3  Any product created, processed, or otherwise altered by an "accessory food laboratory" may be sold only within the overall premises operated by such principal office use to which the "accessory food laboratory" is associated. Specifically, production of product intended for wholesale distribution, off-site retail sale, or on-site packaged retail sale shall be prohibited; provided however that such sale may occur on site for the purpose of consumption on site; and provided further that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit sales of any products to staff or employees. 
6.7.32.4  The operation of any "accessory food laboratory" must be carried out in compliance with all county, state, federal, and/or other applicable regulations. 
6.7.32.5  No offensive noises, gases, fumes, smoke, odors, dust or vibrations shall emanate from such use, and no waste products shall be discharged therefrom of a character to create a nuisance or to be injurious to health. 
6.7.33  "Nursery Business" 
6.7.33.1  Site material, including but not limited to mulch, top soil, wood or stone shall not be higher than 15 feet and may not be located in any required yard setback. 
6.7.33.2  Piles shall be kept moist and mechanically ventilated (turned over) to release heat as required to maintain a temperature no greater than 170 degrees Fahrenheit and separated from adjacent piles by walls or bins of non-combustible construction. 
6.7.33.3  Rows of material piles shall be accessible by approved fire apparatus access roads. In addition, the ground surface between piles of processed tree debris must be kept free of combustible materials. 
6.7.33.4  Side and rear yards shall contain a minimum 10' landscaped buffer and site material shall be screened by 8' high solid panel fencing and/or 10' high evergreen landscaping. 
6.7.33.5  Internal roadway/driveway must accommodate on-site deliveries and have proper space for turning movements to prevent backing onto or from public roadways. 
6.7.33.6  All on-site equipment with back-up alarms shall be variable volume type. 
6.7.33.7  In addition to the requirements of Section 7 of the Zoning Ordinance, a site plan depicting the location and quantity of outdoor storage of materials, including seasonal storage of materials and displays, must be submitted and approved. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1G ; Ord. of 12-5-16, § 3 ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1G ) 
Section 7 - "SITE PLAN" APPROVAL 

Sec. 7.1 - Approval Required 
    No building permit shall be issued for a "structure" and no "structure" or "use" shall be established, other than: 
7.1.1  A "one family" or "two family dwelling" on a parcel of land without any "environmentally sensitive feature" and its permitted "accessory" "structures" and "uses," except as required in Section 8.6.1.5 of this Ordinance; 
7.1.2  A special permit "use" approved in accordance with the requirements of Section 6 of this Ordinance; or 
7.1.3  A "structure" or "use" in the CB-4 District the development of which the Common Council has approved, in connection with the process of approval for the contract for sale of the land pursuant to Article 15 of the General Municipal Law, as of the effective date of this Ordinance; 
Unless it is in conformity with a "site plan" approved in accordance with this Section. No certificate of "use" and occupancy for such "structure" or "use" shall be issued until all the requirements of such approval and any conditions attached thereto have been met, except as provided in Section 7.9. The continued validity of any certificate of "use" and occupancy shall be subject to continued conformance with such approved "site plan" and conditions. Revisions of approved "site plans" shall be subject to the same approval procedure. 
Sec. 7.2 - Approving Agencies 
    The approving agency for "site plans" shall be: 
7.2.1  The Common Council, where: 
7.2.1.1  The minimum parking requirement for the "structure" or "use" proposed, or the proposed construction or creation of new floor space therein, is 50 "parking spaces" or more (25 or more in the Central Parking Area), except for certain changes of "use" pursuant to Section 7.2.3.2. 
7.2.1.2  All "structures" or "uses" proposed in the CB-4 District, except for certain changes of "use" pursuant to Section 7.2.3.2. 
7.2.1.3  All "structures" or "uses" proposed in the UR-4 District, including the design and location of signage, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9-10 of the White Plains Municipal Code. 
7.2.1.4  "Assisted living facilities." 
7.2.1.5  All "structures" or "uses" proposed in the C-O District or "Planned Campus Development District". 
7.2.1.6  "Planned Senior Residential Development" in an approved "Planned Senior Residential Development District" which district is in compliance with the regulations at Section 5.8 of this Ordinance. 
7.2.2  The Planning Board, where: 
7.2.2.1  The minimum parking requirement for the "structure" or "use" proposed, or the proposed construction or creation of new floor space therein is more than 10 but less than 50 "parking spaces" (more than 10 but less than 25 in the Central Parking Area) and for certain changes of "use" pursuant to Section 7.2.3.2, except where the Planning Board finds the impact of any such construction or creation of new floor space to be significant, in which case it may withdraw as the approving agency in favor of the Common Council. 
7.2.3  The Commissioner of Building for: 
7.2.3.1  All other "structures" or "uses" proposed, except that in the case of any proposed development containing and/or affecting any "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the approving agency shall be the Planning Board, and except that where the Commissioner finds the impact of any such "structure" or "use" to be significant, he may withdraw as the approving agency in favor of the Planning Board. 
7.2.3.2  A change of "use" within any zoning district from one existing permitted principal "use" to another permitted principal "use," excluding "bars," where there is no construction or creation of new floor space, and for which no "area" or "use variance" is required, except where the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering determines that an applicant shall provide additional required "parking spaces" pursuant to Section 8.7.8, the approving agency shall be the Planning Board where the additional parking requirement for the new "use" is more than 10 "parking spaces" and the Commissioner of Building where the additional parking requirement for the new "use" is 10 "parking spaces" or less. 
7.2.4  A change in the minimum parking requirement does not require a change of approving agency, except as may be directed by the approving agency having jurisdiction. 
7.2.5  Notwithstanding the number of required "parking spaces" or the district or area in which a proposed "structure" or "use" would be located, the Common Council may, by adoption of a resolution, reclaim jurisdiction as approving agency for any "site plan" upon the finding, in the Common Council's absolute discretion, that such a "site plan" is of substantial public importance. 
Sec. 7.3 - Application 
    A "site plan" shall demonstrate that the standards of Section 7.5 of this Ordinance can be met and shall include at least the following information, except that the Department of Building may waive such requirements as it deems to be not pertinent or necessary subject to ratification by the approving agency: 
7.3.1  General: 
7.3.1.1  "Site plans" shall be drawn to a convenient scale, but not less than 1"=50'. 
7.3.1.2  Such "site plan" shall be prepared and signed by a professional architect, landscape architect, land surveyor or engineer licensed to practice in the State of New York. 
7.3.2  Legal Data: 
7.3.2.1  Name and address of applicant and authorization of owner if different from applicant. 
7.3.2.2  Ward, block and lot numbers of the property taken from the official tax records. 
7.3.2.3  Name, address, signature and seal of the professional preparing the "site plan." 
7.3.2.4  Title of the development, date prepared and date of revision, if any. 
7.3.2.5  North arrow, scale and location map drawn to a scale of not less than 1" = 800'. 
7.3.2.6  The location of all adjoining properties, and the owners, ward, block and lot numbers of those properties as shown on the official tax records. 
7.3.2.7  Description of all existing and proposed deed restrictions or covenants applying to the property filed in favor of the City. 
7.3.2.8  Existing zoning of the property and all adjoining properties. 
7.3.2.9  Analysis of conformity to applicable zoning standards including any variances. 
7.3.2.10  Indication by mapping of the location, and a statement of the area to the nearest multiple of 10 square feet, of any "environmentally sensitive site or feature." 
7.3.3  Natural Features: 
7.3.3.1  Topographic data at a maximum contour interval of 2 feet, showing existing and proposed contours, extended at least 10 feet into adjoining properties. 
7.3.3.2  Surface features, such as the location of rock outcrops. 
7.3.3.3  Vegetative cover, including the location of existing wooded areas, significant individual trees and trees on adjacent city property. 
7.3.3.4  The location of all existing watercourses, waterbodies, intermittent streams, wetland areas and springs. 
7.3.3.5  Boundaries of any area subject to flooding or storm water overflows including Flood Hazard Areas as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
7.3.4  Existing "Structures" and Utilities: 
7.3.4.1  Location of all "structures" on the premises and approximate location of all neighboring "structures" within 100 feet of all "lot lines" of the premises. 
7.3.4.2  Location of all existing adjacent public and private "streets," ways, roads, paved areas and sidewalks. The names and existing widths of adjacent "streets," including curb lines and elevations at the centerline of the "street" and the reference "grade" at the curb along the centerline of the "building." 
7.3.4.3  Locations, dimensions, "grades" and flow direction of existing sewers, culverts, water lines and other underground utilities within the property, to the extent known or relevant. Location of all utilities in the adjacent "street" and connections to "structures" on the premises. Invert and rim elevation at all manholes closest to "lot lines" of the premises. 
7.3.4.4  Fences, landscaping and screening. 
7.3.4.5  All other existing improvements. 
7.3.5  Proposed Developments: 
7.3.5.1  The location and dimensions (length, width, floor elevations and "height" in feet and in "stories") of proposed "structures," with floor plans showing all proposed floor space by type of "use" and floor level. 
7.3.5.2  Preliminary architectural plans showing at least exterior elevations and materials to be used. 
7.3.5.3  The location, width and finished "grades" of proposed public and private "streets," ways, roads and sidewalks, including pavement type and profiles. 
7.3.5.4  The location, layout, finished "grade," pavement specifications and curbing proposed for "parking lots" and "loading spaces," including access drives. 
7.3.5.5  Driveway profiles from the centerline of the "street" to the garage floor or "parking lot." Indicate slopes by percent of "grade." Elevations at centerline of "street," top of curb, and at the "lot line" must also be indicated on the profile. Where there is no curb, the curb elevation is assumed to be equal to the elevation at the centerline of the "street" and should be so indicated. 
7.3.5.6  The location, design and proposed screening of outdoor storage areas, including proposed provisions for refuse storage and collection. 
7.3.5.7  The location, size and design of all proposed water supply, sanitary sewage, valves and hydrants and other utility facilities, including connections to any existing such facilities, with profiles. 
7.3.5.8  Storm water drainage systems with details of catch basins, dry wells, retention basins and other related facilities. Calculation of expected storm drain loads and storm water runoff pattern to be accommodated by the proposed drainage system. 
7.3.5.9  Landscaping plan, to include type, size, quantity and location of plants and other landscaping materials to be used, with English and Latin names. Included in the plan shall be an indication of all existing vegetation to be retained and the methods to be used to protect such vegetation during the course of construction. 
7.3.5.10  Type, location, design, shielding and hours of operation of exterior lighting. 
7.3.5.11  Location, type, size, wording, design, color and illumination of all signs. 
7.3.5.12  Location, type and size of all security grilles or similar security grates or devices, and the type and hours of operation of internal lighting security, after the close of business. 
7.3.5.13  Estimate of earth work, showing the quantity of any material to be imported to or removed from the site. 
7.3.5.14  Description of measures planned to assure proper erosion and sedimentation control both during and after construction, with reference to Westchester County's Best Management Practices Manual for Construction Related Activities, Standards and Specifications. 
7.3.5.15  A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of Chapter 3-6 of the Municipal Code of the City of White Plains shall be required for "site plan" approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter 3-6-6 of the Municipal Code of the City of White Plains. The approved "site plan" shall be consistent with the provisions of Chapter 3-6 of the Municipal Code of the City of White Plains. 
7.3.5.16  A statement from the applicant's engineer indicating the estimated cost of construction of all new "streets" and sidewalks and of the water supply, sanitary sewage and storm drainage systems. 
7.3.6  Other: Any other information determined necessary or appropriate by the approving agency in order to provide for the proper administration and enforcement of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 7.4 - Review Procedure 
7.4.1  Application: Applicants are encouraged to submit a preliminary, informal application and to discuss it with the approving agency prior to formal submission of a complete and detailed "site plan" application. Formal and informal applications for "site plan" approval shall be submitted to the Department of Building, in 35 copies when the Common Council is the approving agency, in 25 copies when the Planning Board is the approving agency, and in 5 copies when the Commissioner of Building is the approving agency. If determined to be complete, the application shall be forwarded by the Department of Building to the approving agency, with a report by the Commissioner of Building on the conformity of the "site plan" to applicable zoning standards. An application shall be considered officially submitted and received on the date of the next regular meeting of the approving agency following such forwarding. Where the Commissioner of Building is the approving agency, the "site plan" shall be considered officially submitted and received on the date it is determined to be complete by the Department of Building. 
7.4.2  Review by Other Agencies: The approving agency may forward copies for review and report to such officials and agencies of the city as it deems appropriate. It shall forward copies for review and report to the Design Review Board where the "site plan" includes a new "building" or a change in the cubic content or exterior appearance of an existing "building" and it shall forward for review and report all "site plan" applications to the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering. In the event that the area involved in any application, and indicated on the "site plan" includes and/or refers to any "environmentally sensitive site or feature," it shall forward copies for review and report to the Conservation Advisory Council, if it exists. When the Common Council is the approving agency, it shall forward copies for review and report to the Planning Board. All agencies shall have 30 days from the date of forwarding to submit a report. Such time limit may be extended by mutual agreement with the applicant, but any such extension shall apply equally to the time limits of Section 7.4.3. Any approving agency shall, in addition, forward copies to the Westchester County Planning Board when such proposed development abuts a State or County highway, park, drainage channel or "building" site, and to the clerk of any abutting municipality where the property proposed for such development is located within 500 feet of such municipality, in accordance with Section 277.61 and 277.71 of the Westchester County Administrative Code. Any revision to a "site plan" or to the application for "site plan" approval shall be referred to the Department of Building for analysis of conformity to applicable zoning standards. 
7.4.3  Action: Within 90 days of the receipt of a completed application, unless such time limit is extended by mutual agreement with the applicant, the approving agency shall approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application. The approving agency shall approve the application where it finds that the standards of Section 7.5 have been met. The approving agency may approve such application conditionally where it finds that such conditions or modifications are necessary to insure initial and continued conformance with the standards of Section 7.5. The decision of the approving agency shall immediately be filed in the office of the City Clerk and the Department of Building with a copy thereof mailed to the applicant. Failure by the approving agency to take action within the time limit specified, unless extended by the applicant in writing, shall constitute disapproval. 
7.4.4  Variances in Conjunction with a "Site Plan": 
7.4.4.1  No application shall be deemed complete unless it complies with all the requirements of this Ordinance and any necessary variances have been granted by the Board of Appeals. 
7.4.4.2  In cases where an application requires one or more variances, the applicant shall be so advised by the Department of Building, which shall also advise the applicant of the procedures and requirements to be followed in seeking any necessary variance(s) from the Board of Appeals. No further action shall be taken with respect to an application unless and until all required variances have been approved by the Board of Appeals. 
7.4.4.3  After approval by the Board of Appeals of any necessary variances, an application for "site plan" approval may be submitted and processed in accordance with Section 7.4.1 of this Ordinance. 
7.4.5  Approvals with "Environmentally Sensitive Sites or Features": In the event that the area involved in any application, and indicated on the "site plan" includes and/or refers to any "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the application shall be subject to the regulations contained in Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 7.5 - Standards 
    In considering and approving "site plans," the approving agency shall take into consideration the purposes of this Ordinance, including the purposes of the applicable zoning district or districts, and, as a condition of approval, may require such modifications of the proposed "site plans" as it deems necessary to comply with the spirit as well as the letter of this Ordinance. The approving agency shall specifically take into account the following: 
7.5.1  Conformity of all proposals with this Ordinance and with the goals of the "Comprehensive Plan." Variances granted by the Board of Appeals need not be regarded by the approving agency as satisfying the requirement of conformity with this Ordinance for purposes of this review and approval. The approving agency shall review any such variances and may deny approval or require modifications pursuant to Section 7.5, above, in the event it finds any such variances produce or permit an unsatisfactory condition or arrangement in the "site plan" before it. 
7.5.2  Safe, adequate and convenient vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation both within and without the site. At least the following aspects of the "site plan" shall be evaluated to determine conformity to this standard: 
7.5.2.1  The effect of the proposed development on traffic conditions on existing "streets." 
7.5.2.2  The number, locations and dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances, exits, drives and walkways. Vehicular access to State and County roads must also be approved by the State Department of Transportation or the County Department of Public Works, as appropriate. 
7.5.2.3  The visibility in both directions at all exit points of the site. The driver of an automobile exiting the site should have an unobstructed view of the "street" for that distance necessary to allow safe entrance into the traffic stream. 
7.5.2.4  The location, arrangement and adequacy of off-"street" "parking lots," which shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of Section 8 of this Ordinance. 
7.5.2.5  Interconnection of "parking lots" via access drives within and between adjacent "parking lots," in order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts, and encourage safe and convenient traffic circulation. 
7.5.2.6  The location, arrangement and adequacy of "loading spaces," which shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of Section 8 of this Ordinance. 
7.5.2.7  Patterns of vehicular and pedestrian circulation both within the boundaries of the development and in relation to the adjoining "street" and sidewalk system. Sidewalk crossings for whatever purpose must be reviewed by the Commissioners of Public Safety and Public Works. 
7.5.2.8  The location, arrangement and adequacy of facilities for the physically handicapped, such as ramps, depressed curbs and reserved "parking spaces." 
7.5.2.9  The location, arrangement and adequacy of landscaping within and bordering "parking lots" and "loading spaces," which shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of Section 8.7.5 of this Ordinance. 
7.5.2.10  Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones. The approving agency may require the provision of fire zones and may also require suitable legal agreements for enforcement of any accompanying parking restrictions. 
7.5.3  The protection of environmental quality and the preservation and enhancement of property values in the neighboring area. At least the following aspects of the "site plan" shall be evaluated to determine conformity to this standard: 
7.5.3.1  The location, height and materials of walls, fences, hedges and plantings so as to insure harmony with adjacent development, screen "parking lots" and "loading spaces," and conceal storage areas, refuse areas, utility installations and other such features. Such walls, fences, hedges and plantings shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of Sections 4.4.16, 4.4.19 and 8.7.5 of this Ordinance. 
7.5.3.2  The prevention of dust and erosion, both during and after construction, through the planting of ground cover or the installation of other appropriate ground surfaces. 
7.5.3.3  The preservation of natural features of the site such as wetlands, unique wildlife habitats, historic "structures," major trees and scenic views both from the site and onto or over the site. 
7.5.3.4  The conformity of exterior lighting to the requirements of Section 4.4.20 of this Ordinance. 
7.5.3.5  The design and arrangement of "buildings," "structures" and accessory facilities (such as air conditioning systems, public address systems, etc.) so as to achieve minimum and acceptable noise levels at the property boundaries. 
7.5.3.6  The provision of adequate storm and surface water drainage facilities so as to properly drain the site while minimizing downstream flooding. Upon completion of development, the control and retention of storm water runoff shall be provided as directed by the Commissioner of Public Works, who may require the submission of an Engineer's Report. 
7.5.3.7  Access to sunlight for present and potential solar energy systems, both on and off site, as well as "building" siting, orientation and landscaping, meeting at a minimum the requirements of Section 4.4.21 of this Ordinance. 
7.5.4  A quality of "building" and overall site design which will enhance and protect the character and property values of the adjacent neighborhood. On report and recommendation of the Design Review Board, the approving agency shall evaluate the architectural features of the proposed design to determine if they are in harmony with the neighborhood, including consideration of architectural style, bulk dimensions, materials and location on the site and, in relation to development on adjoining properties, the natural terrain and vegetation. 
Sec. 7.6 - Expiration 
    Unless other provisions are specifically set forth by the approving agency in connection with its approval of a "site plan," such approval shall expire if substantial construction is not completed within 1 year of approval, or if all required improvements are not completed within 3 years of approval or if the construction or "use" shall cease for more than 6 months in any 12 month period. 
Sec. 7.7 - Amendments 
7.7.1  Minor Amendments: After approval of a "site plan," the Commissioner of Building may approve minor amendments thereto under the following circumstances and conditions: 
7.7.1.1  A minor amendment is a modification, "alteration," adjustment or change in an approved "site plan" that does not exceed any of the following thresholds: 
7.7.1.1.1  There is no increase in the mandatory off-"street" parking or loading requirement. 
7.7.1.1.2  There is no increase in "use," and no new "use" is established. 
7.7.1.1.3  There is no significant "alteration" of the essential characteristics of the design, layout or arrangement of "buildings," parking, circulation, landscaping, or relationship of the project to the "street," adjacent properties and the area in general. 
7.7.1.1.4  There is no increase in the number of "stories" or "mezzanine" levels in any "buildings." 
7.7.1.2  There is a written application for an amendment, together with copies of plans, sections, specifications, and/or other such documentation illustrating the proposed amendment in sufficient number as determined by the Commissioner of Building to facilitate appropriate review. 
7.7.1.3  Upon receipt of an application for a minor amendment to an approved "site plan," the Commissioner of Building shall transmit notice thereof, including a synopsis or brief description of the proposal, to the approving agency for appearance on the agenda of its next-occurring meeting. The approving agency, if it objects to approval of such minor amendment by the Commissioner of Building, shall so signify by majority vote or such other vote as is required by law. In the event of an objection by the approving agency, the Commissioner of Building shall refer the proposed amendment to the approving agency for review and consideration in accordance with Section 7.7.2. Except upon objection at its next-occurring meeting or within 30 days of receipt of notice, whichever is earlier, the approving agency shall have no role in the consideration of minor amendments save for referral under Section 7.7.1.6 hereof. 
7.7.1.4  The application and illustrative material shall be referred by the Commissioner of Building to such departments and agencies as the Commissioner deems proper, and in every case involving the exterior appearance of a site, "building" or project, it shall be referred to the Design Review Board. 
7.7.1.5  Each department and agency to which such referral is made shall notify the Commissioner of Building within 5 days of receipt of the referral whether it wishes to comment on such referral and, if it does, shall deliver such comments to the Commissioner of Building within 10 days of receipt of the referral. Non-response to a referral shall be deemed to represent no objection to the proposed amendment referred. In the case of a referral to a board or commission, receipt of a referral shall be deemed to be the date of the next meeting. 
7.7.1.6  The Commissioner of Building shall incorporate all recommendations and conditions made by departments and agencies in any approval of a minor amendment of a "site plan." In the event of conflicting recommendations or conditions, and/or in the event any department or agency recommends denial of a proposed minor amendment, the request for amendment shall be submitted to the approving agency for its consideration. 
7.7.1.7  No minor amendment to an approved "site plan" shall be approved by the Commissioner of Building until there has been substantial compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations, and until all applicable conditions in the original "site plan" approval have been met. 
7.7.1.8  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7.7.1 herein above, during construction, the Commissioner of Building may authorize minor adjustments to the approved "site plan" when such adjustments appear necessary in light of technical or engineering considerations, the existence or materiality of which was first discovered during actual construction, except where any such adjustments involve or include the addition of any "stories" or "mezzanine" levels which shall in all cases be reviewed under Section 7.7.2. Such minor adjustments shall be consistent with the concepts of the approved "site plan." 
7.7.2  Substantial Amendments: Where unforeseen conditions are encountered which require any change to an approved "site plan" which the Commissioner of Building considers substantial, or where the applicant wishes to modify the approved "site plan" for other reasons, an amended "site plan" shall be filed for review and approval in accordance with the same procedures required for initial applications. 
Sec. 7.8 - Guarantee of Completion 
    Where, in the opinion of the Commissioner of Building, the elements of an approved "site plan" are substantially complete, and the "structure" or "use" meets the requirements of other applicable codes and ordinances, the Commissioner of Building may issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for a period of up to 90 days, subject to a suitable assurance that all required elements of the approved "site plan" will be completed as soon as practicable. Where the Commissioner of Building finds good cause, he may extend such temporary certificate of use and occupancy for two additional periods of not to exceed 90 days each. 
Sec. 7.9 - As-Built Plan 
    Upon completion of construction, an as-built "site plan" shall be submitted to the Department of Building, which plan shall show all elements of the site as actually constructed. Except as provided in Section 7.8 above, no certificate of use and occupancy may be issued until the as-built "site plan" has been reviewed by the Department of Building and found to be in compliance with the approved "site plan"; or has been approved by the original approving agency as the final "site plan" following review and approval in accordance with the same procedures required for initial application. 
Section 8 - OFF-"STREET" PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 8.1 - Purposes 
    All "structures" and "uses" shall be provided with a sufficient amount of off-"street" "parking" and "loading spaces" for employees, residents, visitors, clients, patrons and other "persons" at such "structures" or "uses," but not less than the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. No certificate of "use" and occupancy shall be issued for any "structure" or "use," whether for a new "structure" or a change of "use" of an existing "structure," until such off-"street" "parking" and "loading spaces" have been established in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 8.2 - Limitations on Reserved Spaces 
8.2.1  No more than 2/3 of the "parking spaces" provided to meet the minimum requirements of this Ordinance may be reserved for specific individuals. 
8.2.2  "Parking spaces" may be shared or jointly utilized by residential tenants and non-residents provided that the standards of Section 7.5 and the conditions of Section 8.5.3 are met at all times. 
8.2.3  Neither of these limitations applies to "parking spaces" provided in excess of the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 8.3 - Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements 
    The following schedule presents the minimum "parking space" and "loading space" requirements of this Ordinance. Where a "lot" contains more than one "use," the minimum requirements must be satisfied for each and every such "use." For "uses" that do not fall within the categories listed or "uses" for which no minimum number of "parking spaces" is provided, the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering shall, in his review pursuant to Section 8.7.8, recommend to the approving agency the minimum "parking space" and "loading space" requirements, based on the specific nature of the facility and on accepted engineering practice. 
"USES" MINIMUM NUMBER OF "PARKING SPACES" MINIMUM NUMBER OF
"LOADING SPACES" PER 1,000 sq. ft.
(prorated so that the
requirement shall be
the next highest
integer) OTHER RESIDENTIAL "One family dwelling" - 2 per such "use" - "Two family dwelling" - 2 per "dwelling unit" - "Multi-family dwelling" - 1 per "dwelling unit" plus 1/2 per bedroom - 1 per "dwelling unit" plus 1/3 per bedroom if in RM-1, RM-1.5 or O-R, BR-1 or BR-2, or PCD. • 1 per "dwelling unit" plus 1/2 per bedroom if in the RM-1.5T and the property is on a State or County road. 
• 1 per "dwelling unit" plus 1/3 per bedroom if the property is not on a State or County road. 1 per "dwelling unit" plus 1/4 per bedroom if in RM-0.7, RM-0.4, RM-0.35, LI-M2, B-1, B-3, CB-1, CB-2, CB-3, or CB-4, except in the Central Parking Area and over 3 "stories" 1 per "dwelling unit" if in CPA and over 3 "stories" 0.4 per "dwelling unit" for Senior Citizen Assisted Housing or "assisted living facility" 1 per "dwelling unit" in UR-4 "Roomers" - 1 per "roomer"*(See Section 8.4) - Accessory servants quarters - 1 per such "use" - "Planned Senior Residential Development" - • 1.25 per independent senior living unit 
• 0.4 per "dwelling unit" for "assisted living facility" 
• 0.33 per bed for "domiciliary care facilities" 
• 5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA for all complementary medical facilities 
• 2.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA for special medical or rehabilitation facilities for every 100,000 sq. ft. of medical office use and "assisted living facility" or "domiciliary care facility" "use": 1 RECREATION Customary indoor or outdoor athletic facilities such as playfields and stadia as accessory to a private school, "university," "college" or seminary - 0.1 per seat - Commercial indoor "recreational facilities" and "health clubs" CPA: 3 
Other: 5 - Up to 10,000 sq. ft.: 1 For each additional 100,000 sq. ft.: 1 additional Tennis courts - 3.2 per court 
(2 per court CPA) - Squash, handball, racquet- ball and similar courts - 1.6 per court 
(1 per court CPA) - Bowling alleys - 4 per alley 
(3 per alley CPA) - Theatres B-6 District only: 3.0 0.33 per seat 
(0.22 per seat CPA) - Skating rinks, ballrooms 10 - - "Membership clubs" Meeting or banquet 
 rooms: 10 
Offices: 3 
Bars: 13.3 - 1 "Golf and country clubs" S e e S e c t i o n 6.5.4 SEMI-PUBLIC Hospitals or sanitaria - 1.25 per bed plus 1 per 400 sq.ft. GFA of any out-patient clinic. 
See also Sec. 6.7.5 1 per 100,000 sq.ft. GFA Churches or other places of worship, including Sunday schools or other similar religious schools and/or other "uses" accessory to churches or other places of worship not otherwise listed 10 - - Parish houses or rectories - 2 per such "use" - Convents - 0.1 per bed - COMMUNITY FACILITIES "Uses" of other governments S e e S e c t i o n 5.6 "Private secondary or elementary schools" S e e S e c t i o n 6.5.4 "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" 1.0 - - "Nursery schools" or "day care centers" in conjunction with a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" 1.0 - - Independent, unaffiliated "nursery schools" or "day care centers" located within a permitted church, other place of worship, "membership club," or "public school" or "private secondary or elementary school" 1.0 - - "Universities," seminaries or "colleges" S e e S e c t i o n 6.7.6 "Domiciliary care facilities," "community residences" or "rooming houses" - 0.33 per bed - "Transitional housing for homeless families" S e e S e c t i o n 6.7.25 Libraries, museums or art galleries not operated for profit CPA: 2.2 
Other: 3.3 - - OFFICE Business or professional office, except physicians and dentists CPA: 2.0 
Other: 3.0 - Up to 75,000 sq.ft.: 1 75,000-150,000 sq.ft.: 2 150,000-250,000 sq.ft.: 3 250,000-350,000 sq.ft.: 4 Over 350,000 sq. ft.: 4 plus additional as determined by the approving agency Offices for group education, training or counseling in "buildings" containing no residential "uses" CPA: 2.0 for administrative floor space plus 
0.22 per seat for general assembly/ classroom area - Up to 75,000 sq.ft.: 1 75,000-150,000 sq.ft.: 2 150,000-250,000 sq.ft.: 3 Other: 3.0 for administrative floor space plus 0.33 per seat for general assembly/classroom area 250,000-350,000 sq.ft.: 4 Over 350,000 sq. ft.: 4 plus additional as determined by the approving agency Office space for physicians or dentists CPA: 3.3,but in no case less than 5 "spaces" - Up to 10,000 sq.ft.: None 10,000-100,000 sq.ft.: 1 Other: 5.0 but in no case less than 5 "spaces" For each additional 100,000 sq.ft. or fraction: 1 additional Office in residence of a "professional person" - 4 per physician or dentist; 
2 per other "professional person" - Business, administrative or headquarters offices for "philanthropic institutions" CPA 2.0 
Other 3.0 - - BUSINESS "Accessory Food Laboratory" 2.5 
  
(1.7 CPA) plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on 
"lot" Up to 1,500 sq. ft. : 
None 1,500-20,000 sq. ft.: 1 For each additional 
10,000 sq. ft.: 1 
additional Stores for sales at retail or performance of customary personal services or services clearly incident to retail sales, including "cafes" and "real estate offices," but not including sales of automobile parts and accessories involving installation at the point of sale CPA: 3.3 - Up to 8,000 sq.ft.: 1 
(CPA: none) 8,000 - 16,000 sq.ft.: 1 B-6 District only: 3.0 
with no further adjustment for joint use pursuant to Section 8.5.3 16,000 - 50,000 sq.ft.: 1 additional Each additional 50,000 sq.ft.: 1 additional For uses outside of the CPA, having a gross floor area of at least 150,000 sq.ft. within a single "development site": 4.0 - Other: 5.7 In the B-6 District only: for "uses" exceeding 250,000 sq.ft.: 5 plus additional as required by the approving agency "Retail laundries" or "retail dry cleaners" CPA: 3.3 
Other: 5.7 - - Banks - CPA: 3 per pedestrian teller station or 3.3. per 1,000 sq.ft. GFA, whichever is greater - All other: 5 per pedestrian teller station or 5.7 per 1,000 sq.ft. GFA, whichever is greater "Consumer financial services establishments" CPA: 3.3 
B-6: 3.0 - - Libraries, museums or art galleries CPA: 2.2 
Other: 3.3 - - "Auction houses" 10.0 - 2 "Hotels" and "Extended Stay Hotels" S e e S e c t i o n 6.7.7 Newsstands - - - Radio stations 2.5 - - "Customary home occupations" - - - "Restaurants," "cafeterias" "cabarets" or "bars" B-6 District only: 3.0 
CPA: 3.3 Outside CPA: 1 per 3 seats or 13.3 per 1,000 sq.ft. GFA, whichever is greater B-6 District only: as required by approving agency Outdoor dining S e e S e c t i o n 6.7.8.4 "Fast food eating establishments" CPA: 10 
Other: 20 - 1 "Nursery Business" 8.0 - 1 loading space per two acres Mortuaries or funeral homes - 20 per 1,000 sq.ft. of floor space in assembly rooms plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on the "lot" - Veterinary hospitals, including boarding or care of small animals 5.0 - - "Craft Food Market Hall" 3.3 based upon retail floor space only 8,000-50,000 sq. ft.: 1 
For each additional 50,000 sq. ft.: 1 additional AUTOMOTIVE Motor vehicle sales or rental, including accessory "repair shops," "service stations" or outdoor storage of motor vehicles - Sales: 12 per such "use" plus 2 per 1,000 sq.ft. GFA 
Rental: 3 per such "use" - Motor vehicle "service stations" or motor vehicle "repair shops" - 1 per 1,000 sq.ft. of "lot area" - Auto laundries 2.0 - - INDUSTRIAL Manufacturing, fabrication, finishing or assembling of products 2.5 plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on "lot" Up to 1,500 sq.ft.: None 1,500-11,500 sq.ft.: 1 For each additional 10,000 sq.ft.: 1 additional Research, experimental, medical or testing laboratories 2.5 (1.7 CPA) plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on "lot" Up to 1,500 sq.ft.: None 1,500-11,500 sq.ft.: 1 For each additional 10,000 sq.ft.: 1 additional Printing plants 2.5 (1.7 CPA) plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on "lot" Up to 1,500 sq.ft.: None 1,500-11,500 sq.ft.: 1 For each additional 10,000 sq.ft.: 1 additional Wholesale businesses, storage or warehousing 1.3 plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on "lot" Up to 1,500 sq.ft.: None 1,500-11,500 sq.ft.: 1 For each additional 10,000 sq.ft.: 1 additional "Mini-storage facility" - 1 per employee plus 5 for patrons, but in no case less than 1 per every 200 storage units As required by the approving agency Outdoor storage of building or other materials 0.8 plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on "lot" - Outdoor storage of commercial or industrial vehicles or construction equipment - - - Laundry and dry cleaning plants 3.0 plus 1 per commercial vehicle kept on "lot" Up to 1,500 sq.ft.: 1 For each additional 10,0000 sq.ft.: 1 additional "Public utility buildings or structures" S e e S e c t i o n 6.5.4 Automobile wrecking, storage or treatment of junk, iron, bottles, scrap paper or similar materials - 0.25 per 1,000 sq.ft. of "lot area" Up to 1,500 sq.ft.: 1 For each additional 10,000 sq.ft.: 1 additional  
* NOTE: 
    No off-"street" parking will be required for an adult "family"-type home which meets the following requirements: 
(a)  the adult "family"-type home shall be licensed by the N.S. Dept. of Social Services pursuant to 18 NYCRR Part 485; 
(b)  the home shall be limited to 2 elderly adults; 
(c)  any change in the status of the home or the "roomers" shall be reported to the Commissioner of Building; 
(d)  the Westchester County Department of Social Services shall certify to the Commissioner of Building that each "roomer" does not possess a driver's license. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1H : Ord. of 12-5-16, § 6 ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1H ; Ord. of 4-2-18, § 1H ; Ord. of 5-7-18, § 1H ; Ord. of 7-2-18, § 1K ) 
Sec. 8.4 - Existing "Structures" and "Uses" 
8.4.1  "Structures" and "uses" in existence or for which building permits have been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be subject to the "parking or loading space" requirements of this Ordinance, provided that any parking and loading facilities then existing to serve such "structures" or "uses" shall not in the future be reduced, or pre-designated to serve other "structures" or "uses," except to the extent they exceed such requirements. 
8.4.2  At the time of any construction or creation of new floor space within such existing "structures" or "uses" in the future: 
8.4.2.1  Required parking and loading facilities for that part of the "structure" or "use" that results from the proposed construction or creation of new floor space shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
8.4.2.2  The provisions of Section 8.4.1 to the contrary notwithstanding, to the extent deemed physically possible, feasible and reasonable by the agency approving a "site plan" or special permit, required parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance on the same "lot" or "development site" with the "structure" or "use" for the existing portion of such "structure" or "use" that is legally non-conforming as to "parking and loading space" requirements. 
8.4.2.3  The approving agency shall not permit a reduction or elimination of whatever quantity of "parking or loading space" that may already exist, except to the extent that it may exceed such requirement. 
8.4.2.4  A "building" which is "dimensionally non-conforming" with respect to off-"street" parking or loading shall receive a credit for the difference between the currently required parking and/or loading and the total number of spaces actually provided for the existing legal "use" or legally "non-conforming use." This credit may be applied toward the parking and/or loading requirement for any future "use" of the existing "building." If the "use" to which a "building" is changed requires less off-"street" parking and/or loading, the parking or loading credit shall not be reduced and may be applied again for any future changes in the "building's" "use." These credits may not be applied to the expansion of any "use" or other new "floor area" within an existing "building." Upon demolition of an existing "building," all such credits shall be extinguished, except in the Central Parking Area where such credit may be applied to the creation of new "floor area." 
8.4.3  At the time of any change of "use" of such existing "structure" or at the time of any change to such existing "structure" other than the construction or creation of new floor space: 
8.4.3.1  Required parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance to the extent that the requirements for such facilities were increased by the change, except in the case of a change of "use" from one existing permitted principal "use" to another permitted principal "use," excluding "bars," where no additional parking and loading facilities shall be required, unless the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering determines the need for additional "parking or loading spaces" pursuant to Section 8.7.8. 
8.4.3.2  The provisions of Section 8.4.1 to the contrary notwithstanding, to the extent deemed physically possible, feasible and reasonable by the agency approving of a "site plan" or special permit, required parking and loading facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance on the same "lot" or "development site" with the "structure" or "use" for that portion of the requirement not attributable to any such change in the case of "structures" or "uses" that are legally non-conforming as to parking or loading requirements. 
8.4.3.3  The approving agency shall not permit a reduction or elimination of whatever quantity of "parking or loading space" that may already exist, except to the extent that it may exceed such requirement. 
Sec. 8.5 - Alternate Methods of Providing Parking 
8.5.1  Fee-in-Lieu: Within the Central Parking Area, as shown on the Zoning Map, any "person" required to provide off-"street" parking for a "structure" or "use" may make a cash payment to the City of White Plains Parking Fund in lieu of providing all or a portion of the required "parking spaces," subject to the following: 
8.5.1.1  Any "person" may make said cash payment in lieu of providing up to 10 required off-"street" "parking spaces." 
8.5.1.2  Any "person" may request permission from the approving agency for the special permit or "site plan" to make said cash payment in lieu of providing 11 or more additional required off-"street" "parking spaces." 
8.5.1.3  The approving agency may in its discretion accept all or a portion of the fee-in-lieu offered pursuant to Section 8.5.1.2 in substitution for all or a portion of the required "parking spaces." Where appropriate, it may require the submission of studies and plans demonstrating that practical considerations preclude the provision of such "parking spaces" by the applicant. 
8.5.1.4  The amount of the fee-in-lieu required shall be established pursuant to a fee schedule under a separate resolution adopted by the Common Council. 
8.5.1.5  By acceptance of the fee-in-lieu, the City of White Plains undertakes to provide parking of a type, location and quantity appropriate for the particular "use" within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the existing supply and demand for parking in the area of said "use." The City may charge for the use of such spaces an amount generally consistent with the charge for other publicly provided parking in the same area. 
8.5.1.6  The fee-in-lieu which is based on the current average construction or renovation cost for structured and at-grade parking shall be placed in the City of White Plains Parking Fund. The expenditure of revenues from such Parking Fund shall be limited exclusively to those actions designed to increase the quantity and/or the quality of "parking spaces" available to serve properties within the Central Parking Area. Notwithstanding the definition of "parking space" contained in Section 2.4 of this Ordinance, the term "parking spaces" as use in this section shall include both off-"street" and on-"street" parking. 
8.5.2  Satellite Parking: Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 8.6, the agency approving a "site plan" or special permit may permit all or a portion of the required "parking spaces" to be provided in a separate location (satellite "parking lot" or "parking garage"), subject to the following: 
8.5.2.1  The approving agency may require that such satellite "parking lot" or "parking garage" may only be provided to satisfy the needs of long term parkers, which shall generally mean that cars will be parked in the same "parking space" at least 7 hours. 
8.5.2.2  Where the approving agency finds the distance from the "use" to the satellite "parking lot" or "parking garage" to be too great for walking, it shall allow it only for long-term parkers as provided in Section 8.5.2.1 and shall require a suitable connecting service, such as bus service, to be provided for transporting occupants of the automobiles to and from the satellite "parking lot" or "parking garage." The scheduling, frequency and convenience of the connecting service shall be subject to approval as a part of the "site plan" and shall be such that it will encourage use of the satellite "parking lot" or "parking garage." 
8.5.2.3  The approving agency may require, as a condition of its approval, a suitable assurance of the continued availability of the connecting service and of the use of said satellite "parking lot" or "parking garage" in connection with the "use" which it serves. 
8.5.3  Joint Use: The agency approving a "site plan" may allow off-"street" "parking and loading spaces" required for "structures" or "uses" on the same or adjacent "lots" to be provided in a single common facility, on one or more of said "lots" or in a satellite "parking lot" or "parking garage," subject to the following: 
8.5.3.1  The total capacity of the common facility shall be the sum of the requirements of each individual "use," except that said total capacity may be reduced by the approving agency, providing the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving agency that the capacity of such facility will meet the intent of the requirements by reason of the provision of non-reserved "parking spaces" and variation in the probable time of maximum use by residents, visitors, patrons and employees among such "uses." 
8.5.3.2  As a condition of its approval, the approving agency shall require a legal instrument satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel assuring the continued existence and use of said "parking spaces" in connection with the "uses" and "structures" that they serve. Such instrument shall also guarantee that upon termination of such "use" each individual participant will provide off-"street" "parking and loading spaces" for its own "use" in accordance with all requirements of this Ordinance. 
8.5.4  Automated Parking. Within the Central Parking Area, the "Planned Senior Residential Development District", the C-O District and the "Planned Campus Development District" as shown on the Zoning Map, where the Common Council is the approving agency for a "site plan", the Common Council may, at its sole discretion, permit all or a portion of the required "parking spaces" for private passenger vehicles to be provided in a parking "structure" employing one or more automated vehicle parking systems subject to the following: 
8.5.4.1  As a condition of approval, and in addition to the requirements of Section 7.3 of this Ordinance, the applicant shall be required to provide to the Common Council as part of the "site plan" review and approval, pursuant to Section 7 of the Zoning Ordinance, the following documents: 
8.5.4.1.1  the technical specifications, operating and maintenance procedures, and performance history for the proposed automated parking system satisfactory to the Commissioners of Building, Public Works and Parking, and the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering. 
8.5.4.1.2  a parking management plan, satisfactory to the Commissioners of Building, Public Works and Parking, and the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering detailing with the operation of the automated parking system, and including a plan showing how the number of "parking spaces" provided in the largest automated parking system on the site can be accommodated on site or through satellite parking in the event any such system is not operational for a period exceeding 24 hours. 
8.5.4.2  All HVAC equipment and emergency generators serving the automated parking system must be located within a sound attenuated structure, preferably within the parking structure. The design of the HVAC equipment and emergency generators must be reviewed by the Building Department to ensure that sound levels will be at or below 55 db, and increases of 5 dBA or greater will not be permitted to be perceptible to adjacent properties. No building permit for the installation of such equipment shall be issued until such determination has been made. 
8.5.4.3  Prior to the issuance of any temporary or final Certificate of Occupancy for any "use" for which all or a portion of the "parking spaces" are being provided by an automated parking system, the applicant for the "site plan" shall provide to the Corporation Counsel and the Department of Building: 
8.5.4.3.1  an executed contract between the owner and operator of the automated parking system for maintenance of the automated parking system and an insurance certificate for the automated parking system. 
8.5.4.3.2  a legal instrument satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel assuring the continued existence and operation of the automated parking systems in connection with the "uses" and "structures" that they serve. Such instrument shall provide that is the responsibility of the owner of the property to ensure that off-"street" "parking spaces" for the "uses" on the property are maintained. 
Sec. 8.6 - Location 
8.6.1  Required off-"street" "parking spaces" shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
8.6.1.1  Required off-"street" "parking spaces" shall be provided on the same "lot" or "development site" with the "structure" or "use" they serve, except as provided in Section 8.5 above, and may be located within a "building" or in a "side" or "rear yard." 
8.6.1.2  In non-residential districts, required off-"street" "parking spaces" may also be located in a "front yard" but not less than 5 feet from the "front lot line," subject to review and approval in accordance with Section 6 or 7, as appropriate. 
8.6.1.3  [Reserved] 
8.6.1.4  In residential districts, "parking spaces" for a maximum of 2 private passenger vehicles, currently licensed and in active use, may also be located within a paved driveway constructed in accordance with a valid building permit, which is located within: that portion of the "front yard" immediately contiguous to and an extension of either "side yard"; or within that portion of "front yard" immediately contiguous to and an extension of a garage which is integral with the residence "structure" and has its entrance door within the front wall thereof. (See also areas 1 and 2, Illustration X.) 
8.6.1.5  In residential districts, "parking spaces" for a maximum of 2 private passenger vehicles, currently licensed and in active use, may also be located within a paved driveway, constructed in accordance with a valid building permit, which is located within: that portion of the "front yard" between "building" and the minimum required "front yard" in cases of circular driveways with 2 curb cuts; or review and approval in accordance with Section 7. (See also area 3, Illustration X.) 

8.6.1.6  In the R1-7.5, R1-5, R2-4, R2-2.5, RM-2.5, RM-1.5, RM-1, RM 0.7, RM-0.4 and RM-0.35 residential districts, on "lots" improved by "one" or "two family dwellings," the Commissioner of Building may issue a building permit for a driveway or parking area for a maximum of 2 private passenger vehicles, currently licensed and in active use, to be located in a "front yard" if all of the following conditions and requirements are met. 
8.6.1.6.1  There are no "parking spaces" currently on the site, and there is insufficient area to locate a "parking space" which meets the dimensional standards in Section 8.7. 
8.6.1.6.2  The existing "side yard" setbacks are each less than 10 feet and/or the topography is such that there is no vehicular access to the "side yards" or "rear yard." 
8.6.1.6.3  There is insufficient area beyond the required "front yard" setbacks to locate a "parking space" which meets the dimensional standards in Section 8.7. 
8.6.1.6.4  The "front yard" is not part of a special "building" setback. (See Section 4.4.12.) 
8.6.1.6.5  An application, consisting of a "site plan" prepared pursuant to Section 7.3 of this Ordinance, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Building. 
8.6.1.6.6  The application will be referred to the Commissioner of Public Works and the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering pursuant to Section 8.7.8. 
8.6.1.6.7  Each "parking space" shall measure at least 20 feet in length and 9 feet in width. "Front yard" parking shall cover no more than 50% of the "front yard." In no case shall it be in excess of 450 square feet or greater than 18 feet in width or 25 feet in length, except that the Commissioner of Building may approve other dimensions pursuant to Section 8.7.8 upon recommendation of the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering. 
8.6.1.6.8  "Parking spaces" shall be landscaped with low-growing ground cover, shrubs or bushes, which shall not exceed 30 inches in height, to minimize the visual impact of the "parking space" and to continue the residential appearance of the "street." 
8.6.1.6.8.1:  The selection, amount and location of all landscaping materials shall be subject to approval by the Commissioner of Building, based upon considerations of the adequacy of the proposed landscaping to serve its intended purpose with minimal maintenance problems, including plant care, snow plowing and leaf removal. 
8.6.1.6.8.2:  All landscaping shall continue to be maintained in a healthy growing condition throughout the duration of the "structure" or "use" which it is intended to serve. Any planting not so maintained shall be replaced with new plants at the beginning of the next growing season. 
8.6.1.6.8.3:  The placement of landscaping shall create no obstruction to driver vision at critical traffic intersection areas. 
8.6.1.6.9  The "parking spaces" shall be for the exclusive use of the residents of the "main building." 
8.6.2  Off-"street" "loading spaces" may be located within any "building," within a "side or rear yard," or within a required off-"street" "parking lot" provided such spaces do not block access to such "parking lot" or any "parking space." 
8.6.3  In the case of "corner lots," off-"street" "parking spaces" shall be set back from the side "street" line a distance equal to the "front yard" requirements on such side "street," unless "corner lots" are back to back, in which case such off-"street" "parking spaces" shall be set back at least 10 feet. 
Sec. 8.7 - Design 
8.7.1  Layout: All "parking lots" shall be designed in accordance with the following requirements: 
8.7.1.1  Unobstructed access to and from a "street," so designed as to not require the backing of any vehicle across a sidewalk or into a "street," shall be provided for all "parking and loading spaces," except as permitted in Section 8.7.1.2. Such access shall normally consist of at least 1 lane a minimum of 12 feet in width for "parking lots" with less than 15 "parking spaces" and at least 2 lanes a minimum of 11 feet each in width for "parking lots" with 15 "parking spaces" or more, except that the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering may, in his review pursuant to Section 8.7.8, recommend dimensions different from the above, based on the specific nature of the facility or accepted engineering practice. 
8.7.1.2  For "one and two family dwellings," one of the minimum required "parking spaces" for each "dwelling unit" may have its access obstructed by the other "parking spaces" provided for that same "dwelling unit." In addition, access for such "dwellings" may be designed for the backing of a vehicle across a sidewalk or into a "street," except for those "streets" designated as Major Streets on the Land Use Plan Map of the "Comprehensive Plan." 
8.7.1.3  In order to provide maximum efficiency, minimize curb cuts, and encourage safe and convenient traffic circulation, the agency approving a "site plan" may require the interconnection of "parking lots" via access drives within and between adjacent "lots." The agency may require written assurance such as deed restrictions, satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel, binding the owner and his heirs and assigns to permit and maintain such interconnection of "parking lots." 
8.7.1.4  Each off-"street" "loading space" shall measure at least 15 feet in width, at least 40 feet in length, and at least 14 feet in height, exclusive of access and turning areas, except that adjacent "loading spaces" may be each 12 feet in width. 
8.7.1.5  "Parking spaces" shall be provided according to the following distribution for 90 degree parking stalls. For parking at other than 90 degrees, the functionally equivalent sized "parking spaces" shall be provided. Functionally equivalent sized "parking spaces" shall be as determined by one or more nationally recognized authorities in the field of traffic engineering and parking, as applied by the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering. 
8.7.1.5.1  Not less than 25% of the required "parking spaces" shall be provided at the dimensions of at least 8.5 feet by 20 feet with an aisle at least 22 feet in width, and shall be signed as full-sized spaces. Handicapped spaces as required by the Building Code and regulations implementing the Americans with Disabilities Act shall be counted toward this requirement. 
8.7.1.5.2  The remainder of the required "parking spaces" shall be provided at the dimensions of at least 8.0 feet by 18 feet with an aisle at least 22 feet in width, and shall be signed as standard sized spaces, except as provided in Section 8.7.4 below. 
8.7.1.5.3  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.7.1.5.1 and 8.7.1.5.2 above, the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering may, in his review pursuant to Section 8.7.8, recommend dimensions different from the above, based on consideration of expected estimated turnover, nature of occupancy, volume and pattern of traffic circulation, vehicle sizes and distributions, angle of parking, nature of the facility and accepted engineering practice. In the event of such recommendation, the approving agency shall grant no approval for required "parking spaces" smaller than the smaller of the recommendation of the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering or the provisions of Sections 8.7.1.5.1 and 8.7.1.5.2. 
8.7.1.6  Except where accessory to "one and two family dwellings," "parking spaces" shall be marked with double striped painted lines unless the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering, in his review pursuant to Section 8.7.8, recommends a standard different from the above based on the particular circumstances of the parking facility. 
8.7.2  Improvement: Required off-"street" "parking lots" shall be graded, surfaced, drained and suitably maintained as required by the White Plains Building Code. The agency approving a special permit for customary indoor and outdoor athletic facilities, such as playfields or stadia as accessory to a private school, "university," "college" or seminary, may require or permit all or a portion of the "parking lot" for such facility to be surfaced with grass, gravel or equivalent material. 
8.7.3  Partial Waiver of Improvement: Where the agency approving a "site plan" determines, in connection with its review of such "site plan," that less than the required number of "parking or loading spaces" will satisfy the intent of this Ordinance because of variations in the probable time of maximum use by joint users, use of attendant parking or for any other reason, such agency may waive a portion of the improvement, but for not more than 1/3 of the total number of "parking spaces" normally required by this Ordinance. In all cases, it shall be expressly demonstrated on the "site plan" that sufficient space remains for the provision of the total amount of off-"street" parking required and the "site plan" shall bear such designation. Such unimproved portion of the "parking lot" shall, where practical, be used and maintained as additional landscaped grounds until required for parking. Written guarantees, satisfactory to the Corporation Counsel, shall be submitted by the applicant insuring the improvement of such spaces within 6 months of the date of written notice to the property owner by the agency, stating that all or a portion of such spaces have now been determined to be necessary and should be so improved. 
8.7.4  Compact and Van-Pool Spaces: Where at least 50 "parking spaces" are provided for the sole use of residents and employees or on a non-transient basis (motor vehicle parked at least 3 hours in the same space), the agency approving a "site plan" may permit a portion of these "parking spaces" to be designed and reserved for compact cars, or an area to be designed and reserved for cars and vans used for carpooling. Such spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
8.7.4.1  Compact car "parking spaces" shall measure at least 7.5 feet in width and 15 feet in length, with an aisle at least 20 feet in width, and "parking spaces" for van-pooling shall measure at least 9.5 feet in width and 20 feet in length, with an aisle at least 25 feet in width, except that the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering may, in his review pursuant to Section 8.7.8, recommend a standard different from the above, based on the considerations enumerated in Section 8.7.1.5. 
8.7.4.2  "Parking spaces" for compact cars and car pool vehicles shall be conveniently located for both vehicular and pedestrian access and grouped in a limited number of locations, in order to attract users. Such "parking spaces" shall not be scattered about the premises. 
8.7.4.3  Clear and distinctive signing, meeting the requirements of Section 8.7.6, shall be provided to identify compact car and car pooling areas. All compact car "parking spaces" shall be paint striped along the aisle to indicate the width of such spaces, to easily identify them to the passing driver and to serve as a guide to the maximum size of vehicle allowed to use them. 
8.7.4.4  "Parking lots" for compact cars shall be located so that they tend to fill before the remainder of the "parking lot" does. 
8.7.5  Landscaping: Except for "parking lots" accessory to a "one or two family dwelling," all off-"street" "parking lots" and "loading spaces" shall be curbed, screened and landscaped with appropriate trees, shrubs, ground cover and other plant materials to assure the establishment of a safe, convenient and attractive facility. Such landscaping shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
8.7.5.1  In all off-"street" "parking lots" which contain 25 or more "parking spaces" and which are not located in "parking garages," at least 6% of the total "parking lot" shall be so landscaped, and at least 1 tree of not less than 3 inches caliper, shall be provided within such "parking lot" for each 12 "parking spaces." 
8.7.5.2  Raised planting islands at least 8 feet in width shall be provided as necessary to guide vehicle movement, to separate opposing rows of "parking spaces" and to provide adequate space for plant growth, pedestrian circulation and vehicle overhang. Such raised planting islands and the landscaping within them shall be designed and arranged so as to provide vertical definition to major traffic circulation aisles, entrances and exits, to channel internal traffic flow, to prevent indiscriminate diagonal movement of vehicles and to provide cooling shade and visual relief from the visual monotony and summer heat of a large paved "parking lot." Curbs of such islands shall be designed so as to facilitate surface drainage and to prevent vehicles from overhanging sidewalks and damaging landscaping materials. 
8.7.5.3  Suitable landscaping shall be provided, as required by the agency approving the "site plan," along the periphery of "parking lots," "parking garages" and "loading spaces" where they abut "streets," public spaces and residential districts. Such screening shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.4.19. 
8.7.5.4  The selection, amount and location of all landscaping materials shall be subject to approval by the agency approving the "site plan," based upon consideration of the adequacy of the proposed landscaping to serve its intended purpose with minimal maintenance problems, including plant care, snow plowing and leaf removal. 
8.7.5.5  All landscaping shall continue to be maintained in a healthy growing condition throughout the duration of the "structure" or "use" which it is intended to serve. Any planting not so maintained shall be replaced with new plants at the beginning of the next, immediately following, growing season. 
8.7.5.6  The placement of landscaping shall create no obstruction to driver vision at critical traffic intersection areas. 
8.7.6  Signage: Appropriate signs shall be provided in "parking lots" and "parking garages" to direct internal traffic flow. Such signs shall generally not exceed 1 square foot in area except that the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering may, in his review pursuant to Section 8.7.8, recommend a standard different from the above, where he determines such to be appropriate, based on the particular circumstances involved and based on accepted engineering practice. 
8.7.7  Illumination: Illumination of "parking lots" and "parking garages" shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the White Plains Building Code for the safety and convenience of those using such facilities. Such illumination shall be of such type and location and have such shading as will prevent the source of the light from being seen from any adjoining "streets" and residential properties and which shall prevent objectionable glare observable from such "streets" or properties. 
8.7.8  Review by the Deputy Commissioner of Parking Responsible for Transportation Engineering: The agency responsible for "site plan" approval shall refer such "site plan" to the deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering for review and report prior to taking action. The deputy commissioner of parking responsible for transportation engineering, after considering, in addition to any other appropriate matters, the standards of Section 8.7 and their applicability to the particular circumstances, may recommend amendments to the "site plan" as provided in Section 8.7 and shall recommend any other amendments to the "site plan" necessary to achieve safe and proper internal traffic circulation, convenient ingress and egress, safe pedestrian movement to an through the parking area, and appropriate design for the handicapped. 
Sec. 8.8 - Operation and Maintenance 
    Required off-"street" parking facilities shall be maintained so long as the "use" or "structure" exists which the facilities are designed to serve. Required "parking spaces" developed for specific "structures" and "uses" shall be reserved at all times to "persons" who are employed at or make use of such "structures" and "uses," except where such "parking spaces" are dedicated to and accepted by the City as public "parking lots," or where arrangements for joint "use" are made pursuant to Section 8.2.2 above. 
Section 9 - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 

Sec. 9.1 - Purposes 
    The Common Council hereby finds that excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness or poor quality of design in the exterior appearance of "buildings" or other "structures" erected or "altered" can adversely affect the desirability of the immediate and neighboring areas and, by so doing, impair the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas, impair the stability in value of both improved and unimproved real property in such areas, prevent the most appropriate development and "use" of such areas, produce degeneration of property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants thereof, and contribute to the diminution of the taxable value of real property in such areas and their ability to support municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this Section to prevent these and other potentially harmful effects resulting from such unattractive exterior appearance of "buildings" and other "structures" erected or "altered," and thus to promote the public health, safety and welfare, to conserve the value of "buildings," and other "structures" erected or "altered," and thus to promote the public health, safety and welfare, to conserve the value of "buildings," to encourage the most appropriate "use" of land and to improve the physical and visual appearance of the City. 
Sec. 9.2 - Creation and Organization 
    There is hereby created a Design Review Board which shall consist of 5 members, who shall serve without compensation. Such members shall be specially qualified by reason of training or experience in art, architecture, landscape architecture, community planning, land development, real estate or other relevant business or profession, to judge the effects of a proposed "building" or "structure" or "alteration" thereof upon the desirability, property values and development of surrounding areas. At least 1 member of such Board shall be a registered architect. The members of such Board shall be appointed, and the Chairman thereof shall be designated by the Mayor. Of the members first appointed, 1 shall hold office for the term of 1 year, 2 for the term of 2 years, and 2 for the terms of 3 years from and after their respective appointments. Their successors shall be appointed for a term of 3 years from and after the expiration of the terms of their predecessors in office. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term. The Common Council shall have the power to remove any member of the Design Review Board for cause and after public hearing. The Mayor shall designate a Secretary of the Board, who need not be a member of the Board and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. 
Sec. 9.3 - Meetings, Rules and Records 
    All meetings of the Design Review Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as such Board may determine, but a meeting shall be held within 30 days of the date of any application or referral to it. Such Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if any member is absent or fails to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examination and other official actions. The Board shall have the power from time to time to adopt, amend and repeal rules and regulations not inconsistent with law or this Ordinance, governing its procedures and the transaction of its business. Every rule and regulation, every amendment or appeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall be filed in the office of the Board. 
Sec. 9.4 - Quorum and Vote 
    Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business as provided by Section 41 of the General Construction Law. The Board may disapprove construction pursuant to Section 9.5.3 of this Ordinance only by unanimous vote of those acting upon the matter, but in no case by less than 4 members. 
Sec. 9.5 - Powers and Duties 
9.5.1  Municipal Buildings and Works of Art: The Common Council shall refer to the Design Review Board for review and advisory report plans for construction or installation of all municipal "structures" and "uses," and exterior changes thereto, and all works of art or other objects to be used in a decorative manner or for the purposes of beautification, to be erected upon or over property owned, leased or otherwise occupied by the City. The Design Review Board shall advise the Common Council with respect to any changes thereto which will improve the appearance and design of the exterior of such "structures" and "uses" and the appearance or design of such works of art to the end that the beauty and appearance of the City in general will be improved. The Board shall also consider the proposed location of such works of art and shall make recommendations with respect to the proposed location or recommend such other locations as the Board may deem suitable and appropriate. 
9.5.2  Advisory Reports: The Design Review Board shall issue advisory reports recommending approval, conditional approval subject to specific modifications, or disapproval of any matter which may be referred to it by any approving agency under this Ordinance. 
9.5.3  Final Decisions: Unless reviewed pursuant to Section 9.5.1 or 9.5.2 above, no building permit shall be issued for installation of a solar energy system as provided in Section 4.4.21 of this Ordinance, or for installation of a security grille as provided in Section 4.4.17 of this Ordinance, without approval, or approval subject to specific modifications by the Design Review Board. Notwithstanding the above and as set forth as an exception in Section 4.4.21 of this Ordinance, installation of solar energy systems for one or two family structures which do not require a variance, have a rated capacity of 12 kW or less, where the system is to be mounted parallel to the roof surface, or tilted with no more than an eighteen (18) inch gap between the module frame and the roof surface, shall not require approval by the Design Review Board. 
Sec. 9.6 - Standards 
    In examining plans or proposals, the Design Review Board shall recommend disapproval of, or disapprove, any installation or construction which would cause or contribute to one or more of the harmful effects set forth in Section 9.1 of this Ordinance by reason of: 
9.6.1  Excessive dissimilarity or inappropriateness in relation to any other "structure" existing or for which a permit has been issued, or to any other "structure" included in the same permit application, facing upon the same or intersecting "street" and within 500 feet of the proposed new "structure," in respect to one or more of the following features: cubical content; "gross floor area"; "building area" or "height" of roof; or other significant design features, such as materials or style of architectural design. 
9.6.2  Excessive similarity to any other "structure" existing or for which a permit has been issued, or to any other "structure" included in the same permit application, facing upon the same or intersecting "street" and within 500 feet of the proposed new "structure," in respect to one or more of the following features of exterior design and appearance: apparently identical front, side or other elevations visible from a "street"; substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors, windows, porticoes or other openings or breaks in the elevation facing the "street," including reverse arrangement; or other significant identical features of design, such as but not limited to material, roof line, "height" or other design elements. 
9.6.3  The quality of "building" and overall site design in respect to one or more of the following features: the relationship to and character of the adjacent neighborhood; consideration of architectural style, bulk, dimensions, materials, and location on the site and in relation to development on adjoining properties, the natural terrain and vegetation. 
Sec. 9.7 - Limitations 
9.7.1  The Board shall restrict its considerations to a reasonable and professional review of the proposal and plans, leaving full responsibility for the design and development to the applicant. The Board shall not design or assist in the design of any "buildings" or "structures" submitted for approval. 
9.7.2  The Board shall not unduly restrict new or innovative "building" types, materials or methods. Individual initiative and experimentation are to be encouraged. 
9.7.3  In its endeavor to improve the quality of design, the Board shall consider cost as one factor along with design in its efforts to achieve the objectives of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 9.8 - Procedure 
    The Design Review Board shall have 30 days in which to act upon a matter before it. Such time limit shall be measured from the date of the meeting at which the Board receives an application under Section 9.5.3, or from the date of referral by another approving agency for any other matter. Such time limit may be extended by mutual agreement with the applicant. Failure to act on the part of the Board within the time limit specified, or as may be extended, shall be deemed to constitute approval or recommendation for approval, as the case may be. 
Sec. 9.9 - Application 
    For any matter referred to it for review and recommendation pursuant to Sections 9.5.1 and 9.5.2, the Design Review Board shall act upon the application in the form as referred to it by the approving agency. For matters pursuant to Section 9.5.3, the applicant shall submit preliminary architectural plans showing at least the location and dimensions of proposed "structures," as well as exterior elevations and materials to be used. 
Sec. 9.10 - Appeals 
    Any "person" aggrieved by an action of the Design Review Board in approving or disapproving an application before it under Section 9.5.3 may take an appeal therefrom to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 10.3.7 of this Ordinance. 
Section 10 - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 10.1 - Organization and Appointment and Duties of Chairperson 
10.1.1  Establishment: The Board of Appeals, as heretofore established by the Common Council pursuant to Section 81 of the General City Law of the State of New York, is hereby maintained. The Board of Appeals shall be comprised of 5 members appointed by the Mayor. Pursuant to Section 27(11) of the General City Law, 3 alternate Board of Appeals member positions are hereby established for purposes of substituting for a member in the event such member is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest. Alternate members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of 5 years. 
10.1.2  Appointment of Chairperson: The present Chairperson shall continue to the end of the period for which he or she was appointed and his or her successors shall be appointed by the Mayor. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Board may designate a member to serve as Acting Chairperson. 
10.1.3  Duties of Chairperson: All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as such Board may determine. Such Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Chairperson of the Board of Appeals may designate an alternate member to substitute for a member when such member is unable to participate because of a conflict of interest on an application or matter before the Board of Appeals. When so designated, the alternate member shall possess all the powers and responsibilities of such member of the Board of Appeals. Such designation shall be entered in to the minutes of the initial Board of Appeals meeting at which the substitution is made. 
Sec. 10.2 - Meetings and Records 
10.2.1  Meetings: The presence of 3 members of the Board shall be necessary for a quorum. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to grant a "use variance" or "area variance." Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public to the extent provided in Article VII of the Public Officers Law of the State of New York. 
10.2.2  The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of Appeals shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Board within five business days of said action or decision, and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant. All records and files shall be a public record. 
Sec. 10.3 - Powers and Duties 
10.3.1  General: The Board of Appeals shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed by General City Law and by this Ordinance, which powers and duties are summarized and more particularly specified in the following, provided that none of the following sections shall be deemed to limit any of the powers of the Board of Appeals that are conferred by the General City Law. All provisions of Section 27 of the General City Law relating to Board of Appeals member training and continuing education, attendance, conflict of interest, compensation, eligibility, vacancy in office, removal, compatibility of office and service on other boards, shall also apply to alternate members. Appeals may be taken by any "person" aggrieved, on and by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the City. In passing upon any matter before it, the Board shall take into specific consideration the goals of this Ordinance and the recommendations of the "Comprehensive Plan." 
10.3.2  Rules and Regulations: The Board of Appeals may adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary for or proper to the performance of its powers and duties hereunder, and may amend or repeal the same. 
10.3.3  Special Permits: The Board of Appeals is authorized to hear and decide applications for certain special permits in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in Section 6 of this Ordinance. 
10.3.4  As more fully set out in Section 4.3 of this Ordinance, the Board of Appeals is authorized to: 
10.3.4.1  Extend the permitted period for cessation of a "non-conforming use" in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.3.1.3 and/or Section 4.3.2.5 of this Ordinance provided: 
10.3.4.1.1  An application is made by the owner of at least 120 days prior to the date on which the activities of the use are required to cease and be discontinued. 
10.3.4.1.2  Substantial financial expenditures related to the prohibited activities were made during the two year period prior to December 31, 2016. Financial expenditures shall mean the capital outlay made by the applicant to establish the prohibited activities, exclusive of the fair market value of the building in which such activity may be located and exclusive of any improvements unrelated to the prohibited activities. 
10.3.4.1.3  The Applicant has not substantially recovered all of the financial expenditures related to the prohibited activities as demonstrated by competent financial evidence. 
10.3.4.1.4  The period for which such establishment is permitted to continue is the minimum period sufficient for the applicant to recover substantially all of the financial expenditures incurred related to the prohibited activities but in no case may the period extend beyond an additional three years. 
10.3.4.2  Review and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove a plan for reconstruction of a non-conforming "building" in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.3.4.2 of this Ordinance. Permit the change of a "non-conforming use" to another "non-conforming use" in accordance with Section 4.3.6 of this Ordinance. Review and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove a plan for the improvement of a "non-conforming use" in accordance with Section 4.3.6 of this Ordinance. 
10.3.5  Variances: On appeal from an order, requirement decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance, or on referral of an applicant to the Board by an approving agency acting pursuant to Sections 6 or 7 of this Ordinance, the Board of Appeals is authorized to vary or modify the strict letter of this Ordinance, where its literal interpretation would cause difficulties or unnecessary hardships, in such manner as to observe the spirit of the Ordinance, secure public safety and welfare, and do substantial justice. 
10.3.5.1  "Use Variances": Where because of unnecessary hardship an applicant desires to utilize land for a "use" or purpose not allowed in the district in which the land is located or is prohibited by the applicable regulations of this Ordinance, the Board may grant a variance in the application of the provisions of this Ordinance in the specific case, provided that in the granting of "use variances," the Board shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community. No such "use variance" shall be granted by the Board without a showing by the applicant that the regulations and restrictions in this Ordinance have caused unnecessary hardship. In order to prove unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall demonstrate to the Board that for each and every permitted "uses" in the district in which the land is located: 
10.3.5.1.1  The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided that lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by competent financial evidence. 
10.3.5.1.2  The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is unique, and does not apply to a substantial portion of the district or neighborhood. 
10.3.5.1.3  The requested "use variance," if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood; and 
10.3.5.1.4  The alleged hardship has not been self-created. 
10.3.5.2  Area Variances: Where an applicant requests to use the land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical requirements of this Ordinance, the Board may grant a variance in the application of the provisions of this Ordinance in the specific case, provided that in the granting of an "area variance" the Board shall grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community. In making its determination, the Board shall take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the "area variance" is granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In making such determination, the Board shall also consider: 
10.3.5.2.1  Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby properties will be created by the granting of the "area variance." 
10.3.5.2.2  Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than an "area variance." 
10.3.5.2.3  Whether the requested "area variance" is substantial. 
10.3.5.2.4  Whether the proposed "area variance" will have an adverse effect or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the neighborhood or district; and 
10.3.5.2.5  Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the "area variance." 
10.3.6  Orders, Requirements, Decisions, Interpretations and Determinations: On appeal from an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance, or on request from any official, officer, department, board or bureau of the City, the Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination as in its opinion ought to have been made in the matter by the administrative official charged with the enforcement of such ordinance or local law, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whose order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination the appeal is taken. 
10.3.7  Decisions of the Design Review Board: The Board of Appeals is authorized to hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Design Review Board. The Board may grant a variance in the application of the decision of the Design Review Board provided that it finds, in accordance with the standards of Section 10.3.5.2, that there are difficulties associated therewith. 
10.3.8  Parking for Existing "Structures" and "Uses": In accordance with Section 8.4.2 of this Ordinance, the Board of Appeals is authorized to waive part of the minimum parking requirement for existing "structures" and "uses" under certain conditions. 
10.3.9  Shading for Solar Energy Systems: In accordance with Section 4.4.21.4 of this Ordinance, the Board of Appeals is authorized to allow new construction to block access to sunlight for solar energy systems under certain conditions. 
10.3.10  Imposition of Conditions: The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of both "use variances" and "area variances," have the authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to and incidental to the proposed "use" of the property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance or local law, and shall be imposed for the purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have on the neighborhood or community. Such conditions or restrictions shall be incorporated in the building permit and certificate of "use" and occupancy. Failure to comply with such conditions or restrictions shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance, and may constitute the basis for denial or revocation of a building permit or certificate of "use" and occupancy and for all other applicable remedies. 
( Ord. of 8-1-16, § 1I ; Ord. of 1-3-17, § 1I ) 
Sec. 10.4 - Procedure 
10.4.1  Appeal or Application: 
10.4.1.1  An appeal shall be taken within 60 days of the order or decision appealed from, by filing with the official from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeals of a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the records upon which the action appealed from is taken. A referral to the Board for a variance, or a request for an interpretation, may be made at any time. All such appeals and applications to the Board shall be made by the owner or agent duly authorized, in writing, and shall be on forms prescribed by the Board. Each appeal or application shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case, shall refer to the specific provision of the Ordinance involved, and shall exactly set forth, as the case may be, the interpretation that is claimed, the details of the adjustment that is applied for, and the grounds for which it is claimed that the same should be granted. 
10.4.1.2  Stay Upon Appeal: An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative official charged with the enforcement of such Ordinance or local law, from whom the appeal is taken, certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the administrative official, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
10.4.2  Review by Other Agencies: Upon receipt of a completed appeal or application, the Board of Appeals shall forward copies for review and report to such officials and agencies of the City as it deems appropriate. All such agencies shall have 30 days from the date of forwarding to submit a report. If approval of a "site plan" or issuance of a special permit is involved, the Board of Appeals shall not decide on the matter until it has received the report of the approving agency in accordance with Sections 6.4.5 or 7.4.4 of this Ordinance. In addition, copies shall be forwarded with a notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board when such proposed development abuts a State or County highway, park, drainage channel or "building" site, and to the clerk of any abutting municipality where the property proposed for such development is located within 500 feet of such municipality, in accordance with Sections 277.61 and 277.71 of the Westchester County Administrative Code. 
10.4.3  Public Hearing: The Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on any appeal, application or request made pursuant to this Ordinance. Such public hearing shall be held within 45 days of the date an appeal is taken or an application or request is made to the Board. 
10.4.4  Notice of Hearing Before the Board: Notice of the public hearing shall be published on at least 3 days in the official newspaper, the first insertion to be not less than 5 nor more than 30 days prior to the date of such hearing. Notice and a brief description of the appeal or application shall also be sent 10 days prior to the date of such hearing to all property owners (as shown by the Tax Assessment Roll) within the "area affected." A copy of the notice, with proof of notice in the official newspaper, shall be filed in the office of the Board on or before the date of the public hearing. 
10.4.5  Action: Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution; shall be recorded; and shall fully set forth the facts of the case, the findings and the conclusions on which the decision was based. The Board shall decide on matters before it within 62 days after the close of the public hearing, unless such time limit is extended by mutual agreement with the applicant; shall immediately file its resolution in the office of the City Clerk and the office of the Board within 5 business days and shall within 5 days thereafter mail a copy of such resolution to the applicant. In the event that the area involved in any application for a variance includes and/or would affect any "environmentally sensitive site or feature," the application shall be subject to the regulations contained in Section 4.4.25 of this Ordinance. 
10.4.6  Rehearing: A motion for the Board to hold a rehearing to review any order, decision or determination of the Board not previously reviewed may be made by any member of the Board. A unanimous vote of all members of the Board then present is required for such rehearing to occur. Such rehearing is subject to the same notice provisions as an original hearing. Upon such rehearing the Board may reverse, modify or annul its original order, decision or determination upon the unanimous vote of all members then present, provided the Board finds that the rights vested in "persons" acting in good faith in reliance upon the reviewed order, decision or determination will not be prejudiced thereby. 
Sec. 10.5 - Expiration of a Variance 
    A variance granted under this Ordinance shall automatically expire if substantial construction in accordance with the plans for which such variance was granted has not been completed within 1 year, or such other time limit as may be chosen by the Board of Appeals in connection with its decision, from the date of granting such variance by the Board; or, if judicial proceedings to review the Board's decision shall be instituted, from the date of entry of the final order in such proceedings, including all appeals. 
Section 11 - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 11.1 - Enforcement 
11.1.1  General: No board, agency, officer or employee of the City shall issue, grant or approve any permit, license, certificate or other authorization for any construction or "alteration" of any "building" or "structure" or for any "use" of land, "building" or "structure" that would not be in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, except as permitted under Sections 5.6, 5.7 and 10 of this Ordinance. Any permit, license, certificate or other authorization issued, granted or approved in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and void and of no effect without the necessity of any proceedings or revocation or nullification thereof. 
11.1.2  Enforcing Authority: The provisions of this Ordinance or any rules or regulations authorized hereunder shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Building, or a designated member of his Department. 
Sec. 11.2 - Building Permits 
    Except under written authorization of the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 10, or the Common Council as provided in Section 5.6 of this Ordinance, no building permit shall be issued for any land, "building" or "structure" where said action would be in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 11.3 - Certificates of "Use" and Occupancy 
    Except under a written authorization of the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 10, or the Common Council as provided in Section 5.6 of this Ordinance, no certificate of "use" and occupancy may be issued, pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code, unless such occupancy or "use" is in full conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. A certificate of "use" and occupancy may continue in effect as long as such occupancy or "use" is in full conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance and any requirements made in connection therewith at the time of the issuance thereof. The details of any detailed statement or plan approved by the Common Council, Planning Board, Commissioner of Building, Board of Appeals or Design Review Board, acting under the terms of this Ordinance, and any conditions attached to such approval, shall be deemed to be such requirements. 
Sec. 11.4 - Violations and Penalties 
11.4.1  Penalties: Any "person" who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance or any other regulation made under authority conferred thereby, or who shall build or "alter" any "structure" in violation of any statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or who shall knowingly assist therein, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment or both; such fine and imprisonment to be in accordance with the following schedule: 
11.4.1.1  For the first conviction, a fine not to exceed $500. 
11.4.1.2  For the second conviction of a violation of this Ordinance, where said violation occurs within 5 years of the date of the first conviction, a fine not less than $250 nor in excess of $500, or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both. 
11.4.1.3  For any subsequent conviction of a violation of this Ordinance, where said violation occurs within 5 years of the date of the first conviction, a fine not less than $500 nor in excess of $1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both. 
Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate and additional violation. In addition to the foregoing provisions, the City shall have such other remedies for any violation or threatened violation of this Ordinance as is now or may hereafter be provided by law. The application of any above penalty shall not be held to prevent any action under Section 11.4.2 below. 
11.4.2  Prevention: In case any land is "used" or "structure" is erected, constructed, "altered" or maintained in violation of this Ordinance, any regulation made pursuant thereto or any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, in addition to other lawful remedies, any appropriate action or proceedings may be instituted to prevent such unlawful "use," erection, construction, "alteration" or maintenance, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such "structure" or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or "use" in or about such premises. Whenever the Commissioner of Building has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any "structure" is being prosecuted in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, or not in conformity with any regulation made pursuant thereto or not in compliance with any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, he may issue a stop work order pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code. 
11.4.3  Reimbursement of Costs: If the Commissioner of Building or his duly authorized representative, acting under the authority granted in Section 11.1.2 of this Ordinance, verifies the existence of a violation of this Ordinance and has such violation corrected during regular hours of the Department of Building, the owner of the property on which said violation is verified will be responsible to reimburse the City of White Plains the full cost of salary plus benefits which the Commissioner or his representative is entitled to be paid for the time expended verifying said violation or correction of said violation, less one hour. If, in order to verify the existence of such violation and such violation is verified, or to have such verified violation corrected, the Commissioner of Building or his duly authorized representative is required to work after regular work hours of the Department of Building, on weekends, or on legal holidays of the City of White Plains, the owner of said property will be responsible to reimburse the City of White Plains the full cost of salary plus benefits which the Commissioner or his representative is entitled to be paid. If the owner fails to reimburse the City for the costs of such salary plus benefits, then said costs shall be a lien and shall be assessed against the land upon which the "building" or "structure" is located. 
Sec. 11.5 - Fees 
    For the purpose of defraying professional and administrative costs involved in the review of applications and appeals and the legal notices required by law, the following actions shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the City of White Plains in the amount prescribed below, except where the applicant is an agency of the City: 
11.5.1  Each application or petition requesting any amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal of any provisions of this Ordinance, including the Zoning Map: $100, but not less than $50 per acre for any application requesting a map change. 
11.5.2  For each initial application for a special permit: 
11.5.2.1  for residential special "uses" outside the Central Parking Area: 
One Family $120.00 Two Family $140.00 1 unit (multifamily) to 30 units $100.00/unit from 31 to 100 units $200.00/unit from 101 to 200 units $100.00/unit over 200 units For first 200 units same as above plus $75.00 for each unit over 200.  
11.5.2.2  for non-residential special permit "uses" outside the Central Parking Area and residential and non-residential special permit "uses" in the Central Parking Area: 
for up to 30,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $100.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" from 30,001 sf to 100,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $200.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" from 100,001 to 200,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $100.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" for "gross floor area" over 200,000 sf the same as above for the first 200,000 sf of "gross floor area" and $75.00 for each additional 1,000 sf of "gross floor area." 
11.5.2.3  For special permit "uses" for which no modification is being made to the "site plan," a fee of $500 for each initial application. 
11.5.3  For each initial application for "site plan" approval: 
11.5.3.1  for all one and two family residences and for residential "uses" outside the Central Parking Area: 
One Family $120.00 Two Family $140.00 1 unit (multifamily) to 30 units $100.00/unit from 31 to 100 units $200.00/unit from 101 to 200 units $100.00/unit over 200 units For first 200 units same as above plus $75.00 for each unit over 200.  
11.5.3.2  for non-residential "uses" outside the Central Parking Area and residential and non-residential "uses" in the Central Parking Area, excluding one and two family residences: 
for up to 30,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $100.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" from 30,001 sf to 100,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $200.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" from 100,001 to 200,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $100.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" for "gross floor area" over 200,000 sf the same as above for the first 200,000 sf of "gross floor area" and $75.00 for each additional 1,000 sf of "gross floor area." 
11.5.4  For each initial appeal or initial application to the Board of Appeals: 
11.5.4.1  for all one and two family residences and for residential "uses" outside the Central Parking Area: 
One Family $120.00 Two Family $140.00 1 unit (multifamily) to 30 units $100.00/unit from 31 to 100 units $200.00/unit from 101 to 200 units $100.00/unit over 200 units For first 200 units same as above plus $75.00 for each unit over 200.  
11.5.4.2  for non-residential "uses" outside the Central Parking Area and for non-residential and residential "uses" in the Central Parking Area, excluding one and two family residences: for up to 30,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $100.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" from 30,001 sf to 100,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $200.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" from 100,001 to 200,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $100.00/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" for "gross floor area" over 200,000 sf the same as above for the first 200,000 sf of "gross floor area" and $75.00 for each additional 1,000 sf of "gross floor area." 
11.5.5  For amendments to "site plans," special permits and Board of Appeals or applications prior to final approval: 
11.5.5.1  for one and two family residences: no fee; for all other amendments the greater of $100.00 or 10% of the initial application fee but in no case more than $2,500. 
11.5.5.2  If the Commissioner of Building determines that the "site plan," or special permit amendment or amended appeal or application to the Board of Appeals represents a substantial change, the fee shall be based on the schedules for an original submission cited in Sections 11.5.2, 11.5.3, and 11.5.4. 
11.5.6  For amendments to "site plans," special permits, and appeals or applications to the Board of Appeals after final approval: 
11.5.6.1  for all one and two family residences and for residential "uses" outside the Central Parking Area: 
One Family $50.00 Two Family $50.00 1 unit (multifamily) to 30 units $25.00/unit from 31 to 100 units $30.00/unit from 101 to 200 units $25.00/unit over 200 units For first 200 units same as above plus $30.00 for each unit over 200.  
11.5.6.2  for non-residential "uses" outside the Central Parking Area and residential and non-residential "uses" in the Central Parking Area, excluding one and two family residences: for up to 30,000 sf of "gross floor area" a fee of $25/1,000 sf of "gross floor area;" from 30,001 sf to 100,000 sf of gross floor area a fee of $30.00/1,000 sf of gross floor area; from 100,001 to 200,000 sf "gross floor area" a fee of $25.00/1,000 sf of gross floor area; for over 200,000 sf the same as above for the first 200,000 sf of "gross floor area" and $30.00 for each additional 1,000 sf of "gross floor area." 
11.5.6.3  for amendments to special permit where no modification is being made to the "site plan," a fee of $250 for the application for an amendment to the approved special permit "use." 
11.5.7  Exceptions and modifications to fees: 
11.5.7.1  If a One or Two Family residence is located on an environmentally sensitive site, and the proposed "site plan" or special permit or approval or determination by the Board of Appeals, or amendment of a "site plan," special permit or approval or determination of the Board of Appeals affects any environmental features on the site or on any adjacent sites, then the fee for the initial application shall be $1,500 and the fee for an application to amend a "site plan," special permit, or action or determination of the Board of Appeals shall be $750. 
11.5.7.2  There shall be no fee for affordable units under the City's Affordable Housing Assistance Program or under any other local, State or Federal program approved by the Common Council. For projects with affordable units outside the CPA, the total unit count shall be reduced by the number of affordable units. For projects inside the Central Parking Area, the "gross floor area" shall be reduced by 1,000 square feet of "gross floor area" per affordable unit. 
11.5.7.3  For projects which demonstrate in their final construction drawings approved by the Commissioner of Building that the project meets LEED(c) design standards, as certified by a LEED(c) Certified Architect or Engineer, a credit of twenty percent (20%) of the initial application fee, up to a maximum of $3,000, shall be credited to the Building Permit Fee assessed by the Building Department for the review and issuance of permits for final construction plans. A credit of forty percent (40%) of the initial application fee, up to a maximum of $4,000, shall be credited to the Building Permit Fee assessed by the Building Department for the review and issuance of permits for the final construction plans where the plans are certified by a LEED(c) Certified Architect or Engineer to meet LEED(c) Silver standards; and a credit of fifty percent (50%) of the initial application fee, up to a maximum of $5,000, shall be credited to the Building Permit Fee assessed by the Building Department for the review and issuance of permits for the final construction plans where the plans are certified by a LEED(c) Certified Architect or Engineer to meet LEED(c) Gold or Platinum standards. This credit is to help defray the cost to the applicant of the LEED(c) review. 
11.5.7.4  Outside the Central Parking Area, if an application is made, after the approval of a special permit, "site plan," or action or determination of the Board of Appeals, which proposes to increase the number of dwelling units over the number of units in the approved special permit, "site plan," or action or determination of the Board of Appeals, then the fee for the additional units shall be at the rate for an initial application for a special permit, "site plan," or action or determination of the Board of Appeals. 
11.5.7.5  Outside the Central Parking Area, if an application is made after the approval of a "site plan," special permit, or variance which proposes to decrease the number of dwelling units from the number of units in the approved "site plan," special permit or action or determination of the Board of Appeals, then the fee for the application shall be based on the reduced number of units. 
11.5.7.6  For a non-residential project outside the Central Parking Area or a residential or non-residential project in the Central Parking Area: 
11.5.7.6.1  if an application is made after the approval of a special permit, "site plan," or variance to increase the "gross floor area" over the amount in the approved special permit, "site plan," or variance then the application fee for the additional "gross floor area" shall be at the same rate as required for the initial application. 
11.5.7.6.2  if an application is made after the approval of a special permit, "site plan," or variance to decrease the "gross floor area" from the amount in the approved special permit, "site plan," or variance, then the application fee for the reduced "gross floor area" shall be calculated based on the reduced "gross floor area" at the amendment rate. 
11.5.8  For applications to extend an approved "site plan," special permit or to extend an action by the Board of Appeals where it has a time limitation: 
11.5.8.1  for an application for a first time extension of an approval a fee of 50% of the fee that would be charged for an amendment to the approval, but no less than $50. 
11.5.8.2  for an application for an extension of an approval beyond the first extension the fee shall be the same as for an amendment to the approval. 
11.5.9  If any "site plan" or special permit application, amended application or extension application is subject to more than one approval, or if an application or appeal, amended application or appeal, or extension on an approved project before the Zoning Board is subject to more than one approval, such as a variance and "site plan" approval or special permit and "site plan" approval, only the largest fee shall apply. 
Section 12 - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 12.1 - General 
    The Common Council may from time to time on its own motion, on petition, or on recommendation of any board, agency or official of the City, after public notice and hearing, amend supplement, repeal or change the regulations and districts established under this Ordinance. 
Sec. 12.2 - Amendments on Petition 
12.2.1  Contents: A petition for any amendment of this Ordinance shall be made in 23 copies to the City Clerk and shall describe the proposed changes. For proposed amendments to the Zoning Map, a copy shall be included of the applicable portion of the Official Copy of the Zoning Map, as kept by the City Clerk, showing existing and proposed zoning, as well as a map drawn to an appropriate scale showing the "area affected" and the names of the owners of all "lots" within such area, as shown by the Tax Assessment Roll. For proposed amendments changing the district designation of properties over 25 acres, the petition shall be accompanied by an overall plan of development for such property. If a rendering is to be submitted, there shall also be submitted 12 8 1/2 -inch by 11-inch photographs of such rendering. 
12.2.2  Notice: The applicant shall be responsible for complying with the requirements as to notice in Section 12.7 below. 
Sec. 12.3 - Amendments on Motion 
12.3.1  Contents: To the extent feasible, an amendment on motion or an amendment proposed to the Common Council by any board, agency or official of the City shall contain the information required in Section 12.2.1 above. 
12.3.2  Notice: The City Clerk shall be responsible for complying with the requirements as to notice in Section 12.7 below. 
Sec. 12.4 - Initial Consideration 
    On the making of a motion, on receipt of a petition or on receipt of a recommendation of any board, agency or official of the City for a zoning amendment, the Common Council may decide not to formally consider such amendment. However, where petition is made by the owners of 50 percent or more of the "frontage" in any district or of the "frontage" of the several properties constituting a part thereof, as provided by Section 83 of the General City Law, such consideration is mandatory. 
Sec. 12.5 - Referrals for Review and Report 
    If any amendment is to be considered by the Common Council, it shall be referred for review and report to the Planning Board, the Corporation Counsel, and any other board, agency or official of the City which the Common Council deems appropriate. The Planning Board shall confer with any petitioner and assist such petitioner, where necessary, to place the amendment in the most appropriate form. Such conference and assistance shall not be deemed to constitute any commitment by the Planning Board as to its position on the advisability of the proposed amendment. After said conference, the petitioner shall be allowed to revise his petition and to provide copies of such revision to the Common Council and to any board, agency or official to which the original proposed amendment was referred. The Corporation Counsel shall report to the Common Council regarding the form of the proposed amendment. The Planning Board shall report to the Common Council regarding the form and the advisability of the proposed amendment. Its report shall analyze the proposed amendment and shall state the Board's reasons for its recommendation, describing any conditions it believes make the amendment advisable or not, and specifically stating whether the amendment would or would not be in accordance with the "Comprehensive Plan" and in furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance. All such boards, agencies and officials shall have 30 days from the date of forwarding, or from the date of revision by the petitioner, whichever is later, to submit reports. In no case shall this Section restrict the right of an applicant to come before the Planning Board for an informal discussion and review prior to formal submission. 
Sec. 12.6 - Public Hearing 
    On receipt of the requested reports and any revised proposed amendment from an applicant or notification by the applicant that no revision will be made, the Common Council may schedule and hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. 
Sec. 12.7 - Notice of Hearing 
    Notice of the public hearing shall be published [at least 3 days] in the official newspaper, [the first insertion to be] not less than 10 or more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. For proposed amendments to the Zoning Map, at least 1 week prior to the date of the hearing a notice of such hearing and a brief description of the proposed change shall be mailed to all owners of property (as shown by the tax assessment roll) within the "area affected." A copy of the notice, with proof of such mailing, together with proof of notice in the official newspaper, shall be filed in the City Clerk's office on or before the date of the public hearing. 
Sec. 12.8 - Referral to Westchester County Planning Board and Adjacent Municipalities 
    Not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing, the City Clerk shall forward copies of the proposed amendment with the notice of public hearing to the Westchester County Planning Board when such proposed development abuts a State or County highway, park, drainage channel or "building" site, and to the clerk of any abutting municipality where the property proposed for such development is located within 500 feet of such municipality, all in accordance with Sections 277.61 and 277.71 of the Westchester County Administrative Code. 
Sec. 12.9 - Action 
    A vote by the Common Council on a petition made by the owners of 50 percent or more of the "frontage" in any district shall be taken within 90 days of the filing of such petition with the City Clerk, as provided by Section 83 of the General City Law. 
Sec. 12.10 - Records 
    The City Clerk shall keep record copies of all Zoning Maps and text sections superseded by any amendment of this Ordinance. 
Section 13 - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 13.1 - Separability 
    Should any section, sub-section, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or phrase of this Ordinance be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect any other portion of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 13.2 - Short Title 
    This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as The Zoning Ordinance of the City of White Plains. 
Sec. 13.3 - Effective Date 
    This Ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
Sec. 13.4 - Effect on Building Permits and Building Permit Applications 
    Except as provided in this Section, nothing herein shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated "use" of a "building" or "structure" for which a building permit has been lawfully issued prior to or, under the circumstances noted below, within 60 days after the effective date of this Ordinance, provided that the proposed "use" complies with the "use" requirements of this Ordinance, and further provided that construction shall begin within 6 months of the date of such permit; the foundation or 15% of the construction valuation shall be completed within 1 year of the date of such permit; and the entire "building" or "structure" shall be completed within 2 years of the date of such permit. 
    In addition, if the Commissioner of Building determines that an application (with accompanying construction plans) for a building permit filed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance meets all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance in existence as of the date immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, has received all necessary conditional or final approvals by the Common Council or the Board of Appeals, and complies with the "use" requirements of this Ordinance, then the Commissioner of Building shall issue all necessary permits within a reasonable time, but not longer than 60 days from such date, provided the applicant has taken all steps deemed necessary by the Commissioner of Building to obtain such permit. 
    Any of the above periods may be increased up to 50% by the Commissioner of Building on a showing of good cause. 
    Notwithstanding the preceding, the Commissioner of Building may require any such plans, construction or "use" to be subject to the "site plan" approval procedures as set forth in Section 7 of this Ordinance and to be modified to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance to the extent that the "site plan" approving agency determines such compliance to be reasonable and practical. 
Sec. 13.5 - Repeal of Existing Ordinance 
    An Ordinance adopted by the Common Council of the City of White Plains on December 19, 1949, entitled: An Ordinance Establishing Zoning Regulations and Providing for the Administration and Enactment Thereof Pursuant to the Zoning Provisions of the General City Law, is hereby repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
APPENDIX A - AMENDMENTS TO JUNE 1 1981 ZONING ORDINANCE 
Change
No.Date of Adoption MAP TEXT DESCRIPTION 1. Sep 8, 1981 * White Plains Hotel Annex B-3 to B-4 2. Dec 9, 1981 * Holiday Inn - Text change to Special Provisions 3. Feb 3, 1982 * Holiday Inn - Text change to Special Provisions 4. Mar 1, 1982 * Holiday Inn - Text change to Special Provisions 5. Mar 15, 1982 * Rahmani Towers B-3 to RM-0.35 6. Jul 12, 1982 * Holiday Inn - Text change to Special Provisions 7. Aug 3, 1982 * Markey Property B-2 to LI 8. May 2, 1983 * Health Clubs defined and regulated 9. Aug 1, 1983 * Corrections & Technical Adjustments 10. Sep 6, 1983 * Visiting Nurse Service RM-0.35 to B-4 11. Oct 3, 1983 * Major and Minor Policy Changes 12. Feb 6, 1984 * Time Limits for Site Plan Approval 13. Aug 6, 1984 * Amortization of Non-Conforming Security Grilles 14. Sep 4, 1984 * Professional Persons to include Chiropractors 15. May 6, 1985 * UR-2 District - FAR from 8.0 to 5.0 16. Jun 3, 1985 * Battle Hill School R2-4 to RM-1.5 17. Oct 7, 1985 * Emergency Shelters and Overnight Shelters for the Homeless defined and regulated 18. Feb 3, 1986 * * R1-30 District established and mapped 19. Apr 7, 1986 * * BR-1, BR-2, BR-3, BR-4 Districts established and mapped; RM-0.7 District created; B-4 District deleted 20. Apr 7, 1986 * TVRO defined and regulated 21. Jul 7, 1986 * Family defined 22. Jul 7, 1986 * Site Plan requiring variances - review procedures amended 23. Sep 2, 1986 * Social Service Centers for Homeless Persons defined and regulated 24. Sep 15, 1986 * Outdoor Storage of Motor Vehicles (Rooftop Garages) 25. Sep 15, 1986 * Elba Enterprises RM-1.5 to B-3 26. Dec 1, 1986 * South Side of Maple Avenue RM-0.35 to RM-1 27. May 4, 1987 * Process for Swimming Pool Approval amended 28. May 4, 1987 * Philanthropic Institutions defined and regulation simplified 29. May 4, 1987 * Special Permit requiring variances - review procedure amended 30. May 4, 1987 * Special Permit procedure for Motor Vehicle Service Stations amended 31. May 4, 1987 * Special Permit procedure for TVRO's amended 32. Jul 5, 1988 * Real Estate Offices defined and permitted in B-1, B-2, B-3, BR-1, BR-2, BR-3, BR-4 and UR-2 Districts 33. Aug 24, 1988 * Cabaret allowed as Special Permit Use in BR-3 34. Sep 6, 1988 * Structures allowed in special setbacks in CPA upon approval by site plan approving agency 35. Oct 3, 1988 * Language added to clarify mandatory off-street parking requirements 36. Feb 6, 1989 * Removing restrictions in the CPA of the parking requirement for Senior Citizen Assisted Housing 37. Feb 15, 1989 * * New B-4 District created and mapped 38. Apr 3, 1989 * Parking lots and parking garages allowed as special permit uses in RM-1, RM-0.7, RM-04 and RM-0.35 Districts 39. Apr 3, 1989 * Parking in front yards allowed in certain residential zones in accordance with specified criteria 40. Jun 5, 1989 * Approval for significant projects to pass to Common Council from Planning Board 41. Aug 7, 1989 * Orawaupum Development Corp 2/63/9A & 10 R2-4 to RM-2.5 42. Dec 18, 1989 * Protection of Environmentally Sensitive Sites and Features 43. Feb 13, 1990 * Making Nursery Schools or Day Care Centers a Special Permit Use in R1-12.5 Districts 44. Apr 2, 1990 * Placing certain premises in the B-6 District; de-mapping a Special Building Setback 45. Apr 2, 1990 * Adopting certain provisions for the B-6 District outside the CPA; establishing discrete parking and loading requirements for the B-6 District 46. Sep 4, 1990 * Clarification of definition of Customary Home Occupation 47. Sep 4, 1990 * Codification of procedures for amendments to Site Plans in former "S" Districts 48. Sep 4, 1990 * Adoption of standards, criteria and procedures for consideration of requests for minor amendments of approved Site Plans 49. Nov 5, 1990 * Common Council designated approving agency for Special Permits for Golf & Country Clubs 50. May 6, 1991 * Nursery Schools and Day Care Centers allowed as Special Permit Use in RM-04 District 51. Jun 3, 1991 * Fees in §11 amended 52. Jun 17, 1991 * 5/6000/1A,1B,1E,1F, 1FA, 1AB; 5/27/1-16 from B-1 to B-6; 5/25/1-14 & 30-35 from B-1 to B-6. De-mapping of Special Building Setback line and radius requirements along southerly side of Westchester Avenue between Bloomingdale Road and Armory Place 53. Jun 17, 1991 * Deleting height requirement expressed in stories from B-6 District 54. Aug 14, 1991 * Fast Rood Eating Establishments permitted in BR-3 District 55. Sep 4, 1991 * Allowing Transitional Housing for Homeless Families as a Special Permit Use in the RM-0.35 and BR-3 Districts 56. Jan 6, 1992 * Language added to define and clarify Decks 57. Apr 6, 1992 * Language added regarding reimbursement of costs incurred verifying and/or correcting violations 58. Jul 6, 1992 * Language added providing procedures for consideration of requests for minor amendments of approved Conservation Developments 59. Jul 6, 1992 * Language added modifying off-street parking for certain uses in the CPA 60. Aug 3, 1992 * Changing TVRO's to Dish Antennas 61. Jan 4, 1993 * Language regarding dimensions and distribution of parking spaces 62. Mar 2, 1993 * Headquarters for Philanthropic Institutions deleted from Special Permit Uses allowed in the R1-12.5 District 63. Jun 7, 1993 * Headquarters for Philanthropic Institutions deleted from Special Permit Uses allowed in the R1-7.5, R1-5 and R2-4 Districts 64. Aug 2, 1993 * Independent, Unaffiliated Nursery Schools and Day Care Centers allowed in churches, etc., in all but the RM-2 and CO Districts 65. Oct 4, 1993 * Consumer Financial Services Establishments defined as a permitted principal use in the BR-3, BR-4, B-4, UR-2 and B-6 Districts 66. Dec 6, 1993 * Incidental Seating allowed in establishments which sell prepared foods, snacks and/or beverages for off-premises consumption 67. Jun 6, 1994 * Outdoor Storage of Motor Vehicles allowed in the B-2 District 68. Jun 6, 1994 * Planning Board designated approving agency where the minimum parking requirement is more than 10 spaces 69. Jun 6, 1994 * Flexibility given to approving agency with respect to standards for Motor Vehicle Service Stations and Repair Shops 70. Sep 12, 1994 * 5/17/5 & 6 from BR-1 to BR-3 71. Sep 12, 1994 * Definition of Cabaret amended; Café defined and added as a use 72. Sep 12, 1994 * * RM-1.5T District established and mapped 73. Sep 12, 1994 * Permitting procedures for Dish Antennas amended 74. Oct 3, 1994 * Allowing Electronic Games as a Permitted Accessory Use in all Districts 75. Oct 3, 1994 * 6/66/14D, E, & F from CO to R1-12.5 76. Oct 3, 1994 * Approval process for multiple concurrent applications streamlined 77. Dec 5, 1994 * Stacked Attendant Parking allowed in the CPA as a Special Permit Use 78. Apr 3, 1995 * "Area Affected" increased from 100 to 200 feet 79. May 1, 1995 * Fines for violations increased 80. Jul 3, 1995 * Common Council given ability to reclaim jurisdiction over certain Special Permit Uses 81. Oct 2, 1995 * Fine for first conviction of a violation increased 82. Feb 5, 1996 * Site Plan approvals and Parking requirements for Change of Use 83. Mar 4, 1996 * Section 10 replaced to reflect changes in State Law 84. Aug 5, 1996 * Amendments to fee-in-lieu provisions 85. Sep 9, 1996 * Offices for Group Education, Training or Counseling... established as use 86. Oct 9, 1996 * Section 4.4.17, Security Grilles, replaced in its entirety 87. Jan 6, 1997 * Amendments to fee-in-lieu provisions; §8.5.1.6 to apply to on- and off-street improvements 88. Jan 6, 1997 * §4.4.18.3 amended with regard to Camper Trailer storage 89. Apr 7, 1997 * Height of fences abutting major roads amended 90. May 5, 1997 * Site Plan approval for existing Uses 91. Jun 2, 1997 * Front Yard setback and Height in RM-0.35 amended 92. Jul 15, 1997 * Special Building Setback along South Broadway & Maple Avenue (Saks site) amended and de-mapped 93. Jul 15, 1997 * Parking and projections on Saks site 94. Oct 6, 1997 * CPA boundaries amended 95. Nov 3, 1997 * Auction Houses allowed in B-2 District within the CPA 96. Mar 2, 1998 * Parking and loading space requirements for existing structures and uses amended 97. Apr 3, 1998 * Retail Amusement Center created as a Special Permit Use in the B-6 District 98. Aug 3, 1998 * * Creation and mapping of UR-4 District 99. Jan 4, 1999 * Procedure added for designation of Alternate Members of Zoning Board of Appeals 100. May 3, 1999 * De-mapping Special Building Setback line and radius requirements across frontage of 145 Westchester Avenue 101. Jul 6, 1999 * Ancillary Hospital and Sanitarium Uses listed and regulated 102. Aug 2, 1999 * Retail Amusement Centers deleted from Special Permit Uses 103. May 11, 2000 * * Boundary of CPA moved to include SBL 125.67-03-01; 12-story Height limitation removed 104. Jun 5, 2000 * New § 5.4.1.5.1 added. Increased density in RM-0.35 District allowed when used for the purposes set forth in §5.4.1.5.1 105. Jun 5, 2000 * Language added concerning lots in two or more districts or municipalities 106. Sep 5, 2000 * FAR may be increased on lots greater than 1000,000 s.f. in the UR-2 District 107. Apr 2, 2001 * Modifications to BR-1 and BR-2 Districts 108. Sep 4, 2001 * * Deletion of certain Districts and creation of new Districts; Zoning Map changes in the Core Area (BR's to CB's) 109. Sep 6, 2001 * * Creation of R2-2.5 District; Certain dimensional changes and Zoning Map changes outside the Core Area 110. Sep 4, 2001 * Increased height allowed in the UR-4 District 111. Sep 20, 2001 * Dimensional standards in the RM-1 District modified (affordable units) 112. Feb 7, 2002 * Dimensional standards in Single-Family and R2-4 Districts modified 113. Sep 3, 2002 * Motor Vehicle Repair Shops allowed as a Special Permit Use in the B-6 District within the CPA under certain conditions 114. Jan 6, 2003 * Transfer of development rights 115. Sep 7, 2004 * Assisted Living Facility created as a principal permitted use in the O-R, CB-1, CB-2, CB-3 and CB-4 Districts. 116. Jan 3, 2005 * De-mapping Special Building Setback line and radius requirements at the southwest corner of Maple Avenue and DeKalb Avenue 117. Mar 7, 2005 * "Mini Storage Facility" established as a use in the LI District 118. Apr 4, 2005 * Height increase for 221 Main Street 119. Apr 3, 2006 * * Two-foot Special Building Setback line and radius established for certain parcels on Martine Ave., UR-4 removed from Section 5.5.3.1 building setbacks 120. July 5, 2006 * Exceptions to "height" limitations and screening of mechanical equipment 121. Aug 7, 2006 * Placing 230 Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Blvd. in the B-3 District 122. Oct 26, 2006 * In relation to change of district of Lots 8, 8A, 9 and 10, Block 9, Ward 4 (White Plains Plaza) (S Zone Amendment) 123. Feb 16, 2007 * Re-zoning certain properties in area of Miles Ave., Albemarle Rd. and Beverly Rd. from R1-5 to R1-7.5 124. Mar 5, 2007 * * Establishing new zoning district "Planned Senior Residential Development Zoning District" 125. June 4, 2007 * "Extended stay hotel" established as permitted principal "use" in CB-3, CB-4 and UR-4 Districts and as special permit "use" in C-O, B-3, CB-1 and CB-2 Districts; "restaurants," "cafeterias" established as principal permitted "use" in C-O District, "day care centers" and "nursery schools" established as special permit uses in C-O District 126. Dec 20, 2007 * Requiring Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan consistent with the requirements of Chapter 3-6 of the Municipal Code of the City of White Plains. 127. June 2, 2008 * In relation to adjustments to approved "site plans" and "site plan" amendments involving additional "stories" or "mezzanine" levels. 128. Dec 1, 2008 * "Business or Professional Offices of a 'Professional Person'" in BR-1 and BR-2 Zoning Districts 129. 130. May 4, 2009 * Fees charged for applications made pursuant to sections 6, 7, 9.5, 10.3.5, 10.3.6 and 10.3.7 of the Ordinance 131. July 6, 2009 * (1) Re-zone portion of Winbrook property fronting on S. Lexington and (2) extend Central Parking Area line to include Winbrook property and certain properties located on westerly side of S. Lexington Ave. from Fisher Ave. to Denison St. 132. Aug 3, 2009 * Large signs in non-residential districts 133. Oct 5, 2009 * PSRDD and Automated Parking 134. Dec 6, 2010 * Environmentally sensitive sites - 100 ft. wetland buffer 135. January 3, 2012 * Establishing Health Clubs as a Special Permit use in the B-6 "Enclosed Mall" Zoning District 136. August 6, 2012 * Campus Office: expand permitted uses, create "Planned Campus Development" overlay district, revise and establish dimensional standards 137. January 7, 2013 * Merging Parking and Traffic Departments 138. August 5, 2013 * Definitions of "Day Care Centers" and "Nursery Schools" 139. October 7, 2013 * Remap Parcels at 71 E. Post Rd and 211 S. Lexington changed from the B-3 to O-R District 140. November 4, 2013 * "Nursery Schools" and "Day Care Centers" made Special Permit uses in the R2-4 District if on County or State roads 141. January 6, 2014 * Sections 4.4.21 and 9.5.3 amended in relation to installation of solar energy systems for one or two family structures 142. May 5, 2014 * Discontinuance of an Unimproved Portion of Middle Road between 181 and 189 Hillair Circle 143. July 7, 2014 * Section 6.7.8 - public notice mailing requirements for special permits for outdoor dining 144. December 1, 2014 * BR-1 amendment to add uses 145. March 2, 2015 * Parking requirements reduced outside CPA, for retail with =150,000sf gross floor area 146. May 4, 2015 * Special permit uses for Cabarets in non-residential districts. The definition of "Cabaret" was revised and "Primary Cabaret" and "Accessory Cabaret" definitions added. 147. May 4, 2015 * Section 12.7 Publication of Notice of Public Hearing for at least three (3) days in the official newspaper. 148. August 3, 2015 * * Addition of LI-M Zone to Zoning Ordinance and Map 149. August 1, 2016 * Adding "nursery business" as aspecial permit use and adding "organic manufacturing" as a principally permitted use. 150. December 5, 2016 * Amending various sections of the Zoning Ordinance regarding the creation of a new use entitled,"Accessory Food Laboratory. 151. January 3, 2017 * Adding "nursery business" as aspecial permit use and adding "organic manufacturing" as a principally permitted use. 152. April 3, 2017 * Amends section 5.3 regarding schedule of dimensional regulations, nonresidential table to amend two existing footnotes. 153. September 5, 2017 * Regarding schedule of dimensional regulations, nonresidential table to amend two existing footnotes. 154. March 5, 2018 * * Creates a new light industrial mixed use 2 (LI-M2) zoning district, re-zoning certain properties in the light industrial district, and amending the offical zoning map to remove the 10 foot special building setback on haarlem a venue and 5 foot special building setback on Holland Avenue. 155. April 2, 2018 * * Creates a new light industrial mixed use 2 (LI-M2) zoning district, re-zoning certain properties in the light industrial district, and amending the offical zoning map to remove the 10 foot special building setback on haarlem a venue and 5 foot special building setback on Holland Avenue. 156. May 7, 2018 * * Creates a new light industrial mixed use 2 (LI-M2) zoning district, re-zoning certain properties in the light industrial district, and amending the offical zoning map to remove the 10 foot special building setback on haarlem a venue and 5 foot special building setback on Holland Avenue. 157. July 2, 2018 * * Creates a new zoning district known as Transit Development District (TD-1) and rezoning a property in the Neighborhood Business (B-2) Zoning District to Transit Development-I (TD-1) Zoning District.  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the City used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Adoption 
Date Section  Section 
this Code  2- 1-16 1 5.3  8- 1-16 1A 2.4 1B       Added 4.3.1.3, 4.3.1.4 1C 5.1 1D 5.2 1E       Added 6.2.2.10 1F       Added 6.5.5 1G       Added 6.7.33 1H 8.3 1I 10.3.4 12- 5-16 1 2.4 2       Added 6.2.1.37 3       Added 6.7.32 4 5.1 5 5.2 6 8.3  1- 3-17 1A 2.4 1B       Added 4.3.1.3, 4.3.1.4 1C 5.1 1D 5.2 1E       Added 6.2.2.10 1F       Added 6.5.5 1G       Added 6.7.33 1H 8.3 1I 10.3.4  4- 3-17 1, 2 5.3  9- 5-17 1, 2 5.3  3- 5-18 1A 3.1 1B 3.2 1C       Added 4.4.15.10 1D 5.1 1E 5.2 1F 5.3 1G 5.5.1.12       Added 5.5.1.13  4- 2-18 1A 3.1 1B 3.2 1C       Added 4.4.15.10 1D 5.1 1E 5.2 1F 5.3 1G 5.5.1.12       Added 5.5.1.13 1H 8.3  5- 7-18 1A 3.1 1B 3.2 1C       Added 4.4.15.10 1D 5.1 1E 5.2 1F 5.3 1G 5.5.1.12       Added 5.5.1.13 1H 8.3  7- 2-18 1A 2.4 1B 3.1 1C 3.2 1D 5.1 1E 5.2 1F 5.3 1G 5.4.1.5.1 1H 5.4.3 1I       Added 5.5.1.14 5.5.2 1J       Added 5.10 1K 8.3 

SUPPLEMENTAL UNIFORM BUILDING AND FIRE CODES CITY OF WHITE PLAINS, NEW YORK 
 
____________ 
Adopted as the Official Supplement to the New York State Building Code 
____________ 
Adopted: August 2, 2005 
Updated: May 30, 2018 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a publication of the Supplemental Building and Fire Codes of the city of White Plains, NY. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2005 Code, as supplemented through 2009, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2005 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The zoning ordinance has been printed as submitted by the City and the original numbering system has been retained. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Words or phrases added by the editor for purposes of clarification are enclosed in brackets. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
BUILDING CODE—ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 	BCAE:1 
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION CODE 	GCC:1 
MECHANICAL CODE 	MC:1 
ELECTRICAL CODE 	EC:1 
FIRE CODE 	FC:1 
SMOKE CONTROL CODE 	SCC:1 
PLUMBING CODE 	PC:1 
VERTICAL TRANSPORTATION CODE 	VTC:1 
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 	PMC:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Tassy Spinks, Director of Supplementation, and Lauren Coulter, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Anne M. McPherson for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Zoning Code which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of White Plains, NY. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of White Plains, NY. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of White Plains, NY. 2016. 
INTRODUCTION 
  
This document contains Supplemental Provisions to the following New York State Codes (Latest Version): 
  
The Building Code of New York State. 
The Residential Code of New York State. 
The Fire Code and Property Maintenance Code of New York State. 
The Mechanical Code of New York State. 
The Energy Conservation Code of New York State. 
The Plumbing, Mechanical, and Fuel Gas Codes of New York State. 
  
The White Plains Supplemental Code is specific to White Plains and shall be applied in addition to and in conjunction with the above-stated Codes. 
Whenever there is a conflict between The White Plains Code and The State of New York Codes, the more restrictive provisions shall prevail.  
Chapter 1 - WHITE PLAINS BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
The White Plains Supplemental Building Code promulgated pursuant to Section 238-t of the White Plains City Charter, as amended, when combined with the New York State Building, Fire, Mechanical, Property Maintenance, Plumbing, Energy, Fuel Gas, Existing Building Code and Residential Codes, shall be known and may be cited as the "The White Plains Supplemental Building Code", and is hereinafter referred to as "this Code" or "the Code". 
The White Plains Supplemental Building Code is comprised of a series of individual codes. These codes include The White Plains Building Code—Administration and Enforcement, The White Plains General Construction Code, The White Plains Mechanical Code, The White Plains Electrical Code, The White Plains Fire Code, The White Plains Smoke Control Code, The White Plains Plumbing Code, The White Plains Vertical Transportation Code and The White Plains Property Maintenance Code. 
a.  Matters Covered. 
(1)  Building Matters Covered. The provisions of this Code shall cover all matters affecting or relating to buildings and shall extend to excavation and fill operations and to all types of buildings and structures and their appurtenant constructions, including vaults, signs, projections, and accessory additions, together with all surface and subsurface construction within the curb line, including driveways, the coverings thereof and entrances thereto, except as provided in BCAE Subsection a(2). 
(2)  Exemptions. No building or structure shall be constructed, extended, repaired, removed or altered in violation of these provisions, except for 
i)  ordinary repairs as defined in the New York State Existing Building Code. 
ii)  the raising or lowering or moving of a building or structure as a unit necessitated by a change in legal grade or widening of a street shall be permitted, provided the building is not otherwise altered or its use or occupancy changed. 
iii)  factory manufactured homes intended for use as one- or two-family dwelling units or multiple dwellings of not more than two stories in height. 
(3)  Matters Not Provided For. Any matter or requirement essential for the fire or structural safety of a new or existing building or for the safety or health of the occupants or users thereof or the public, and which is not specifically covered by the provisions of this Code or other applicable laws or regulations, shall be the subject of determination by the Commissioner in specific cases. 
(4)  Zoning Restrictions. When the provisions herein specified for structural, fire and sanitary safety are more restrictive than the zoning ordinance, this Code shall control the erection or alteration of buildings in respect to location, use, permissible area and height; but in any case, the most rigid requirements of either the building code or the zoning ordinance of the city shall apply whenever they may be in conflict. 
(5)  New Work. No general excavations, filling or grading shall be performed nor shall any wall, structure or building hereafter be constructed, altered, repaired, or removed, except in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
b.  Installation of Service Equipment. 
(1)  Approval Required. No mechanical equipment, including elevators, escalators, dumbwaiters, heating equipment, refrigerating equipment, ventilating or air conditioning equipment, plumbing, fire protection, electrical equipment/wiring, or any other service equipment, device or appliance shall be installed, replaced or otherwise remodeled except in conformity with the provisions of this Code or the State of New York Codes, or other ordinance or rule or regulation authorized by law. It shall be unlawful to use such equipment until accepted and authorized for such use by the Commissioner. 
c.  Maintenance. 
(1)  General Maintenance. All buildings and structures and all parts thereof, both existing and new, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All service equipment, means of egress, devices and safeguards which are required by this Code or The New York State Codes in a building, or which were required by a previous statute in a building when erected, altered or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. 
(2)  Service Equipment. Any service equipment, device or appliance that may be or shall at any time become unsafe or dangerous shall be made safe and secure, taken down, or replaced in conformity with the provisions of this Code, or other ordinance, rule or regulation authorized by law, or shall be removed. 
(3)  Owner Responsibility. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the safe and sanitary maintenance of the building or structure and its exit facilities at all times. 
d.  Continuation and Change in Existing Use. 
(1)  Continuation of Existing Use. The legal use and occupancy of any structure existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or for which it had been heretofore approved, may be continued without change, except as may be specifically covered in this Code or may be deemed necessary by the Commissioner for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(2)  Change in Use. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the use or occupancy of any structure or premises which would subject it to any special provision of this Code without approval of the Commissioner and certification that such structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new use and occupancy and that such change does not result in any greater hazard to public safety or welfare. 
(3)  Continuation of Unlawful Use. The continuation of occupancy or use of a building or structure, or of a part thereof, contrary to the provisions of this Code, shall be deemed a violation and subject to the penalties prescribed in BCAE Subsection aa. 
e.  Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcing Authority. The provisions of this Code or other ordinance or rules or regulations legally authorized thereunder shall be enforced by the Commissioner of Building or the Commissioner of Building's duly authorized representative. For such purposes enforcing authority shall be vested with the powers of a police officer. 
(2)  Relief From Personal Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code while acting for the city, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed in the lawful discharge of the officer or employee's duties and under the provisions of this Code shall be defended by the City of White Plains or its representative until the final termination of the proceedings. In no case shall the Commissioner or any of the Commissioner's subordinates be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this Code and any officer of the Department of Building, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of the official duties in connection therewith. 
(3)  Official Records. An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of this Code, and all such records shall be open to public inspection at all appropriate times. 
(4)  Copying Records. Plans, specifications and such other data filed with the Commissioner, for the purpose of obtaining a permit, may be examined in the office of the Commissioner, but may not be removed therefrom, nor copied, except as provided in BCAE Subsection e(5); except by a duly executed subpoena, or by the consent of the Commissioner of Building for the use of a department of the City of White Plains. 
(5)  Reproduction of Plans. The owner or lessee of a building or structure for which plans are on file in the Department of Building or such individual as may be authorized in writing by said owner or lessee, may obtain copies of such plans upon written signed request to the Commissioner and upon the advance payment of the prescribed fee. 
f.  Duties and Powers of Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall enforce or cause to be enforced all the provisions of this Code and shall act on any question relative to the mode or manner of construction and the materials to be used in the erection, addition to, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, installation of service equipment, and the location, use, occupancy, and maintenance of all buildings, structures, and premises, except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by statutory requirements or as herein provided. 
(1)  Applications and Permits. The Commissioner shall receive applications and issue permits for the erection and alteration of buildings and structures, and examine the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(2)  Building Notices and Orders. The Commissioner shall issue all necessary notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to require the necessary safeguards during construction, to require adequate exit facilities in existing buildings and structures, and to insure compliance with all the Code requirements for the safety, health and general welfare of the public. 
(3)  Inspections. The Commissioner shall make all the required inspections, or may accept reports of inspection of authoritative and recognized services or individuals, and all reports of such inspections shall be in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such authoritative service or by the responsible individual; or the Commissioner may engage such expert opinion as may be deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that may arise, subject to the approval of the Common Council. 
(4)  Research and Investigation. The Commissioner shall make or cause to be made investigations of new developments in the building industry, subject to local climatic or other conditions, and shall accredit tests meeting the functional requirements of this Code conducted by accredited authoritative agencies, or duly authenticated reports may be accepted from the International Code Council (ICC), International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO), or from other recognized authoritative sources of all new materials and methods of construction proposed for use which are not specifically provided for in this Code. The costs of all tests or other investigations required under these provisions shall be paid by the applicant. 
(5)  New Rules. The Commissioner shall promulgate rules under the procedure provided in BCAE Subsection g(1) establishing the conditions for use of new materials consistent with the provisions of this Code and with minimum requirements based on accepted engineering practice. 
(6)  Department Records. The Commissioner shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. File copies of all papers (or electronic files) in connection with building operations shall be retained in the official records so long as the building or structure to which they relate remains in existence. 
(7)  Annual Report. At least annually, he shall submit to the Mayor and Common Council of the city a written statement of all permits and certificates issued. 
(8)  Forms. The Commissioner may prescribe such forms for compliance with this Code as may be necessary. 
g.  Rules and Regulations. 
(1)  Rule Making Authority. The Commissioner of Building shall have power as may be necessary in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare, to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations, to interpret and implement the provisions of this Code to secure the intent thereof and to designate the requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions; but no such rules shall have the effect of waiving working stresses or fire-resistive requirements specifically provided in this Code or of violating accepted engineering practice involving public safety. 
(2)  Accepted Engineering Practice. In the absence of approved rules; the regulations, specifications and standards listed in the referenced standards section of the New York State Codes shall be deemed to represent accepted engineering practice in respect to the material, equipment, system or method of construction therein specified. 
(3)  Rules. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Common Council by the Commissioner. Failure of the Common Council to approve, reject or modify such rules and regulations within 45 days after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval thereof. Said rules and regulations, as approved by the Common Council, shall be on file in the Department of Building and available as a matter of public record. 
(4)  Amendment of Rules. All rules adopted by the procedure herein established shall have the same effect as provisions of this Code; but such rules may be amended or repealed at any time by the same procedure herein prescribed for their adoption. 
h.  Variations or Modifications of the Code. 
(1)  Variations. The requirements and standards prescribed in this Code shall be subject to variation in specific cases by the Building Code Appeals Committee pursuant to the provisions of BCAE Subsection h(2) when there are demonstrated practical difficulties or hardships involved in carrying out any provisions of the Code or an approved rule, provided that the spirit and intent of the law shall be observed and public welfare and safety assured. 
(2)  Applications for Variations. The application for a variance shall be in writing and shall be officially recorded with the Appeals Committee resolutions and the application for permit in the permanent records of the Building Department. 
i.  Equivalent Facilitation. Nothing in this Code is intended to prevent the use of designs or technologies as alternatives to those prescribed in this Code provided they result in substantially equivalent or greater construction, performance etc. The applicant shall provide all technical information requested by the Commissioner so the equivalent facilitations can be evaluated. The Commissioner reserves the right to approve or disapprove any submission at his/her discretion. 
j.  Inspection. 
(1)  General Inspections. Before issuing a permit, the Commissioner shall examine or cause to be examined as deemed necessary all buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed for a permit to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, demolish or change the use thereof; and shall conduct such inspections from time to time during and upon completion of the work for which a permit has been issued; and shall maintain a record of all such examinations and inspections and of all violations of this Code. 
(2)  Mandatory Inspections. The following minimum quantity of inspections shall be made in all buildings: 
(i)  Foundation Inspection. To be made after footing trenches are excavated and the necessary forms erected. 
(ii)  Mechanical, Plumbing, Fire Protection and Electrical Inspection. To be made after all pipes, ducts, and wiring are in place. 
(iii)  Frame and Masonry Inspection. To be made after all framing, masonry walls, electrical, mechanical, firestopping and bracing is in place. 
(iv)  Insulation Inspection. To be made after all required insulation is in place. 
(v)  Final Inspection. To be made after structure is complete. 
(3)  Other Structures. In addition to the inspection requirements of BCAE Subsection j(2), in structures requiring continuous inspection due to the construction advancing in successive stages, the reinforcing steel and/or structural steel of any part of any wall, building or structure shall not be covered or concealed in any manner without first being inspected and accepted by the Commissioner or the Commissioner's representative. 
(4)  All Structures. No mechanical, plumbing or electrical installation shall be covered or concealed in any manner whatsoever without first being inspected and accepted by the enforcing authority. 
(5)  Request for Inspections. It shall be unlawful to proceed with work on any part of any wall, building or structure beyond the point indicated in this section, or to otherwise cover any wall or ceiling of any building or structure until the Commissioner has been notified and approval given to do so. The Commissioner shall act upon all requests for inspections as soon as practicable, and generally within 48 hours. 
(6)  Contractor to Be Present. The contractor responsible for the work to be inspected, or a responsible representative of the contractor, shall be present at each mandatory inspection. 
(7)  Accredited Inspection Services. The Commissioner may accept reports of building department inspectors or of approved inspection services or individuals which satisfy all requirements as to qualifications and reliability. 
(8)  Plant Inspection. When required by the provisions of this Code or by the approved rules, materials or assemblies shall be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication. 
(9)  Inspection Reports. All inspection reports shall be in writing and shall be certified by the licensed authority, or responsible officer of the service, or the individual when expert inspection services are accepted. A label or mark of approval permanently fixed to the product indicating that factory inspection has been made shall be accepted in lieu of the foresaid report in writing. 
(10)  Final Inspection. Upon completion of the building, structure or facility, and before issuance of the Certificate of Use and Occupancy, a final inspection shall be made and violations of the approved plans and permit shall be noted and the holder of the permit shall be notified of the discrepancies. The holder of the permit shall be responsible to request such final inspection. 
k.  Right of Entry. In the discharge of his duties, the Commissioner or his authorized representative shall have the authority to enter at any reasonable hours (typically 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.), any buildings, structure or premises in the municipality to enforce the provision of this Code. 
(1)  Official Badge. The Commissioner may adopt a badge or identification card of office for use by the Commissioner and the Commissioner's representatives which shall be displayed for the purpose of identification. 
(2)  Municipal Cooperation. The assistance and cooperation of the police, fire, and health departments and all other municipal officials shall be available to the Commissioner as required in the performance of said duties. 
l.  Application for Permit. 
(1)  Permit Required. No excavation, construction, addition, repair, alteration, removal or demolition shall be commenced; nor shall any topsoil, earth, gravel, or any other substance be removed from or added to the premises; nor shall the location, occupancy, use or maintenance of any wall, building or structure be changed; nor shall any engine or generator be installed, nor any steam/hot water boiler, furnace, heater, incinerator, or other heat producing apparatus be installed; nor shall any installation, repairs or alterations be made to any plumbing, gas piping, electric wiring [1], elevators, refrigeration, air conditioning, ductwork, or fire-suppression equipment, the installation of which is regulated by this Code until a permit for the same shall have been applied for and obtained from the Commissioner; except that ordinary repairs as defined in the New York State Code (which do not involve any violation of this Code) shall be exempt from this provision. 
(2)  Forms of Application. The application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the Commissioner may prescribe and shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(3)  By Whom Application is Made. 
(i)  General Case. Application for a permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of the building or structure, or agent of either, or by the licensed engineer or architect employed in connection with the proposed work. If the application is made by a person other than the owner "in fee," it shall be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner or the qualified person making the application that the proposed work is authorized by the owner "in fee" and that the applicant is authorized to make such application. The full names and addresses of the owner, lessee, applicant, and of the responsible officers, if the owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application. 
(ii)  Utility Service. Separate applications shall be filed and separate permits obtained for underground structures, to be installed for public utility service, between the building line, as defined in the zoning ordinance, and the property line. Such application shall contain an agreement by the applicant (which shall be a public utility company) to raise or lower the structure and to support any curbing, paving, sidewalk or driveway at no expense to the city, if the city shall require such changes for public improvements. 
(iii)  Service Equipment. Separate applications shall be made and separate permits shall be obtained for all service equipment installation as required by this Code. 
(4)  Description of Work. The application shall contain a general description of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all parts of the building or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not covered by the building, and such additional information as may be required by the Commissioner. 
(5)  Plans and Specifications. The application for the permit shall be accompanied by not less than: 
Three copies (for one- and two-family residential projects) 
or 
two copies (for multifamily and commercial projects) 
of plans drawn to scale, with sufficient clarity and detail dimensions to show the nature and character of the work to be performed. When quality of materials is essential for conformity to this Code, specific information shall be given to establish such quality; and in no case shall the Code be cited or the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. The Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing plans when the work involved is of a minor nature. 
(i)  Arrangement of Exitways. The plans shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all exitways together with the arrangement of aisles, corridors, passageways and hallways leading thereto in compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
(ii)  Number of Occupants. In other than one- and two-family dwellings, the plans and the application for permit shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces when required by the building official. When not otherwise specified, the minimum number of occupants to be accommodated by the exitways shall be determined as outlined in Section 1004 of The New York State Building Code. The posted occupancy load of the building shall be limited to that number. 
(6)  Plot Diagram. There shall be filed also a plot plan showing to scale the size and location of all the new construction, drives and parking areas, and all existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines and the established street grades and utilities; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the plot plans shall show all construction to be demolished and the location and size of all existing buildings and construction that are to remain on the site or plot and the location of discontinued services. 
(7)  Engineering Details. The Commissioner may require adequate details of structural, mechanical and electrical work including computations, stress diagrams and other essential technical data to be filed. All engineering plans and computations shall bear the signature of the engineer or architect responsible for the design and shall be accompanied by an affidavit signed by the architect or engineer who prepared the plans, certifying that they comply with the requirements of this Code and that the architect or engineer is authorized by the owner to make the application, and shall state clearly whether or not the construction is to be supervised by the architect or engineer. 
(8)  Amendments to Application. Subject to the limitations of BCAE subection l(9) and upon approval of the Building Commissioner, amendments to a plan, application or other records accompanying the same may be filed at any time before completion of the work for which the permit is sought or issued; and such amendments shall be deemed part of the original application and shall be filed therewith. 
When filing amendment document(s), the revision(s) shall be clouded, numbered and dated. In addition the applicant shall provide an estimated cost of construction for the proposed amendments. Additional permit application fee may be required in addition to the amendment submission fee. Refer to BCAE Subsection r. 
(9)  Time Limitation of Application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after date of filing, unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued, except that for reasonable cause, the Commissioner may grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. 
m.  Permits. 
(1)  Action on Application. The Building Commissioner shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. When an application is for a structure to be located between the building line and the street property line, the Commissioner shall consult with the Commissioner of Public Works before issuing the permit. If the application or plans do not conform to the requirements of all pertinent laws, the Commissioner shall reject such application in writing stating the reason therefor. If the Commissioner is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this Code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, a permit shall be issued therefore as soon as practicable. 
(2)  Suspension of Permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of commencing; provided, that for cause, one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 90 days each, may be allowed in writing by the Commissioner. 
(3)  Previous Permits. Nothing in this Code shall require changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a lawful permit has been theretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized and the construction of which shall have been actively prosecuted within 90 days after the effective date of this ordinance, unless so stated. 
(4)  Signature to Permit. The Commissioner's signature shall be attached to every permit; or a subordinate may be authorized to affix such signature thereto. 
(5)  Reviewed Plans. The Commissioner shall stamp or endorse in writing all sets of reviewed plans, and one set of such plans shall be retained by the Commissioner and one set shall be kept at the building site, open to inspection of the building official or the building official's authorized representative at all reasonable times. 
(6)  Revocation of Permits. The Commissioner may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this Code in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(7)  Authorization in Part. The Commissioner may issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building have been submitted, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all the pertinent requirements of this Code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other part of a building or structure shall proceed at the permit holders own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted. 
(8)  Posting of Permit and Site Plans. A true copy of the building permit shall be kept on the site of operations open to public inspection (it shall be posted where feasible) during the entire time of prosecution of the work and until the completion of the same. Where separate permits are required for mechanical, plumbing, or electrical work, true copies of such permits shall also be kept on the site of operations open to public inspection until final authorization is obtained. 
(9)  Notice of Start. At least twenty-four (24) hours notice of start of work under a building permit shall be given to the Commissioner. 
n.  Conditions of Permit. 
(1)  Payment of Fees. No permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed in BCAE Subsection r. have been paid. 
(2)  Compliance with Code. The permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this Code, except as specifically stipulated by a legally granted variation recorded with the application. The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the Commissioner from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this Code. 
(3)  Compliance with Permit. All work shall conform to the approved application and plans for which the permit has been issued and any approved amendment thereto. 
(4)  Compliance with Plot Plan. All new work shall be strictly in accordance with the approved plot plan and site plan. 
(5)  Change in Plot Plan. No lot or plot shall be changed, increased or diminished in area from that shown on the official plot plan, unless a revised diagram showing such changes accompanied by the necessary affidavit of owner or applicant shall have been filed and approved; except that such revised plot plan will not be required if the change is caused by reason of an official street opening, street widening or other public improvement. 
(6)  Abandoning Work. Work started under the provisions of this Code shall be completed with reasonable expedience. Should such work be stopped or abandoned the completed portion shall be left in a clean, safe and secure condition. In the event the person or persons, firm, corporation or partnership responsible for such stoppage or abandonment shall fail to comply with this requirement, the administering authority shall proceed, after legal notice, to employ such labor and materials necessary to put the work in a safe condition. The cost of such labor and materials shall become a lien on the premises, and shall be collected as provided by law. 
(7)  Foundation and Final Surveys. Prior to construction of super-structure, an as-built survey, showing the completed foundation and all building setbacks, shall be submitted to the Department of Building. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a survey showing the completed structure and all building setbacks shall be submitted to the Department of Buildings. 
o.  Demolition of Buildings. 
(1)  Service Connections. Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to demolish or remove a building shall not be issued until a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. 
p.  Removal of Buildings. 
(1)  Notice to Adjoining Owners. Only when written notice has been given by the applicant to the owners of adjoining lots and to the owners of wired or other facilities, of which the temporary removal may be necessitated by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the removal of a building or structure. 
(2)  Lot Regulation. Whenever a building is demolished or removed, the premises shall be maintained free from all unsafe or hazardous conditions by the proper regulation of the lot, restoration of established grades and the erection of the necessary retaining walls and fences in accordance with the provisions of Section the White Plains General Construction Code. 
q.  Project Completion and Clearance. Upon completion of a project the following information is required for proper clearance of the work: 
(1)  All inspections shall be made and the field inspection form signed and submitted. A field inspection form shall be submitted for each respective trade. Inspectors initials shall be provided for the "rough", "final" and any other inspections made for each associated trade. 
(2)  An Affidavit of Cost shall be submitted (if required). 
(3)  Builders Affidavit for Final Inspection shall be submitted (if required). 
(4)  Architects/Engineers Affidavit for final inspection. 
(5)  All documents including the original application, affidavits, insurance forms, permitted set of drawings, etc., shall be scanned and submitted to the Building Department in pdf format. 
Until the above items are completed and submitted a Temporary Certificate of Compliance, Letter of Compliance, Temporary Certificate of Occupancy or a Certificate of Occupancy will not be issued. 
r.  Fees. Any person desiring a building permit shall at the time of filing an application therefor, as provided in BCAE Subsection l. pay to the Commissioner a fee as required in this section. In all cases fees for permits shall be paid for by the applicant. Twenty percent of the total fee shall accompany the application for an approval of plans or other description or indication of construction work; the remainder of the fee shall be paid before the construction permit may be issued. 
Fees shall be prescribed as follows: 
(1)  Special Fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition and for all work done in connection with or concurrently with the work contemplated by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that may be prescribed by law or ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical permits, plumbing permits, erection of signs and display structures, or other appurtenant structures, or fees for inspections, Certificates of Use and Occupancy or other privileges or requirements, both within and without the jurisdiction of the Department of Building. 
(2)  Fees: 
(i)  One- and Two-Family Dwellings—New Construction and Additions. (Volume Added) The prescribed fees for permits for new buildings and additions increasing the volume of existing one- and two-family buildings shall be basically as follows, depending on the cubic feet of volume (computation per section xxiii) of the proposed structure: 
(I)  One hundred ten dollars for any building volume up to and including the first 5,000 cubic feet. 
(II)  Ten dollars additional per 1,000 cubic feet or fraction thereof, for any building volume in excess of 5,000 cubic feet. 
Note: For new dwellings a minimum fee of $750.00 shall apply. 
(ii)  One- and Two-Family Dwellings—Alterations (No Volume Added); Demolition; Mechanical Installations; Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning; and Fire Suppression Systems. The prescribed fees shall be based upon the estimated cost of construction certified to by the applicant as follows: 
(I)  One hundred dollars for up to and including the first $1,000.00 of construction cost. 
(II)  Ten dollars additional for each $1,000.00 or any part thereof. 
(iii)  One- and Two-Family Dwellings—Plumbing Systems. The prescribed fees for plumbing systems shall be based upon the estimated cost of construction certified to by the applicant as follows: 
(I)  Fifty dollars for up to and including the first $1,000.00 of construction cost. 
(II)  Thirty dollars additional for each $1,000.00 or any part thereof. 
(iv)  One- and Two-Family Dwellings—Electrical Permits. The filing fee for permits for installation of any wiring system or electrical equipment, or for any alteration or addition to any such existing installations, shall be: 
(I)  Reserved. 
(II)  Eighty-five dollars for up to and including the first $1,000.00 of construction cost. 
(III)  Ten dollars for each $1,000.00 of construction cost or part thereof. 
(v)  All Buildings (Other Than One- and Two-Family Dwellings)—Demolition; New Construction; Additions; Alterations; Paving; Scaffolding; Mechanical Installations; Electrical Installations, Heating, Ventilating; Air Conditioning; and Fire Suppression Systems. The prescribed fees shall be based upon the estimated cost of construction certified to by the applicant as follows: 
(I)  One hundred dollars for up to and including the first $1,000.00 of construction cost. 
(II)  Fifteen dollars additional for each $1,000.00 or any part thereof. 
(vi)  All Buildings (Other Than One- and Two-Family Dwellings)—Plumbing Systems. The prescribed fees for plumbing systems shall be based upon the estimated cost of construction certified to by the applicant as follows: 
(I)  Seventy-five dollars for up to and including the first $1,000.00 of construction cost. 
(II)  Thirty dollars additional for each $1,000.00 or any part thereof. 
(vii)  Reserved. 
(viii)  Boiler Certificates. The prescribed fee for boiler certificates shall be as follows: 
(I)  External inspection filing and certificate processing—$50.00 per boiler, per location. 
Multiple boilers connected to a common header or separate systems owned or leased by the same party and located in the same building with a combined input of 300,000 BTU/hour or less—$30.00 per location and $100.00 inspection fee. 
(II)  Internal inspection filing and certification—$75.00 per boiler. 
** Boiler inspection fees not paid within 30 days shall be increased by one-half (½) of the original amount. 
(ix)  Vertical Transportation Inspection. 
The annual inspection fee for vertical transportation and related equipment shall be the following: 
(I)  (a)  Traction and drum elevators, hydraulic elevators and escalators: $275.00. 
(b)  Dumbwaiters, conveyors, sidewalk elevators and casket lifts: $65.00. 
(c)  Auto lifts and miscellaneous hoisting equipment: $45.00. 
The five-year inspection fee for vertical transportation and related equipment shall be the following: 
(II)  (a)  Traction and drum elevators, hydraulic elevators and escalators: $350.00. 
[III]  The annual elevator inspection fee shall be due and payable as of the first of July in each calendar year and paid within 30 days. 
** Vertical transportation inspection fees not paid within 30 days shall be increased by one-half (½) of the original amount. 
(x)  Type I (Grease) Hood/ Duct Cleaning Certificates. The prescribed fee for Type 1 (grease) hood/ duct cleaning certificates shall be $50.00 per year, per system. 
** Hood/duct certificate fees not paid within 30 days shall be increased by one-half of the original amount. 
(xi)  Smoke Purge/Control Certificates. The prescribed fee for smoke purge/control certificates shall be $50.00 per year, per system. 
(xii)  Temporary Structures. The fee for a permit for any temporary structure such as a reviewing stand, tent, etc., shall be $50.00 per structure. 
(xiii)  For Excavation, Grading or Filling. For excavation or grading other than for construction of walls, buildings, and parts thereof, the prescribed fee shall be $100.00 plus $10.00 per each $1,000.00 of construction cost (if one- or two-family parcel) or $15.00 per each $1,000.00 of construction cost (for all other parcels). 
(xiv)  Hoisting. 
(I)  The prescribed fee for a hoisting license for a person or corporation generally engaged in the hoisting business as described in GCC Part 1. Subsection a(16) of this Code shall be $500.00 per calendar year. 
(II)  The prescribed fee for a special hoisting permit for a specific location, each hoisting device or equipment being used, shall be $200.00 per permit. 
(xv)  Outdoor Signs and Awnings. The prescribed fee for each outdoor sign and awning shall be as follows: 
(I)  New installation and repair: 
a)  Wall or ground sign—$50.00 per sign plus $2.00 per sq. ft. of sign display surface. 
b)  Awning or canopy—$25.00 per awning or canopy. 
c)  Bunting—$50.00 per bunting. 
(II)  Annual inspection: 
a)  Wall or ground sign—$50.00 per sign. 
b)  Roof sign—$100.00 per sign. 
c)  Awning or canopy—$25.00 per awning or canopy. 
(xvi)  Operating Engineers License. The prescribed fee for operating engineers license's shall be as follows: 
(I)  Initial examine/license fee—$100.00. 
(II)  Subsequent examinations (if required)—$50.00/exam. 
(III)  Annual renewal—$75.00. 
(xvii)  Weekend or Overtime Inspections. Where inspections are mandated for any work performed under permit, as required in this Code; and where such inspection(s) must, due to special circumstances as approved by the Commissioner of Building, be done after regular work hours of the Department of Building, on weekends, or on legal holidays of the City of White Plains, the fee for such inspection shall be based upon the inspectors hourly wage x 1.5. The cost associated with these inspections shall be billed to the property owner, contractor or other responsible party. 
(xviii)  Re-inspection fee. Where re-inspections are required due to the responsible party not being prepared for a scheduled inspection or not following previous instructions given by the City of White Plains inspector, the following re-inspection fees shall apply: 
(I)  All trades except Vertical Transportation: 
First re-inspection—No charge 
Any re-inspection required thereafter—$100.00 per occurrence 
(II)  Vertical Transportation: 
First re-inspection—No charge 
Any re-inspection required thereafter—$200.00 per occurrence 
Cancelling a scheduled inspection less than 48 hours before the inspection date—$200.00 per occurrence 
(xvix)  Stop work order. Legalization fee. If a "Stop Work" order has been issued for on-going construction work of if a "Notice of Violation" is issued for completed work without first obtaining a building permit. Legalization fees may apply in addition to the requisite building permit fees. Legalization fees shall be paid for each trade which requires a permit as follows: 
(I)  Residential (owner occupied—1 & 2 family house and individual Condo/Co-op). 
a)  Legalization fee will be two times the calculated permit fee amount per trade. 
(II)  All other buildings 
a)  Legalization fee will be three times the calculated permit fee amount per trade. 
The term "Legalization" as used in this Code is defined as the process by which on-going or completed construction that was implemented without the benefit of a permit is properly filed for with The Department of Building and a permit is issued for the work. The process of "Legalization" may entail construction and/or demolition to achieve compliance. 
The use of "Third Party Inspection Services" or a Design Professional (registered by The State of New York) to certify the work may be permissible if approved in advance by the Commissioner of the Building. 
(xx)  Refunds. If an application for a permit has been withdrawn by the applicant, the applicant may submit a refund claim to the City of White Plains and upon approval of the claim by the Commissioner of Building, may obtain a refund of a portion of the fee paid as follows: 
(I)  All but $10.00 of the fee paid if application is withdrawn prior to the commencement of examination of the application. 
(II)  If the application is withdrawn after examination of plans, and before construction is commenced, there shall be refunded such portion of the fee paid as will leave retained by the Commissioner of Finance 30 percent of the total computed fee. 
(xxi)  Adjustment of Fees Based on Estimated Cost. The fee shall be adjusted at the completion of all work for which the fee was based on an estimated cost. The final fee in such case shall be based on the affidavit of cost required by BCAE Subsection q(2). The owner or applicant shall pay the difference between the original fee paid and the fee computed on such actual cost. In case the actual cost is less than the original estimated cost, a refund of the difference shall be made to the person or concern depositing the original fee. 
(xxii)  Search of Records. The fee for a requested search of official records maintained by the Department of Building, limited to Certificates of Occupancy, legal occupancy determinations, notices of violation, and retrieval of drawings shall be: 
(I)  For one- and two-family dwellings, and vacant lots, $8.00 per location. 
(II)  For all other types of occupancies and uses: $20.00 per location. 
(III)  Additional fees shall be charged for requested copies of records or drawings. 
Exception: A bonafide owner of a property/structure is not required to pay this fee. 
(xxiii)  Copying Plans. The fee payable to the City in advance for reproducing plans shall be a minimum charge of $5.00 per sheet for prints up to 24" x 36" and $6.00 per sheet for larger prints. The fee payable to the City for reproduction of microfilm shall be $3.00 per reproduced sheet. 
(xxiv)  Valuation and Volume Computation. For the determination of the permit fees, the volume of the structure and its estimated cost shall be computed and indicated by the applicant as herein provided. 
(I)  Structures with Basements. The volume of the building shall include all enclosed dormers, porches, penthouses and other enclosed portions of the structure extending from the basement or cellar floor to the mean height of a pitched roof, or to the average height of the top of the roof beams of a flat roof. All measurements shall be taken from the exterior surface of the building. 
(II)  Structures without Basements. For buildings without basements or cellars, the volume shall be based on the height measured to a level located one-fifth the distance from the first floor level to the bottom of the footings, but not to exceed two and one-half feet below the first floor level). 
(III)  Open Sheds. For open sheds and structures of a similar character, the volume shall be measured within the perimeter of the roof for a height from the grade line to the mean roof level. 
(IV)  Estimated Cost. The term "Estimated Cost" means the current value of all services, labor, materials, construction, equipment, rental and service equipment installations; but not including costs of such grading, decorating or other work intended primarily for appearance or embellishment, and which is not necessary for the safe and lawful use of the building or structure. 
(V)  Affidavit of Cost. At the completion of the work, the owner shall file a sworn affidavit of the actual cost to the owner of the work, except that the Commissioner may waive such affidavit for any work for which the estimated cost is less than $1,000.00. Such affidavit of cost shall be required whether the fee was computed originally based on volume or based on the estimated cost of construction. 
(VI)  Proof of Costs. The Commissioner may require proof of the accuracy of the cost stated in the required affidavit and in case such proof is not produced may, at the owner's expense, have an appraisal made by competent appraisers and may, where the fee is based on cost, compute such fee on such appraised valuation. 
(xxv)  Amended Plans. An additional fee for resubmission of amended or revised plans shall be charged at a rate of $50.00 per submission for a one- and two-family residence and $100.00 per submission for other than a one- and two-family residence. 
(xxvi)  Cabaret License. The prescribed fee for issuance or renewal of a Cabaret license shall be $500.00 per annum. 
(xxvii)  Blasting permit. The prescribed fee for issuance or renewal of a Blasting permit shall be $200.00 per annum. 
(xxviii)  Explosive Storage. The prescribed fee for the issuance or renewal of an explosive storage permit shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(xxix)  Occupancy Posting. The prescribed fee for the issuance or renewal of a Occupancy posting shall be $35.00 per year. 
(xxx)  Reactivation of expired permit. The prescribed fee for the reactivation of an expired permit shall be $150.00. 
s.  Performance and Indemnity Bonds. 
(1)  Excavation and Grading. Before the issuing of a permit for any excavation other than for construction of walls, buildings, and any part thereof, or before the removal of any topsoil, sand, gravel, rock or earth or other substance from any premises, the applicant for a permit shall execute and file with the city clerk a bond, approved by the Corporation Counsel, in the sum of not less than $5,000.00, or in such increased amounts as the commissioner may deem necessary, issued by a surety company or surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all of the conditions of the building code, the observance of all other municipal ordinances, and to indemnify The City of White Plains for any damage to its property. 
t.  Certification of Occupancy. 
(1)  New Buildings. No building hereafter erected shall be used or occupied in whole or in part until the Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Commissioner pursuant to this Section and BCAE Subsection z(2). 
(2)  Buildings Hereafter Altered. No building hereafter enlarged, extended or altered to change from one use group to another, in whole or in part, and no building hereafter altered for which a Certificate of Use and Occupancy has not been heretofore issued, shall be occupied or used until the certificate shall have been issued by the Commissioner, certifying that the work has been completed in accordance with the provisions of the approved permit; except that any use or occupancy, which was not discontinued during the work of alteration, shall be discontinued within 30 days after the completion of the alteration unless the required certificate is secured from the Commissioner. 
(3)  Existing Buildings. Upon written request from the owner of an existing building, the Commissioner shall issue a Substitute Certificate of Occupancy, provided there are no violations of law or orders of the commissioner pending, and it is established after inspection and investigation that the alleged use of the building has heretofore legally existed. Nothing in this Code shall require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, or prevent the continuance of the use and occupancy of a lawfully existing building, unless such use is deemed to endanger public safety and welfare. 
(4)  Changes in Use and Occupancy. After a change of use has been made in a building, the re-establishment of a prior use that would not have been legal in a new building of the same type of construction is prohibited unless all the applicable provisions of this Code are complied with. A change from one prohibited use, for which a permit has been granted, to another prohibited use shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(5)  Temporary Occupancy. Upon the request of a holder of a permit, the Commissioner may issue a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy for a building or structure or part thereof, before the entire work covered by the permit shall have been completed, provided such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion of the building without endangering life or public welfare. 
(6)  Contents of Certificate. This certificate shall certify legal use and occupancy and the purpose(s) for which the building or structure may be used in its several parts. The Certificate of Occupancy shall specify: the use group, the fire grading, the maximum live load on all floors, the occupancy load in the building and all parts thereof, and any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
u.  Posting Buildings. 
(1)  Posted Use and Occupancy. Every building and structure and part thereof designed for high hazard, storage, , or industrial use as defined shall be posted by the owner with a suitably designed placard in a form designated by the Commissioner, which shall be securely fastened to the structure in a readily visible place, stating: the use group, the fire grading, the live load and the occupancy load. 
(2)  Posted Occupancy Load. Every building and structure and part thereof designed for use as a place of public assembly shall be posted with an approved placard designating the maximum occupancy load. 
(3)  Periodic Inspection. The building official may periodically inspect all existing buildings and structures except one- and two-family dwellings, for compliance with the law with respect to posting; or a report of such inspection may be accepted from an authorized licensed professional engineer or architect; and such inspection and report shall specify any violations of the requirements of the Code with respect to the posting of floor load, fire grading, occupancy load and use group of the building. 
v.  Violations. 
(1)  Notice of Violation. Whenever the Commissioner of Building determines that there has been a violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this ordinance, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, notice shall be given of such violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible for such violation. Such notice shall be in writing and shall specify the alleged violation and shall be served upon the owner, agent, operator or occupant, as the case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, agent, operator or occupant, if a copy is served to such person personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by First Class Mail to the last known address of such person; or if a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the building affected by the notice, or by such other method authorized by the laws of the State of New York. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(2)  Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the Commissioner shall request the Corporation Counsel to institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to required [require] the removal or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(3)  Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Commissioner, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be liable to a fine as prescribed in BCAE Subsection aa. 
(4)  Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the penalties prescribed in BCAE Subsection aa. shall not preclude the Corporation Counsel from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, or over occupancy of a structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises. 
w.  Stop-Work Order. 
(1)  Notice to Owner. Upon notice from the Commissioner that work on any building or structure or that any excavation, grading or filling operation is being prosecuted, without the benefit of a permit, contrary to the provisions of this Code (or any other prevailing code) or in an unsafe and dangerous manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work; and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. 
(2)  Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work in or about a building or premises after having been served with a stop order, except such work which is directed to be performed in order to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine as prescribed in BCAE Subsection aa. 
x.  Dangerous Buildings and Structures. 
(1)  Dangerous Building or Structure. (Defined). For the purpose of this section, the term dangerous building or structure is hereby defined to include, but not be limited to, any building or structure which: 
(i)  As the result of its condition, is dangerous to the public and may cause or aid in the spread of disease or injury to the occupants of the building or structure or any neighboring building or structure; 
(ii)  As the result of faulty construction or any other cause, all or part of said building or structure is likely to collapse; 
(iii)  Due to faulty construction, age, lack of repair or other cause, constitutes or creates a fire hazard; 
(iv)  Due to a lack of doors or windows or inadequately secured doors or windows, the building or structure is available to disorderly persons who are not the lawful occupants thereof. 
(2)  Declaration of Nuisance. Any dangerous buildings or structures as defined above are hereby declared to be public nuisances. It shall be a violation: 
(i)  To maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building or structure in the city; and 
(ii)  For the owner, occupant or person in custody of a dangerous building or structure to permit the same to remain in a dangerous condition, or permit the same to be occupied while it is in a dangerous condition, after notification by the Commissioner of the Building Department to repair, vacate or demolish said building. 
(3)  Inspection and Report. Upon the written complaint of any person, filed with the Building Department, that a building or structure is existing in violation of this section, a code enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection of the allegedly dangerous building or structure. The code enforcement officer shall prepare a written report to be filed with the Commissioner. 
(4)  Notice of Violation. If the report of the code enforcement officer finds that the building or structure is in violation of this section, the Commissioner shall prepare a notice which contains a description of the premises, a statement of particulars in which the building or structure is dangerous, an order from the Commissioner to repair or demolish the building or structure within 20 days from the date of the notice, and that a hearing will be held by the Commissioner within 30 days. The time periods established in this section may be extended by the Commissioner upon a showing of good cause. 
(5)  Hearing. The Commissioner shall: 
(i)  Hold a hearing, and take testimony and other evidence from the owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, mortgagee and any other person having an interest in the premises; 
(ii)  Make written findings of fact as to whether the building or structure is dangerous, as herein defined; 
(iii)  Issue an order based upon the findings of fact commanding the owner, occupant, lessor, lessee, mortgagee or any other person having an interest in the premises to repair, vacate or demolish the building or structure in accordance with the terms of the order. 
(6)  Repair by Commissioner and Assessment of Costs. If the owner, (or last known owner of record) occupant, lessor, lessee, mortgagee or any other person having an interest in the premises fails to comply with an order of the Commissioner to repair, vacate or demolish the building or structure, the Commissioner shall cause the building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as the facts may warrant. The Commissioner of Building is authorized to direct the Commissioner of Public Works to solicit demolition bids and to enter into a demolition contract on behalf of The City of White Plains. The costs of said repair, vacation or demolition shall be a lien and shall be assessed against the land upon which the building or structure is located. 
(7)  Emergency Measures. 
(i)  Vacating Buildings. When, in the opinion of the Commissioner, there is actual imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, or when any structure has failed and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, or when any hazardous condition exists which would endanger life, the Commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the same forthwith. The Commissioner shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice reading as follows: 
"This Building is Unsafe and Its Use or Occupancy 
Has Been Prohibited By the Commissioner of Building." 
and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter such building or structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same. 
(ii)  Temporary Safeguards. When, in the opinion of the Commissioner, there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, or when any hazardous condition exists which would endanger life, the Commissioner shall cause the necessary work to be done to render the building or structure or part thereof temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted. 
(iii)  Closing Streets. When necessary for the public safety, the Commissioner may temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings and structures and places adjacent to such unsafe buildings, or structure, and prohibit the same from being used. 
(iv)  Emergency Repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Commissioner shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(v)  Cost of Emergency Repairs. The expenses incurred pursuant to this section shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the premises, or by the person who caused or maintained such unsafe building or structure. The Department of Building shall file among its records an affidavit stating, with fairness and accuracy, the items of expense and the date of execution of actions authorized by this section. The Commissioner may institute a suit in the name of the City to recover such expenses against any persons liable for such expenses or may cause such expenses to be charged and assessed against the property as a lien. A certified notice of such lien shall be mailed to or served upon the owner and persons claimed liable to pay the same, and a similar copy may be filed in the office of the Commissioner of Finance of the city, and may be noted on the Commissioner's records of liens or assessments against the property. Such liens shall bear interest and penalty of two-thirds of one per centum per month for each month or part thereof the same are unpaid after said filing of such notice of lien. Except with respect to a lien imposed for expenses incurred in demolition, nothing herein shall be construed as placing a lien upon the property which supersedes the lien of any mortgage on such property executed and recorded prior to the existence of a lien herein authorized. 
(8)  Board of Survey. 
(i)  Application for Survey. The owner of a building, structure or premises, or the owner's duly authorized representative who has been served with an unsafe order and notice to make such premises or structure safe, secure and habitable or to take down and remove such structure shall have the right, except in cases of emergency, to demand the appointment of a Board of Survey if the owner deems such order to be unnecessary, improper or unreasonable. Such demand shall be in writing with a statement of the reasons thereto. 
(ii)  Constitution of Board of Survey. The Board of Survey shall consist of three persons, one of whom shall be the Commissioner or an assistant designated by him; another shall be the owner or his legal representative, or a licensed professional engineer or architect, or a qualified builder designated by the owner; and the third shall be a licensed professional engineer or architect chosen jointly by the other two members, or designated by a justice of the court of record in case of failure of agreement. 
(iii)  Compensation of Board of Survey. The third member of the board shall receive for his services a fee of $1,500.00 to be paid by the applicant. 
(iv)  Survey Procedure. The powers and duty of the board of survey shall be: 
(I)  Inspection of Structure of Premises. To inspect the premises, building or structure and to confirm, modify or revoke the order of the Commissioner as may seem just and proper in the interest of public safety and welfare; and 
(II)  Determination of Repair Cost. To determine the suitable cost of reconstruction, restoration or rehabilitation in the repair of an unsafe building, structure, or premises in case of disagreement or dispute. 
(9)  Survey Findings. 
(i)  Report. The Board of Survey shall determine its findings, and submit a report in writing affirming or modifying the order of the Commissioner in whole or in part and recommending the remedial steps to be taken to render the premises, building, or structure safe. 
(ii)  Method of Decision. The findings and determinations of any two members of the board shall be deemed conclusive, and certified copies of the report shall be filed with the Commissioner and with the owner or the owner's representative and shall be binding upon the Commissioner and all parties in interest. 
y.  Code Appeals Committee. The following procedures shall apply to the appeal of decisions by officials authorized by this Code to enforce all sections of this Code. 
(1)  Application for Appeal. The owner of a building or structure or any other person may appeal from a decision of the Commissioner or Fire Chief concerning provisions of this Code covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration or repair of a building or structure to the Appeals Committee. Application for appeal may be made when it is claimed that: the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction can be used. 
(2)  Constitution of Appeals Committee. 
(i)  Membership of Committee. The Mayor shall appoint an Appeals Committee composed of five persons. Members of said committee shall serve for a five-year period or until their successors are appointed. 
(ii)  Qualification of Committee Members. Each member shall be a licensed professional engineer or architect, or a builder or superintendent of building construction, each of at least ten years' experience, for five years of which he shall have been in responsible charge of work; and at no time shall there be more than three members of the committee selected from the same profession or business; and at least one of the professional engineers shall be a licensed structural or civil engineer. 
(iii)  Absence of Members. During the absence of a member by reason of disability or disqualification, the Mayor shall designate a qualified substitute. 
(iv)  Director of Committee. The committee shall select one of its members to serve as the Committee Director, and the Commissioner shall designate a clerk from the department to serve as secretary to the committee, or a public stenographer in lieu thereof, who shall keep a detailed record of all proceedings on file in the Department of Building for inspection. 
(v)  Exemption of Members. No member of the committee shall pass on any question in which the member is engaged as contractor or material dealer, or in the preparation of plans or specifications, or in which the member has any personal interest. 
(vi)  Board of Appeals. Wherever reference is made in this Code to the Board of Appeals, it shall be deemed to refer to and mean the body designated as the Appeals Committee pursuant to the Code. 
(3)  Compensation of Appeals Committee. Compensation of appointed members of the committee shall be determined by the Common Council. 
(4)  Appeals Procedure. 
(i)  Notice of Meeting. The committee shall meet upon notice of the Committee Director within 30 days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings if warranted by the volume of work. 
(ii)  Public Hearing. All hearings shall be public; and the appellant, authorized representative, the Commissioner and other city officials, and any other person whose interests may be affected by the matter on appeal, shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
(iii)  Adjourned Meeting. When five qualified members are not present to consider a specific appeal, either the appellant, the Building Commissioner or their representatives may request a postponement of the hearing. 
(5)  Decisions of Appeals Committee. 
(i)  Action of Committee. The committee shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Commissioner or Fire Chief by concurring vote of three members. 
(ii)  Resolutions of Committee. Every action of the committee shall be by resolution and certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Commissioner or Fire Chief. 
(iii)  Determining Vote. Failure to secure three concurring votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the Building Commissioner or Fire Chief. The appellant shall be entitled to further hearing before a full board if there were not five qualified members present when the vote was taken, except where the appellant did not request a postponement of the hearing as permitted in BCAE Subsection y(4)(iii). 
(iv)  Enforcement of Decision. The Building Commissioner or Fire Chief shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the Board. 
z.  Controlled Procedures. 
(1)  Waiver of Examination and Inspection. 
(i)  Under Direct Supervision. When plans for the erection or alteration of a building are prepared by a licensed professional engineer or registered architect, which contemplate structural work or structural changes involving public safety or health and such plans are accompanied by an affidavit of the designer that the engineer or architect has supervised the preparation of the architectural, structural and mechanical design plans and that the engineer or architect will supervise or check all working drawings and shop details for the construction, and that the structure will be built under his field supervision and in accordance with the approved plans, and that such plans conform to all the provisions of this Code and the legal rules adopted under its provisions, and that all the material used in the construction will be controlled materials, the Commissioner may waive examination of the plans and field inspection of the construction and may issue a permit for the performance of the work. 
(ii)  Qualified Supervisor. The licensed professional engineer or architect shall be qualified by experience and training in the particular field of construction involved in the building project under construction. 
(2)  Verified Reports. Before issuance of the Certificate of Use and Occupancy for such building or structure, the following shall be required: 
(i)  The licensed professional engineer or architect who inspected the erection of the building shall file a verified report with the Commissioner of Building stating that the architect or engineer has made regular and periodic inspections of the construction work, including critical construction components, and all controlled construction procedures and controlled materials as defined in this Code and in its referenced standards, for the purpose of determining that to the best of the architect or engineer's knowledge and belief the building as erected complies with the filed drawings and with this Code and other applicable laws and regulations governing building construction except as to the specific variations duly authorized under the provisions of this Code and as specifically noted in the verified report and cited in the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(ii)  The contractor who constructed the building or structure or the owner in lieu thereof shall file a verified report with the Commissioner of Buildings stating that to the best of the contractor's (or owner's) knowledge and belief, the building or structure has been constructed in accordance with the approved construction drawings and specifications, except as to the specific variations duly authorized under the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  When Required. The Commissioner of Buildings may invoke any or all provisions of this Section and require from the owner both certified design and field inspection by a licensed professional engineer or registered architect for any project which in the Commissioner's judgment requires such controlled design and inspection by a licensed professional, by virtue of the project's technical complexity, difficulty, extensive size or other reason necessary to protect public safety and welfare. 
aa.  Violation and Penalties. Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, shall be liable to a fine and/or imprisonment of not exceeding 15 days as follows: The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, or any lessee, architect, building, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as herein provided. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
bb.  Repeal of Existing Ordinance. An ordinance adopted by the Common Council of The City of White Plains on the 13th day of June, 1989 entitled: "An ordinance adopting a building code for The City of White Plains", and any and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. 
cc.  Saving Clause. No action, matter or proceeding brought by The Department of Building or the Department of Public Safety or any other department of The City, pending at the time this ordinance shall take effect, shall be prejudiced or effected by said repeal but the same may be continued, asserted, enforced or defended as fully and to the same extent as if such repeal had not been affected. 
dd.  Administrative Liability. No officer, agent or employee of The City of White Plains shall be rendered personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any omission or act required or permitted in the discharge of authorized duties under this ordinance. 
ee.  When Effective. This ordinance shall take effect immediately. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— It is the position of this Commissioner of Building that the term electric wiring does not adequately reflect the broader intent of the Chapter nor of New York State code requirements. 
 The Commissioner of Building hereby establishes the following rule that clarifies what the term electric wiring means in the context of when a permit is required: 
  Electric wiring shall mean all electrical work governed by The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 70-The National Electrical Code. 
 
Chapter 2 - WHITE PLAINS GENERAL CONSTRUCTION CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  Precautions During Building Operations. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all construction operations in connection with the erection, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of buildings and structures. 
Building operations and construction within the scope of this Code, shall be performed in such manner that the workmen and public shall be protected from injury and adjoining property shall be protected from damage by the use of bridges, sheds, scaffolding, underpinning, or other approved methods in conformity with The New York State Building Code, The White Plains Building Code and Good Engineering Practices. 
(2)  Definitions. 
Competent Workmen. One who is capable of identifying existing and predictable hazards in the surroundings or working conditions, which are unsanitary, hazardous to the public, employees, workmen, etc., and who has authorization to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate them. 
Construction Equipment. The construction machinery. tools, derricks, hoists, scaffolds, platforms, runways, ladders and all material handling equipment safeguards and protective devices used in construction operations. 
Construction Operation. The erections, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition, or removal of any buildings or structures and the excavation, filling grading and regulation of lots. 
Material Platform Hoist. A power or manually operated suspended platform conveyance operating in guide rails for the exclusive raising or lowering of materials, which is operated and controlled from a point outside the conveyance. 
Sidewalk Bridge. A structure intended to support pedestrian traffic that spans a trench, area of excavation, hole, etc. in the ground that is in the pedestrian path of travel on or around a building parcel. 
Sidewalk Shed. A structure intended to protect pedestrians from falling objects. Shed shall include a lighted walkway and be a minimum four feet wide and eight feet high (clear). 
Runway. Any aisle or walkway constructed or maintained as a temporary passageway for pedestrians or vehicles. 
Scaffold. Any elevated platform which is used for supporting workmen, materials or both. 
(3)  Plans Specifications and Special Permits. 
(i)  Temporary Construction. Before any construction operation is started, plans and specifications shall be filed with the building department showing the design and construction of all sidewalk sheds, truck runways, trestles, foot bridges, guard fences and other similar devices required in the operation; and the approval of the building commissioner shall be secured before the commencement of any work. 
(ii)  Encroachments During Construction. Subject to the approval of the building commissioner, sidewalk sheds, underpinning and other temporary protective guards and devices may project beyond the interior and street lot lines as may be required to insure the safety of the adjoining property and the public. When necessary, the consent of the adjoining property owner and The City of White Plains shall be obtained. 
(4)  Tests. 
(i)  Loading. It shall be unlawful to load any structure, temporary support, scaffolding, sidewalk bridge or sidewalk shed or any other device or construction equipment during the construction or demolition of any building or structure in excess of its safe working capacity as provided for allowable loads and working stresses or the approved design documents. 
(ii)  Unsafe Equipment. Whenever any doubt arises as to the structural quality or strength of scaffolding plank or other construction equipment, such material shall be replaced; however, the building commissioner may accept a strength test of two and one-half times the superimposed live load to which the material or structural member is to be subjected. The member shall sustain the test load without failure. 
(iii)  Inspection. When inspection of any construction or excavation operation reveals that any unsafe or illegal conditions exists, the building official shall notify the owner and direct him to take the necessary remedial measures to remove the hazard or violation. 
(I)  Failure to Comply With Orders. Unless the owner so notified proceeds to comply with orders of the building official within 24 hours (or less if deemed an imminent hazard by the Building Official), the building official shall have full power to correct the unsafe conditions. All expenses incurred in the correction of such unsafe conditions shall become a lien on the property. 
(II)  Unsafe Construction Equipment. When the strength and adequacy of any scaffold or other device or construction equipment is in doubt, or when any complaint is made, the building official shall inspect such equipment and shall prohibit its use until tested as required in GCC Part 1, Subsection a(4)(ii) or until all danger is removed. 
(5)  Maintenance. All construction equipment and safeguards shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a substantial manner and shall be so operated to insure protection to the workers engaged thereon and to the general public. It shall be unlawful to remove or render inoperative any structural, fire protective or sanitary safeguard or device herein required except when necessary during the actual installation of such equipment. 
(6)  Existing Buildings. 
(i)  All existing and adjoining public and private property shall be protected from damage incidental to construction operations. 
(ii)  Chimney, Soil and Vent Stacks. Whenever a new building or structure is erected to greater or less heights than an adjoining building, the construction and extension of new or existing chimneys, soil/vent stacks shall conform to the provisions of the New York State Mechanical, Plumbing, Gas and Construction Codes. 
(iii)  Adjoining Walls. The owner of the new or altered structure shall preserve all adjoining independent and party walls from damage as provided herein. The owner shall underpin where necessary and support the adjoining building or structure by proper foundations to comply with GCC Part 1, Subsection a(7). 
(I)  Maintenance. In case an existing party wall is intended to be used by the person who causes an excavation to be made, and such party wall is in good condition and sufficient for the use of both existing and proposed building, such person shall preserve the party wall from injury and support it by proper foundations at his own expense, so that it shall be and shall remain safe and useful as it was before the excavation was commenced. During the demolition, the party wall shall be maintained weather-proof and structurally safe by adequate bracing until such time as the permanent structural supports have been provided. 
(II)  Beam Holes. When a structure involving a party wall is being demolished, the owner of the demolished structure shall, at the owner's expense, bend over all wall anchors at the beam ends of standing wall and shall brick-up all open beam holes and otherwise maintain the safety and usefulness of the wall. 
(III)  Party Wall Exitways. No party wall balcony or horizontal fire exit shall be destroyed unless and until a substitute means of egress has been provided and approved by the Building Commissioner. 
(iv)  Adjoining Roofs. When a new building or demolition of an existing building is being constructed at a greater height, the roof, roof outlets and roof structures of adjoining buildings shall be protected against damage with adequate safeguards by the person doing the work. 
(7)  Excavations. 
(i)  Temporary Supports. Until permanent support has been provided, all excavations shall be safeguarded and protected by the person causing the excavations to be made, to avoid all danger to life or limb. Where necessary, such excavations shall be retained by temporary retaining walls, sheet-piling and bracing or other approved method to support the adjoining earth in accordance with OSHA 2226 standards. 
(I)  Examination of Adjoining Property. Before any excavation or demolition is undertaken, license to enter upon adjoining property for the purpose of physical examination shall be afforded by the owner and tenants of such adjoining property to the person undertaking such excavation or demolition, prior to the commencement and at reasonable periods during the progress of the work. 
(II)  Notice to the Building Commissioner. If the person who causes an excavation to be made or an existing structure to be demolished has reason to believe that an adjoining structure is unsafe, the condition shall be reported forthwith in writing to the building commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall inspect or cause to be inspected such premises, and if the structure is founds [found] unsafe, a repair order shall be issued. 
(III)  Responsibility of Adjoining Owner. The person making or causing an excavation to be made shall, before starting the work give at least ten days notice in writing to the owner of each neighboring building or structure the safety of which may be affected. Having received consent to enter a building, structure or premises, the necessary provisions shall be made to protect it structurally and to insure it against damage by the elements which may ensue from such excavation. If license to enter is not afforded, then the adjoining owner shall have the entire responsibility of providing both temporary and permanent support of the premises at the owner's expense; and for that purpose, the owner shall be afforded the license when necessary to enter the property where the excavation is to be made. 
(IV)  Excavations for Other than Construction Purposes. Excavations made for the sole purpose of removing soil, earth, sand, gravel rock or other materials (when not in conjunction with proposed construction on the same site) shall be performed in such a manner as will prevent injury to neighboring properties or to the street, which adjoins the lot where such materials are excavated, and to safeguard the general public health and welfare. 
No such excavation and/or removal of any top soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other substance shall be made within ten feet of any street line, or property line, nor unless adequate barricades are erected and maintained around any excavation, and adequate provision is made for the prevention of flying dust, nor unless any excavation is immediately, refilled with non-burnable clean fill containing no garbage, refuse or other deleterious or unwholesome matter, and that dust down or its approved equal is spread when, in the opinion of the commissioner, it is necessary to prevent dust from flying, and that the premises are left graded to a point not lower than the level of the abutting highway or the original grade if the same was below the level of the highway, and properly drained. 
(V)  General Grading. In the event topsoil is removed for purposes of grading, or other uses to improve the premises, on completion of such grading or improvement the premises shall be covered with six inches of topsoil and graded to a point not lower than the level of the abutting highway, or the original grade if the same was below the level of the highway. In the event that the work involves only the removal of topsoil, there shall remain upon the surface from which topsoil is removed, at least six inches of topsoil. Upon completion of such work, dust down, or its approved equal, shall be spread to prevent dust from flying, and all areas from which topsoil is removed shall be prepared into a loose level seed bed, fertilized, seeded and rolled. 
(VI)  Commissioner May Act. If the person whose duty it shall be under the provisions of this code to properly guard and protect an excavation, or to prevent adjoining earth from caving in, or [to] preserve or protect any wall, building or structure from injury, shall neglect or fail to do so after having had a notice of 24 hours from the Commissioner of Building, the Commissioner may enter upon the premises and employ such labor, and furnish such materials and take such steps, as in the Commissioner's judgement, may be necessary to prevent adjoining earth from caving in or to make such adjoining wall, building or structure safe and secure, or to prevent the same becoming unsafe or dangerous. The expense plus a penalty of 10 percent of the cost of such work shall be charged to the person whose duty it is to keep the same safe and secure. 
(ii)  Permanent Support. 
(I)  Deep Excavations. Whenever an excavation is made to a depth of more than ten feet below the established curb, the person who causes such excavation to be made, if afforded the necessary license to enter the adjoining premises, shall preserve and protect from injury at all times and at his own expense such adjoining structure or premises which may be affected by the excavation. If the necessary license is not afforded, it shall then be the duty of the owner of the adjoining premises to make the adjoining building or structure safe by installing proper underpinning or foundations or otherwise, and such owner, if it be necessary for the prosecution of the work, shall be granted the necessary license to enter the premises where the excavation or demolition is contemplated. 
(II)  Shallow Excavations. Wherever an excavation is made to a depth less than ten feet below the curb, the owner of a neighboring building or structure, the safety of which may be affected by the proposed excavation, shall preserve and protect from injury and shall support the building or structure by the necessary underpinning or foundations. If necessary for that purpose, the owner shall be afforded a license to enter the premises where the excavation is contemplated. 
(8)  Erosion Control. Prior to the commencement of construction work on a project involving any disturbance of land, an Erosion Control Plan must be submitted and approved. The plan(s) must reflect the type of erosion control to be implemented and the Building Inspector or an Inspector from The Department of Public Works must inspect for compliance with the plan(s) prior to commencement of construction. Erosion control shall be in accordance with New York State Standards and Specifications For Erosion & Sediment Control and "Best Management Practices". The applicant and/or contractor shall maintain erosion control measures throughout construction until such time that the Building Inspector deems the land stabile. 
As of January 1 st 2010 all contractors that perform work in The City of White Plains that involves the disturbance of soil shall have a "Trained Individual" Certificate as regulated by The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC). 
All projects that have a soil disturbance area of one acre or more shall submit a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to the City of White Plains Department of Public Works prior to applying for a Building Permit. A Building Permit cannot be issued until the SWPPP has been reviewed and accepted by The Department of Public Works. 
(9)  Regulation of Lots. When a building has been demolished and no building operation has been projected or approved, the vacant lot shall be filled, graded and maintained in conformity to the established street grades at curb level. The lot shall be maintained free from the accumulation of rubbish, soil erosion, water runoff, and all other unsafe or hazardous conditions which endanger the life or health of the public or damage to any foundations or the premise or the adjoining property. 
(10)  Driveways and Parking Areas. 
(i)  General. Except as provided in this section, all parking areas, and access driveways, not within parking structures such as garages or parking decks, shall be paved, drained, illuminated and protected as required by this section. 
Exception: The only provisions of this section that shall be applicable to driveways and parking areas which are to be accessory to one- and two-family residences shall be the provisions of GCC Part 1, Subsection a(10)(ii)(II). 
(ii)  Grades. 
(I)  General. Except as provided in GCC Part 1, Subsection a(10)(ii)(II) access driveway grades shall not exceed six per centum from the intersection of such driveway with the street property line for a distance of 20 feet therefrom and shall not exceed 12 per centum thereafter. The slope of any parking area exclusive of access drives, shall not exceed six per centum in any direction. The elevation of the center line of the driveway at the street property line shall be obtained by a slope up at the rate of one-fourth inch per foot from the established elevation of the center line of the street as the theoretical top of curb elevation, unless a different elevation has been established, for drainage or other reason, and approved in writing by the Commissioner of Public Works. 
(II)  One- and Two-Family Residences. The maximum grade along the center line of a driveway accessory to a one- or two-family residence connecting such residence or its accessory garage or parking area to a public street shall not exceed 12 per centum from the intersection of such driveway with the street property line for a distance of 25 feet therefrom. The elevation of the center line of the driveway at the street property line shall [be] obtained by a slope up at the rate of one-fourth inch per foot from the established elevation of the top of existing curb, or if no curb exists by using the elevation of the center line of the street as the theoretical top of curb elevation, unless a different elevation has been established and approved in writing by the Commissioner of Public Works. 
(iii)  Pavement. Parking areas and access drives shall be paved to withstand a wheel load of not less than 4,000 pounds. The base course shall be of non-absorbent approved material rolled or compacted to grade. Except as provided in GCC Part 1, Subsection a(10)(ii)(II) of the subdivision, the wearing surface shall be brought to a smooth but non-slip, non-dusting finish and maintained in this condition. All finished pavement shall be approved equal to a minimum of four inches in compacted thickness of bituminous macadam composed of one and one-half inch trap rock penetrated with one and one-half to two gallons of asphaltic oil per square yard of paved area. 
(iv)  Drainage. 
(I)  General. An approved drainage system shall be installed and maintained to adequately remove all precipitation resulting in water to prevent puddles on the parking area and spillage onto neighboring property or across sidewalks. Where the property abuts a street in which a city stormwater drain is maintained, the required drainage system shall be adequately connected to the stormwater drain. 
(II)  Exceptions. Where, in the opinion of the Commissioner, the area to be paved cannot be drained to a public storm or street, and "dry wells" or similar means are not feasible, an approved porous surfacing, such as washed gravel or graded stone, may be used for mandatory on-site parking in a residential zone, providing the area so paved does not exceed 3,500 square feet. 
(v)  Illumination. Exterior lighting shall be provided and maintained to furnish adequate illumination of driveways and lanes. Provisions shall be made to minimize glare and light spillage onto adjacent properties. In no case shall such illumination be less than foot candle levels as prescribed by the Illumination Engineering Society (IES), for the particular application. Illumination shall not be required for parking areas fenced and barricaded and not used between sunset and sunrise. 
(vi)  Lanes and Spaces. Access lanes shall be provided for each row or two rows of cars at not less than 26 feet in width for 90 degree parking and the parking space shall be not less than eight feet by 19 feet for each motor vehicle. The lane width may be reduced for parking at angles less than 90 degrees in accordance with rules of the Commissioner based on current recognized standards but in no case shall the lane width be less than 11 feet. 
(vii)  Protection. A substantial bumper of masonry, steel or heavy timber or other approved assemblies shall be placed and maintained near all lot lines to protect structures and property abutting the parking and to protect pedestrian traffic. 
(viii)  Plans. Applications for permits to construct parking areas and driveways shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale indicating existing and proposed surface elevations, as well as proposed entrances and exits, stalls and aisles, type of bumper assembly, drainage facilities, lighting when required, and the type of pavement to be employed. 
(ix)  Exterior Paved Areas. 
(I)  Drainage. All roofs, yards, courts, courtyards, and other paved areas, shall be drained into the public stormwater sewage system if such exists in an adjacent street. If an accessible public stormwater sewage system does not exist, the owner may connect the roof and surface drains to dry wells. 
(11)  Retaining Walls and Partition Fences. When the adjoining grade is not higher than the legal level, the person causing an excavation to be made shall erect, when necessary, a retaining wall at the owner's expense and on the owner's land. Such wall shall be built to a height sufficient to retain the adjoining earth, shall be properly coped and shall be provided with a guardrail or fence not less than four feet in height. 
(12)  Design Capacity. Materials or equipment stored within the building, or on sidewalks, sheds or scaffolds shall be placed so as not to overload any part of the construction beyond its design capacity, nor interfere with the safe prosecution of the work. 
(i)  Special Loading. Unless the construction is designed for special loading, materials stored on sidewalk sheds and scaffolds shall not exceed one day's supply. All materials shall be piled in an orderly manner and height, to permit removal of individual pieces without endangering the stability of the pile. 
(ii)  Pedestrian Walkways. No materials or equipment shall be stored on the street without a permit issued by the administrative official having jurisdiction. When so stored, they shall not unduly interfere with vehicular traffic, or the orderly travel of pedestrians on the highways and streets. The piles shall be arranged to maintain a safe walkway not less than four feet wide, unobstructed for its full length, and adequately lighted at night and at all necessary times for the use of the public. 
(13)  Removal of Waste Material. No material shall be dropped by gravity or thrown outside the exterior walls of a building during demolition or erection. Wood or metal chutes shall be provided for this purpose and any material which in its removal will cause an excessive amount of dust shall be wet down to prevent the creation of a nuisance. 
(14)  Protection of Floor and Wall Openings. 
(i)  Noncombustible Floor Construction. The arches, slabs or structural floor fillings of buildings of fireproof construction (type 1) and noncombustible construction (type 2) shall be installed as the building progresses. 
(ii)  Combustible Floor Construction. In wood joist floor construction (types 3, 4 and 5) when double flooring is used, the underfloor shall be laid on each story as the building progresses and when double floors are not used, the floors shall be planked over two stories below the level where work is being performed. 
(iii)  Steel Structural Frames. In steel construction, the entire tier of iron or steel beams upon which the structural work is in progress shall be planked over, with the exception of necessary hoistways and permanent openings; and in no case shall the steel work advance more than six floors ahead of the permanent floor construction. 
(iv)  Guardrails. All floor and wall openings shall be protected with substantial guardrails and toe boards in accordance with accepted engineering practice. 
(15)  Scaffolds and Staging. 
(i)  Erection. Staging, and built-up, swinging, suspended scaffolds shall be erected by competent workmen only (as defined in GCC Part 1, Subsection a(2) and shall be in accordance with OSHA 3150 Standards. 
(ii)  Signed and Sealed drawings shall be submitted for all scaffolding proposed to be 50 feet or higher in elevation. 
(16)  Hoisting and Rigging. 
(i)  Hoisting and Riggers Permit. No person or corporation shall hoist anything whatsoever on or over any public street, highway, right-of-way of public place, or employ hoisting or rigging equipment with a lifting capacity of greater than five tons on private property without a permit thereof first being obtained from the Commissioner. 
(17)  Construction Ladders. 
(i)  Ladders. Temporary Ladders, when permitted for access to floors before stairways are installed or which are designed for other working purposes, shall extend at least 42 inches above the floor level which they serve. 
(18)  Lighting. All stairways and parts of buildings under demolition, erection or repair shall be adequately lighted while persons are engaged at work to comply with the provisions of Section NFPA 70 and with a minimum level equivalent to three foot candles. 
(19)  (i)  Temporary Heating. Whenever heating devices are used for temporary heating, all regulations as to maximum temperature, distance from combustible materials, spark arrestors, removal of noxious gases, and other requirements prescribed by the building official shall be fully observed. 
(ii)  Storage of Flammables. Storage of gasoline for hoists, oils, paints and other highly flammable materials shall be permitted only as specified in Chapter 14 of the New York State Fire Code and when stored in approved safety containers. The storage of larger quantities may be approved by the administrative official when stored in separate compartments or enclosures of approved noncombustible construction. 
(iii)  Housekeeping. Rubbish and trash shall not be allowed to accumulate on the site and shall be removed as fast as conditions warrant; combustible rubbish shall be removed daily, and shall not be disposed of by burning on the premises or in the immediate vicinity and the entire premises and area adjoining and around the operation shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition and free of accumulations of trash, rubbish, nuts, bolts, small tools and other equipment. 
(20)  Health Hazards. Every construction or maintenance operation which results in the diffusion of dust, stone and other small particles, toxic gases or other harmful substances in quantities hazardous to health shall be safeguarded by means of local ventilation or other protective devices to insure the safety of the public as required by the regulations of the administrative official. 
(i)  Removal of Dust. Dust, sand blasts or other harmful agents, when employed or occurring in construction operations, shall be disposed of at or near the point of origin to prevent their diffusion over adjoining premises or streets. 
(ii)  Protective Equipment. Facilities shall be provided for housing the necessary vision, respiratory and protective equipment required in welding operations in approved closed containers and in accordance with the regulations of the administrative official. 
(21)  Welding Safety Precautions. 
(i)  Welding Enclosures. All welding and flame-cutting operations shall be performed in protected areas with full consideration to safety and fire hazards. Such closed spaces shall be properly ventilated while welding or cutting is being done. Suitable protection against the rays of the electric arc shall be maintained by the contractor where arc-welding operations might be viewed within harmful range by persons other than the welding operators and inspectors. 
(ii)  Flammable Materials. Proper precautions shall be taken to avoid all risk of fire or explosion and no flammable or explosive materials shall be stored in the vicinity of welding or cutting operations. 
(22)  Sanitation. Every building in the course of demolition, erection or repair shall be provided with toilet and drinking water facilities which shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the Plumbing Code of New York State. 
(23)  Disputes. The building official, when requested by any person, aggrieved or otherwise, shall serve a written notice on any owner, tenant, and their agents who fail to conform to the requirements of this article directing said person to take the necessary remedial action. If the person whose duty it is to protect the property in question or the adjoining property under those provisions fails to proceed to fully comply with such notice within three days of the receipt thereof, or within a reasonable time thereafter as determined by the building official, the building official may cause the necessary work to be done when the health, safety and general welfare of the public are involved. The cost of such work shall become a lien against the property of the offending owner and the legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for its recovery.  
Part 2. - Fire Limits 
a.  Fire Limits Established. The fire limits referred to in this ordinance shall include all sections of the city designated in the Zoning Ordinance and its amendments as Industrial Districts, Commercial Districts, Business Districts, Business Residential Districts and Office Residential Districts and shall be classified as "Fire Limits A". 
b.  Changes in Fire Limits. Any changes in the boundaries of the fire limits or changes of designation of any area from one to another shall be established by the same procedure prescribed for the promulgation of new rules, or by the promulgation of a new ordinance. 
c.  Restrictions. 
(1)  High Hazard Uses. Except as specifically approved by the Commissioner, all buildings of high hazard use (Group H) shall be prohibited from location within the limits. Paint spray, drying rooms and rooms for similar incidental uses not exceeding 1,000 square feet in area in industrial buildings shall be permitted when enclosed in fire resistive construction as specified for special uses and occupancies. 
(2)  Frame Construction. No building of frame construction (type 5) shall be erected within the fire limits nor shall such building or structure be moved from without to within, or from one lot to another within the fire limits except as provided in Part 2; and no building of otherwise lawful construction shall be extended in height or area within the fire limits by frame construction; except that one- and two-family framed dwellings may be extended in area by not more than 300 square feet and to a height of not more than two and one-half stories nor more than 35 feet. 
(3)  Fences. Fences not over eight feet in height may be erected of frame (type 5) construction. 
(4)  Storm Enclosures. Storm enclosures may be erected of frame construction not more than ten feet in height and not more than three feet wider than the entrance doors which they serve; provided they do not project more than six feet beyond the building line. 
(5)  Accessory Buildings. 
(i)  Outbuildings and Parking Lot Offices. Outbuildings and parking lot offices not more than ten feet in height and 100 square feet in area may be erected of frame (type 5) construction when accessory to one- or two-family dwelling on the same lot or accessory to a lot approved for motor vehicle parking, when located not less than six feet from the lot line or any building. 
(ii)  Greenhouses. Greenhouses and similar accessory structures may be erected of frame (type 5) construction when accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling on the same lot and when located not less than six feet from interior lot lines or any building. 
(iii)  Private Garages. Private garages not more than one story nor more than 15 feet in height when accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling may be erected of protected frame (type 5a) construction not more than 750 square feet in area, or of frame (type 5b) construction not more than 500 square feet in area, when located not less than five feet from interior lot lines or any building. 
(iv)  Store Fronts. Wood veneers of one inch nominal thickness or exterior grade plywood not less than five-eighths inch thick may be used on store fronts when facing public streets; provided the veneer does not exceed one story in height and is applied to noncombustible backing or is furred not to exceed one and five-eighths inch and fire stopped. 
(vi)  Pedestrian Bridges. Pedestrian bridges of type 2b (unprotected noncombustible) construction shall be permitted within the limits subject to the following conditions: 
(I)  Connecting buildings or structures of Type 1 or Type 2 Construction classification only. 
(II)  Shall not be used as a required means of egress, nor as occupiable space. 
(III)  Such pedestrian bridges shall be of noncombustible construction throughout, including all glazing (no plastic) and finish materials. 
(IV)  Bridges, when enclosed, shall be equipped with approved sprinkler and fire detection system. 
(V)  The underside horizontal surface of such bridges shall be covered by a noncombustible, fire resistive panel. 
(VI)  The height clearance, measured from the bottom exterior surface of such bridges to any pavement or building roof surface below, shall be a minimum of 15 feet, (16 feet, six inches when over a roadway). 
d.  Temporary Structures. 
(1)  General. Within the fire limits no temporary structure which is enclosed in any manner shall be placed on any lot nearer than ten feet to the lot line. 
(2)  Tents. Tents shall not be permitted within the fire limits, unless constructed of approved certified flameproof material. 
(3)  Builders Shanties and Reviewing Stands. Temporary builders' shanties erected in connection with approved building operations, platforms, reviewing stands, and other similar miscellaneous structures may be erected of frame (type 5) construction for a limited period of time as approved by the Commissioner. 
(4)  Sheds. Sheds open on the long side not more than 15 feet in height nor more than 500 square feet in area may be erected of frame (type 5) construction when located not less than six feet from lot lines.  
Part 3. - Projection Beyond the Street Line 
a.  Marquees. For the purpose of this section a marquee is a "roof-like" structure that projects over the front entrance of a building, usually incorporating signage and lighting, and shall include any object or decoration attached to or a part of said marquee. 
(1)  Projection and Clearance. The horizontal clearance between a marquee and the curb line shall be not less than two feet. A marquee shall be not less than ten feet above the ground or pavement below. 
(2)  Restricted Use. Marquees projecting over the building line or street property line shall be permitted only as accessory to a hotel or theater use, and limited for such use to the principal entrance of the building. 
b.  Permissible Street Projections. Subject to such provisions as may be otherwise prescribed by law or ordinance, or by rule of the municipal authorities having jurisdiction over streets, highways, and public spaces, the following projections shall be permitted beyond the street lot line or the building line, as the case may be: 
(1)  "Main cornices or roof eaves" located at least 12 feet above the curb level shall project not more than three feet; 
(2)  "Belt courses, lintels, sills, architraves, pediments" and similar architectural decorations shall project not more than four inches when less than ten feet above the curb level, and not more than ten inches when ten feet or more above the curb level; 
(3)  "Ornamental columns, or pilasters" including the bases and moldings which emphasize the main entrance of the building shall project not more than 12 inches; 
(4)  "Entrance steps and doors" shall not project beyond the building line; except that where the building is set back a minimum of 12 inches from the property line the door swing may extend a maximum of 12 inches beyond the face of the building; 
(5)  "Oriel windows" with the lowest portion at least ten feet above the curb level shall project not more than one and one-half feet; 
(6)  "Balconies" located at least ten feet above the curb level shall project not more than one and one-half feet; 
(7)  "Awning covers or boxes" located at least eight feet above the curb level shall project not more than 12 inches; 
(8)  "Vaults and areaways" projecting into public property shall not be permitted except pursuant to a permit issued by the Commissioner of Public Works. When plans for a building filed with the Commissioner show that any portion of the space underneath any sidewalk or other public place is intended to be used as a vault, the Commissioner shall not approve such plans nor issue a permit for the construction or alteration of such building until a copy of the required vault permit issued by the Commissioner of Public Works shall have been filed in the office of the Commissioner of Building. 
c.  Awnings and Canopies. 
(1)  Awnings. For the purpose of this section an Awning is a "roof-like" cover that projects [from] the exterior wall of a building for the purpose of shielding the area below the Awning from the elements. An Awning maybe fixed or retractable. 
(2)  Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the Commissioner for the erection, repair or replacement of any fixed awning, canopy, or hood except as provided in GCC Part 3, Subsection c(2)(i) and for any retractable awning located at the first story level and extending over the public street or over any portion of a court or yard beside a building serving as a passage from a required exit to a public street. 
(i)  Exemption From Permit. No permit shall be required for the erection, repair or replacement of fixed or retractable awnings installed on one- and two-family dwellings unless they project over public property, or for retractable awnings installed about the first story or where the awning does not project over the public street or over any court or yard serving as a passage from the required exit to a public street. A permit will not be required in accordance with this section; a permit is required for the same installation by the Sign and Awning Ordinance. 
(3)  Installation of Awnings. 
(i)  Retractable Awnings. There shall be a minimum clearance of seven feet from the sidewalk to the lowest part of the framework or any fixed portion of any retractable awning, except that the bottom of the valance of canvas awnings may extend to six feet nine inches above the sidewalk. Retractable awnings shall be securely fastened to the building and shall not extend closer than 12 inches from the curb line. They shall be equipped with a mechanism or device for raising and holding the awning in a retracted or closed position against the face of the building. 
(ii)  Fixed or Permanent Awnings. The clearance from the sidewalk to the lowest part of any fixed or permanent awning shall be the same as required for retractable awnings. Fixed or permanent awnings installed above the first story shall not project more than four feet. 
(iii)  Canopies. Canopies shall be constructed of a metal framework, with an approved "flexible" covering, attached to the building at the inner end and may be supported at the outer end by not more than two stanchions with braces anchored in an approved manner and placed not less than two feet in from the curb line. The horizontal portion of the framework shall not be less than eight feet nor more than 12 feet above the sidewalk and the clearance between the covering or valance and the sidewalk shall be not less than seven feet. 
(iv)  Special Applications of Awnings. Rigid awnings supported in whole or part by members resting on the ground and used for patio covers, car ports, summer houses or other similar uses shall comply with the requirements of GCC Part 3, Subsection c(3)(v) for design and construction. Such structures shall be braced as required to provide rigidity. 
(v)  Design and Construction. Fixed awnings, canopies, and similar structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind or other lateral loads and live loads as required by the Code with due allowance for shape, open construction and similar features that relieve the pressure or loads. Structural members shall be protected to prevent deterioration.  
Chapter 3 - WHITE PLAINS MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  General Requirements. 
(1)  Inspection. The Commissioner shall cause to be inspected at least once each year all boilers as defined in this article, except boilers operating at a gauge pressure of not more than 15 pounds per square inch and located in dwellings occupied by less than six families. The Commissioner may require that all such inspections be made by authorized insurance companies. Failure to do so shall result in the Boiler being shut down. 
(2)  Dangerous Boiler. If, in the judgment of the Commissioner, a boiler is in an unsafe or a dangerous condition, he shall order the use of the boiler discontinued until such dangerous and unsafe condition has been remedied. 
(3)  Certificate of Inspection of Heating Equipment. No boiler or unfired pressure vessel subject to the provisions of this article shall be placed in operation until a certificate of inspection and license has been issued. Licenses shall be posted near the boiler(s) in a glass frame. 
(4)  Tests of Heating Equipment. Whenever a dispute arises as to the safety of operation of a heating device or with respect to abnormal emission of smoke, the building official may require tests to be performed at the owner's expense to determine the integrity or operational performance of any suspect equipment. When a boiler or unfired pressure vessel is found unsafe, the building official shall order such device withdrawn from service until the necessary repairs have been made. 
(5)  Boiler Record. The Commissioner shall maintain a file of all such boilers and pressure vessels, with a record of all inspections, together with the official recommendations and actions thereon. The Commissioner shall assign each boiler an identification number. Owners and lessees of boilers shall attach to such boilers the numbers assigned by the Commissioner. 
(6)  Filing Fee. The annual filing fee to be paid to the City of White Plains for issuance of license shall be per BCAE Subsection r. 
b.  Smoke Abatement. 
(1)  Prohibited Discharge. All furnaces and heating appliances fired with solid, liquid or gas fuels including all rubbish burners and incinerators, shall be so designed that they will not discharge under normal conditions of operation excessive smoke, soot, cinders, fly-ash or other materials which are deleterious to the safety or health of the public. 
(2)  Solid Fuel Fired. When solid fuel is used, the maximum amount of cinders discharged with the gases of combustion into the free air and the maximum amount of fly-ash shall comply with the Air Pollution Control Ordinance or other approved rules but in no case shall any such impurity exceed a concentration of 400 grains per 1,000 cubic feet of combustion gases. 
(3)  Oil Fired. When oil is used as fuel, the maximum amount of measured carbon discharged with the gases of combustion shall not exceed that permitted by the Air Pollution Control Ordinance but in no case more than 400 grains per 1,000 cubic feet of such gases. 
c.  Annual Cleaning, Inspection and Certification of Commercial Cooking Equipment. 
(1)  Definition. Commercial Cooking Equipment and Kitchen Exhaust System shall be defined to include all manner of commercial cooking equipment, exhaust hoods, grease removal devices, exhaust ductwork, exhaust fans, dampers, fire extinguishing equipment, and all other auxiliary or ancillary components or systems that are involved in the capture, containment, and control of grease - laden cooking effluent, pursuant to the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association, NFPA-96-"Standard For Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations". 
(2)  Annual Cleaning and Inspections. All existing and new commercial cooking equipment and kitchen exhaust duct systems shall be completely cleaned, tested, and inspected annually by properly trained and qualified persons, as required by NFPA-96, Chapter 8 (Procedure for the Use and Maintenance of Equipment). Upon receipt of inspection and cleaning letter from the Cleaning Company technician is to complete the form and affix his signature on the form. The owner of the kitchen exhaust system is responsible to return the form to the Building Department. There shall be one form for each exhaust system and the form shall not be copied. An inspection and servicing of the fire extinguishing system and exhaust hood and of all actuation components and safety and automatic shutdown devices shall be conducted in accordance with said reference chapter after the system has been cleaned. (Note: Supplemental Cleaning Testing, Servicing and Inspection shall also be provided pursuant to Chapter 8, NFPA-96, and as needed throughout the year). 
(3)  Owner's Verification Report. The owners or operator of the commercial cooking equipment and kitchen exhaust system shall submit to the Department of Building on an annual basis a written report verifying that inspection, testing and maintenance of said equipment has been completed in accordance with the requirements of this Section and NFPA-96 Standards. The report is to be prepared and signed by the company performing such cleaning, testing and inspection services. 
(4)  City's Annual License. Upon receipt of the required Owner's Verification Report and filing fee, the City shall issue a "License for Commercial Cooking and Kitchen Exhaust and Grease Duct Systems", on an annual basis. Such License is required to be posted under glass in an area immediately adjacent to the commercial cooking equipment so as to be visible at all times. No commercial cooking equipment shall be operated unless a currently valid License is so posted. 
(5)  Filing Fee. The annual filing fee to be paid to the City of White Plains for issuance of the License shall be per BCAE Subsection r. 
d.  Annual Inspection and Certification of Smoke Purge/Control System Equipment. 
(1)  Definition. Smoke Purge System Equipment shall be defined to include all equipment, fans, ductwork, controls, etc., that comprise the smoke purge/control system in a building. 
(2)  Annual Testing and Inspections. All smoke purge and control systems shall be completely tested and inspected annually by properly trained and qualified persons. An inspection and Testing of the Purge/Control system and all related and ancillary components shall be performed once a year to determine that equipment is fully functional and ready for operation. This shall include but may not be limited to equipment, fans, dampers, actuators, "status" devices, etc. Any deficiency found shall be immediately repaired or replaced. Positive confirmation of equipment operation is required. Note: "Smoke Bomb" testing is not required but may be performed to confirm operation. 
(3)  Owner's Verification Report. The owner or operator of the smoke purge system shall submit to the Department of Building on an annual basis a written report verifying that inspection, testing and maintenance of said equipment has been completed in accordance with the requirements of this Section and the State of New York and NFPA-90A Standards. The report is to be prepared and signed by a licensed Professional Engineer who witnessed such testing and inspection services. 
(4)  City's Annual License. Upon receipt of the required Owner's Verification Report and filing fee, the City shall issue a "License for Smoke Purge/Control Systems" on an annual basis. Such License is required to be posted under glass in an area immediately adjacent to the Fire Command Station so as to be visible at all times. 
(5)  Filing Fee. The annual filing fee to be paid to the City of White Plains for issuance of the License shall be per BCAE Subsection r.  
Part 2. - Operating Engineers 
a.  Definition. A high pressure boiler shall be defined as a boiler having safety valve or valves set higher than 15 pounds per square inch gauge and rated in excess of 30 Boiler Horse Power, or if such boiler produces hot water at a pressure of 160 pounds per square inch or at a temperature over 250°F. 
b.  License Required. It shall be unlawful for a person to operate: 
(i)  Any high pressure steam or hot water boiler(s) or engine(s) in which the safety valve(s) are set higher than 15 P.S.I. and the equipment is rated at more than 30 H.P.(developed). 
-or- 
(ii)  Any refrigeration or equipment generating chilled water of over 50 tons capacity. 
-or- 
(iii)  Any air compressor(s) rated at more than 75 H.P. 
Only those persons who work for a company that occupies all or the major part of a building in the City of White Plains and is responsible for the operation of a high pressure boiler(s) or refrigeration system(s) shall be so licensed in The City of White Plains. There is no reciprocal agreement with any other municipality. All Operating Engineers and Refrigeration Operators shall be tested and approved solely by the Operating Engineer/Refrigeration Operator Examining Board of The City of White Plains. 
c.  Exceptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons operating locomotives of incorporated railroad companies. 
(2)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to refrigerating systems of any size, provided that the systems is under automated control by devices that will cause the system to be de-energized from electric power and go to a shutdown condition upon experiencing an equipment malfunction or fault condition and provided further that: 
(i)  A building safety summary is submitted and approved by the Commissioner. 
(ii)  The Building safety summary shall be prepared by a N.Y.S. licensed professional engineer and include at a minimum: 
(a)  A life safety study of the building, including emergency procedures in effect in the building; and 
(b)  A description of automated HVAC equipment installed; and 
(c)  A complete description of the operation of the shutdown system under emergency conditions; and 
(d)  Other information as required by the Commissioner. 
(iii)  Notwithstanding the above these exceptions shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes or schools. 
d.  License Classifications. The license issued shall be divided into four classes as follows: 
(1)  A Chief Stationary Engineer's license shall be issued to any person found competent by due examination and experience to take charge of and operate a high pressure boiler or boilers, regardless of pressure or horse-power. The applicant shall submit to the Examining Board, at the time of application for license, proof in writing that the applicant has operated under the supervision of a licensed Chief Stationary Engineer, on high pressure boilers, for a period of at least four years. An applicant must operate with a First Class Stationary Engineer's license for at least one of the four years prior to taking the Chief Stationary Engineer's license examination. 
(2)  A First Class Stationary Engineer's license shall be issued to any person found competent by due examination to take charge of and operate, or be responsible for, a high-pressure boiler or boilers of between 100 H.P. and 500 H.P. The applicant shall submit to the Examining Board. at the time of application for license, proofing in writing that the applicant has had three years' experience under the supervision of a licensed First Class Stationary Engineer, on high-pressure boilers. An applicant must operate with a Second Class Stationary Engineer's license for a least one of the three years prior to taking the First Class Stationary Engineer's license examination. 
(3)  A Second Class Stationary Engineer's license shall be issued to any person found competent, by due examination, to take charge of and operate, or be responsible for, a high-pressure boiler or boilers of between 30 H.P. and 100 H.P. The applicant shall submit to the Examining Board, at the time of application for a license, proof in writing that the applicant has at least two years' experience under the supervision of a licensed Stationary Engineer, on high-pressure boilers. 
(4)  Refrigeration operators' license shall be issued to any person found competent after due examination by the Examining Board to take charge of and operate a refrigeration system of over 50 tons capacity, and the applicant shall submit proof with the application that the applicant has had at least one years' experience operating a refrigerator or air-conditioning system of over 50 tons capacity. Such proof shall be in writing and acknowledged by a notary public or by any person qualified to take a sworn oath. 
e.  Application. Any person desiring a license required by this article shall file in the Commissioner's office an application accompanied by the payment of an examination/licensing fee as outlines [outlined] in Section. Application shall be made in writing under oath on a form provided by the Commissioner, stating the name and address of the applicant, the applicant's practical experience and such other information as the Commissioner may require. Application shall be filed at least two weeks prior to the date of the examination. 
f.  Examining Board. There is hereby created and continued an Examining Board of Stationary Engineers composed of the Commissioner (or his/her duly authorized representative), a City of White Plains Mechanical Inspector (or other Building Department staff member designated by the Commissioner), a licensed Professional Engineer, two stationary and one refrigeration engineers who work in the City of White Plains. The refrigeration engineer shall serve a one year term then two year terms thereafter. The Stationary Engineer shall serve two-year terms. The three members, other than the Commissioner, shall serve without compensation and shall be appointed by the Mayor. Upon expiration of the term of each member, the Mayor shall appoint a new member to serve for two years. Vacancies in said Board shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term. The Board shall elect its own chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary. A stated meeting of the Board shall be held each month and special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or the Commissioner. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
g.  Examination. Upon notice from the Commissioner, the applicant shall appear before the Board for an examination of the applicant's experience and qualifications. The Board shall submit to the Commissioner a written report in regard to the qualifications of the applicant with its recommendation in favor or rejection of the licensing of the applicant. An applicant who fails an examination under this article cannot qualify for another examination until a period of six months has elapsed, and an applicant who has failed two examinations cannot reapply for another examination until the period of one year has elapsed (from the date of the second exam). A fee prescribed in BCAE Subsection r. shall be paid prior to each examination. 
h.  License. Upon receipt of the Board's favorable recommendation, the Commissioner may issue to the applicant a license containing the name, address and signature of the applicant, and authorizing the applicant to operate in accordance with this article. Each license and renewal thereof shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance and may be renewed for a period of one year from date of expiration upon the payment of a license fee as prescribed in BCAE Subsection r. 
If a license is not renewed within one year of the date of expiration, the holder thereof shall be required to take another examination.  
Chapter 4 - WHITE PLAINS ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  Inspectors/Inspecting Agencies. 
(1)  The City of White Plains performs its own electrical inspections, however there maybe instances when the Building Commissioner may authorize a third party inspection service to make inspections and reinspections of all electrical installations hereafter described, and to approve or disapprove the same. 
(2)  Any Third Party inspection agency desiring to perform inspections in White Plains must register with the Building Department of the City of White Plains by providing the following information and documentation to the Building Commissioner or his designee for review and determination as to its acceptability. 
(3)  Any person desiring to be an Inspector must register with the Building Department of the City of White Plains to perform electrical inspections by providing the following information and documentation to the Building Commissioner or his designee for review and determination as to its acceptability: 
(i)  A copy of a valid and substituting certificate from the International Association of Electrical Inspectors and/or [The National Fire Protection Association] National Certification for Construction Code Inspectors to perform inspections of structures or portions of structures as classified in Section 302 of the Building Code of New York State. The original certificate must be displayed to the Building Commissioner or his designee. 
(ii)  Such person's address and telephone contact information and email address if available. 
(iii)  Proof of insurance, showing worker's compensation, general liability, and other coverage naming the City of White Plains as an insured and agreement to indemnify the City of White Plains in each case in such scope and amount as the City Council shall set by resolution. 
(iv)  If such person is a firm, corporation or other entity, the subject Certificate must be provided for each employee for whom authorization is sought to perform electrical inspection. 
(v)  A fee schedule for charges to be incurred by a property owner for the inspection. 
b.  Required Inspections. 
(1)  During Installation. During the installation of electric wiring systems and service equipment, the building official shall make or cause to be made inspections to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Concealing Work. No work in connection with an electric wiring system shall be covered or concealed until it has been inspected and permission to do so has been granted by the building official. 
(3)  Final Inspection and Test. On completion of the work, the administrative official shall inspect the work and cause tests to be made of the operation of the entire system to ensure compliance with all requirements. 
(4)  Reinspection. The Commissioner shall make or cause to be made a reinspection of an electric installation whenever it is deemed necessary in the interest of public safety. 
c.  Temporary Use. The Commissioner may give temporary permission for a reasonable time to supply and use current in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of approval has been issued; provided that the part covered by the temporary certificate complies with all the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the National Electrical Code. 
d.  Permit and Certificate of Inspection. No wiring system or electrical equipment shall be installed within or on any building or structure or premises, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in any such existing installations without first securing approval and a permit from the building official except as provided herein. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of, for electric wiring, light or power in a building or structure, unless the required Certificate of Completion has been issued by the building official. 
(1)  Exemptions. No permit shall be required for the execution and use of the following classes of work: 
(i)  Repairs and Maintenance. Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
(ii)  Public Service Agencies. The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment for the operation of telecommunication systems by public service agencies up to the "Point of Presence" room within the building. 
(iii)  Power Companies. The installation, alteration or repair of electrical equipment of a power or public service company for its use in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electricity. 
(iv)  Temporary Testing Systems. The installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(2)  Applications. Applications for permits shall be made to the Commissioner on forms supplied by the Commissioner. Permits shall bear the name of the electrician to whom it is issued, the location of the premises, and such other information as the Commissioner may require. 
(3)  License Required for Permit. No permit shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation other than a licensed electrician except those not required by this article to have licenses. 
(4)  Posting of Permits. The permit shall be posted by the electrician on the premises in which the installation is to be made, adjacent to the existing or proposed location of the electric service meter. 
(5)  Annual Permit. In lieu of an individual permit for each new addition to or alteration of an already approved electrical installation, the building official may issue an annual permit upon application therefor to any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more special electricians in the building, structure or premises owned or operated by the applicant for the permit. 
(6)  Annual Records. The person to whom an annual permit is Issued shall keep a detailed record of all changes and alterations to an approved electrical installation made under such annual permit and such records shall be accessible to the building official at all times or shall be filed with the building official as is designated. 
e.  Existing Installations. No alterations or additions shall be made to any existing installations of electric wiring or equipment for which a permit is required within or on any building, structure or premises except as provided in EC Part 1, Subsection d. without first securing the approval and a permit from the building official. 
(1)  Defective Wiring. If upon reinspection an electric wiring system is found defective and unsafe, the building official shall revoke all certificates and permits in effect; and the use of such system shall be discontinued until it has been made to conform to this article and the approved rules and after a new permit has been issued. 
f.  Electricians. 
(1)  License Required. It shall be unlawful for any master or special electrician to engage in work of the character herein defined without first having obtained a license from the [Board of Electrical Control] Office of the Westchester County Clerk. 
(i)  Unlawful Use of License. It shall be unlawful for any licensed master electrician whose license is used in connection with work not actually done by the electrician or the electrician's employees. Nor shall any special electrician's license be used in connection with work not actually done by the electrician for the electrician's employer. 
(ii)  Exceptions. The provisions of this article pertaining to licenses shall not apply to electric corporations as defined in the transportation corporations law of the State of New York, nor to any person or corporation engaged in their behalf, not to the employees of any of them in performing such work in the conduct of the business of such corporations in installing, maintaining or repairing wires, apparatus or fixtures or other appliances used by such companies and necessary for or to their business, whether or not such wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures or other appliances are on its own premises, unless the work in connection therewith is done within a building not owned by such corporation. Such provisions shall not apply to the electrical work of a telephone, telegraph, central station protective, railroad or radio broadcasting company, nor to those performing electrical work for such a company where said electrical work is an integral part of the plant or service used by such company in rendering its duly authorized service to the public. Such provisions shall not apply to the operation of electrical equipment within a theater or other place of public assemblage where entertainment or exhibition is provided, motion picture studio, theatrical studio or motion picture film laboratory, nor to the installation of temporary electrical cables, assembling or erection of such theatrical, sound recording, sound reproducing or motion picture equipment where such equipment is an integral part of the theater, traveling production, motion picture studio or laboratory used in the production or exhibition of stage or motion picture attractions.  
Part 2. - Electrical Installation 
a.  Light Fixture Support. 
(1)  Recessed lay in fixtures shall be hung from the building structure at two points (opposite corners) with fixture chain or #12 AWG wire. Provide lag screws at termination points. 
(2)  Recessed lay in fixtures that are utilized for emergency lighting purposes shall be hung from the building structure at four points with fixture chain or #12 AWG wire. Provide lag screws at termination points. 
b.  Illuminated Exit Sign Support. 
(1)  All illuminated exit signs shall be supported from the building structure with fixture chain or #12 AWG wire.  
Chapter 5 - WHITE PLAINS FIRE CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  Application of Code. 
(1)  The provisions of this Code shall apply equally to new and existing conditions. 
(2)  Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed as applying to the transportation of any article shipped under the jurisdiction of and in compliance with the regulations prescribed by the Department of Transportation (DOT), nor as applying to the military forces of the United States. 
(3)  In general, wherever the term "Commissioner" is used, it shall mean the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
b.  Authority to Enter Premises. 
(1)  The Chief of the Fire Department, or any designated inspector thereof, may at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises for the purpose of making any inspection, or investigation which, under the provisions of this Code, the Chief or Inspector deem necessary to be made. 
(2)  The Chief of the Fire Department, or any designated inspector thereof, shall be permitted by the owner, lessee, manager, or operator of any building or premise to enter and inspect their building or premise at the time and for the purpose stated in this section. 
c.  Inspection of Buildings and Premises. 
(1)  The Chief of the Fire Department, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety (or the Commissioner's designated representative), may designate competent members of the Fire Department to make the inspections, keep the records or perform any other duty required by this Code and any inspection or order given by such designated member shall have the same force and effect as if performed or given by the Fire Chief personally. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to inspect, or cause to be inspected by the Division of Fire Prevention, or by the Fire Department officers or members, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of dwellings containing less than three dwelling units, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this Code and of any other ordinance affecting the fire hazard. 
(3)  The Chief of the Fire Department or an inspector upon the complaint of any person, or whenever it is deemed necessary, shall inspect any buildings and premises within their jurisdiction. 
(4)  Whenever any of the officers, members or inspectors of the Fire Department or Division of Fire Prevention shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials as set forth below, it shall be ordered that such dangerous conditions or materials be removed or remedied in such manner as may be specified by the Chief. 
(i)  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials. 
(ii)  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials. 
(iii)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly combustible materials. 
(iv)  Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts or inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible material from hoods, grease extractors, and ducts. 
(v)  Obstructions to or on fire escapes, designated access openings in exterior walls for fire department use, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire. 
(vi)  Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes or other exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus of fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, creates a hazardous condition. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Part to rent, lease or otherwise allow, permit, or suffer the occupancy of any building or premises, or any part thereof, without the inspection and certificate as required herein. Such certificate shall be issued on an annual basis and shall be valid until reissued, renewed or revoked, or may be issued for a specific period of time. 
(i)  No certificate shall be issued until the appropriate fee is paid in full to the Department of Public Safety. In addition, no certificate shall be issued unless all applicable provisions and requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, the City of White Plains Municipal Code, and the Supplemental Uniform Building and Fire Prevention Code of the City of White Plains are complied with and met. 
(ii)  The non-refundable fee assessed annually for the inspection and certificate shall be five dollars ($5.00) per thousand dollars of assessed value. 
(iii)  Owner-occupied rental dwellings containing not more than two rental units owned by one or more natural persons, all of whom are sixty-five (65) years of age or older at the time of inspection, or any building or premises owned by a non-profit corporation as defined by Section 102 of the Not-For-Profit Corporation Law of the State of New York, are exempt from the inspection fee, however, such exemption shall not be applicable to fines levied in connection with any violation of this Part. 
(iv)  The fees established by this section shall be administered by the Department of Public Safety and may be billed in the manner provided for collection of real property taxes or in the manner otherwise deemed most effective by such Department. The annual inspection fee shall be due and owing without penalty for thirty (30) days commencing on July 1 of each billing period, which shall be the period from July 1 to June 30 of each calendar year, provided that the first billing period shall begin on the effective date of this Ordinance. If not collected within said thirty (30) day period, interest from the expiration of said thirty (30) day period to the date of payment shall be added to the amount of such fee at the rate of one percent for each month period, or any part thereof, until the fee is paid. 
(v)  Failure to maintain a current valid certificate will result in a fine equal to double the inspection fee. Cancelled appointments consisting of less than twenty-four (24) hours notice, or a failure to gain entry to the premises on the scheduled date, shall result in a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense, and a fine of one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) for all subsequent offenses. 
(vi)  If the premises, or any part thereof, fails inspection, all violations must be corrected and another inspection scheduled. Failure to correct the violations by the date of the scheduled re-inspection shall result in an inspection fee equal to the originally assessed fee. 
d.  Orders. The Commissioner shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the hazards inspected and for safeguarding of life and property from fire. Whenever the Commissioner shall find in any building or upon any premises combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable materials and which is so situated as to endanger property or the occupants thereof; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or egress of occupants in case of fire, it shall be ordered that the same be removed or remedied. Whenever the Commissioner shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes, lack of automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or, by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or, from any other cause, is especially liable to fire, and, which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants thereof, the deficiency shall be remedied, or the installation of automatic fire extinguishing equipment or other fire alarm apparatus may be required. 
Any order authorized herein shall be given verbally at the time of inspection by the member of the Fire Department making such inspection to any person of suitable age and discretion apparently in charge of the premises. If no person shall be found in charge of the premises, or the verbal order is not complied with within a reasonable time, or whenever the Commissioner deems it advisable to serve an immediate written order, a written copy of the order signed by the Commissioner or the Commissioner's duly authorized representative shall be delivered to the owner, lessee, if any, and person apparently in charge of the premises. If neither the owner, lessee nor person in charge of the premises can be found, a copy of the order shall be affixed in a conspicuous place at the entrance to said premises and a duplicate shall be mailed to the owner or his agent or lessee at such person's last known address. Any order authorized herein shall forthwith be complied with by the owner, lessee and occupant of such premises or building. 
The Commissioner may require any building or premises which in the Commissioner's opinion is inadequately protected against fire perils to be vacated, and may require any equipment or appliance causing such condition to be condemned and removed. 
e.  Service of Orders. 
(1)  The service of orders for the correction of violations of this code shall be made upon the owner, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions, either verbally or by delivering a copy of same to such person or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the premises or on the door to the entrance of the said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the said person a copy of the said order, or, if such owner is not in the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by sending such copy by registered or certified mail to the owner's last known post office address. 
(2)  If buildings or other premises are owned by one person and occupied by another under lease or otherwise, the orders issued in connection with the enforcing of this Code shall apply to the occupant thereof, except where the rules or orders require the making of additions to or changes in the premises themselves, such as would immediately become real estate and be the property of the owner of the premises; in such cases the rules or orders shall affect the owner and not the occupant unless it is otherwise agreed between the owner and the occupant. 
f.  Driveways for Fire Apparatus. 
(1)  Such driveways shall be provided and maintained in accordance with Section 503 of the Fire Code of the New York State and approved by the Fire Department and shall be adequate to admit the driving in and out of the Fire Department apparatus and shall be kept clear of vehicles or obstruction. Such driveways shall be posted with signs, installed by the City, indicating "NO STANDING - FIRE LANE". Such signs shall be of metal, 12 inches by 18 inches, reflective, with red letters on white background, and placed every 75 feet on the driveway. Any person who shall park or leave any vehicle or obstruction on such driveways displaying such Fire Department posted regulation, shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
g.  False Alarms. No person shall by outcries, ringing of bells, sounding of alarm, or otherwise, raise a false alarm of fire. 
h.  Injuring Fire Department Equipment. No person shall injure in any manner any hose, fire engine or other apparatus used for the extinguishment of fires, belonging to or used by the Fire Department. No person shall drive a vehicle over such hose except the driver of a vehicle carrying the United States mail, driver of an ambulance when conveying any patient or injured persons to any hospital, or when proceeding to the scene of any accident by which any person or persons have been injured; or any driver of any vehicle who may be permitted to drive over or across any such hose by the officer of the Fire Department in command of the force operating at any such fire and under Fire Department direction. 
i.  Investigation of Fires. The Fire Department shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the municipality which is of suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to person or by which property has been destroyed or substantially damaged. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire and, if it appears that such fire is of suspicious origin, the Chief shall be immediately notified of the facts; the Chief shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
j.  Fire Records. The Chief shall keep a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the Fire Department officers and inspectors. 
k.  Permits. 
(1)  A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials, or to conduct processes, which produce conditions hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment used in connection with such activities. Such permit does not take the place of any license required by law. It shall not be transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall require a new permit. 
(2)  Before a permit may be issued, the Chief, or the Chief's inspectors or assistants, shall inspect and approve the receptacles, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used. In cases where laws or regulations enforceable by departments other than the Fire Department are applicable, joint approval shall be obtained from all city departments or other agencies concerned. 
(3)  All applications for a permit required by this Code shall be made to the Commissioner in such form and detail as shall be prescribed. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans as required by the Fire Department. 
(4)  Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein, and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any officer of the Fire or Police Departments. 
(5)  The Commissioner may revoke a permit or approval issued if any violation of this Code is found upon inspection or in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
l.  Fire Drills. Fire drills shall be conducted in accordance with Section 405 of the Fire Code of New York State. 
m.  Liability for Damages. 
(1)  This code shall not be construed to hold the municipality or the Fire Department or its members responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect or the permit issued as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment herein. 
(2)  Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the city in the discharge of authorized duties, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and such persons and the city are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any omission or act required or permitted in the discharge of such persons duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed in the lawful discharge of the officer or employee's duties and under the provisions of this Code shall be defended by the City of White Plains or its representative until the final termination of the proceedings. In no case shall the Commissioner or any of the Commissioner's subordinates be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that may be instituted in pursuance of provisions of this Code. Any officer of the Department of Public Safety acting in good faith and without malice, shall be held harmless from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of the official duties in connection therewith. 
n.  Mandatory Fire Report. All fires involving any property damage or personal injury in any part of The City of White Plains shall be immediately reported to fire headquarters of The City of White Plains by telephone (via 911) or by a fire alarm system. Responsibility for said reporting of a fire shall be the duty of the person in charge of the building or facility where the fire occurs. 
o.  Violations. The violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or failure to comply therewith, shall be punishable by a fine as outlined in permit fees (BCAE Subsection r.) and violation fines section, (BCAE Subsection aa.) or imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and each day such violations shall exist or be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building, structure or part thereof, where any violation of this Code shall exist, or any other person who may be employed or assist in the commission of any such violation, and any and all persons who knowingly violate any of the provisions of this Code, or fail to comply therewith, or any requirements thereof, or who shall knowingly violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, shall be severally liable for each and every such violation and noncompliance. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
p.  Conflicts. In any case where a provision of this Chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, property maintenance, health code, or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any other law, ordinance, code, or regulation of The City of White Plains, Westchester County Health Department, County of Westchester or State of New York, the provision which establishes the highest standard shall prevail. 
( Ord. of 5-17-16, § 1 ) 
Editor's note— Section c(5) of Pt. 1 of the White Plains Fire Code was inadvertantley omitted during publication and have been restored to the Code. Said provisions were added by an ordincane adopted on May 28, 2009, and amended on May 7, 2012, May 19, 2014, and May 17, 2016.  
Part 2. - Equipment and Systems 
a.  Standpipes. 
(1)  Required Installations. Not withstanding any other provisions of this Code or Section 905 of the Fire Code of New York State an approved standpipe system(s) shall be provided as herein specified: 
(2)  Building Height. Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout all buildings, where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet above the lowest level of the designated Fire Department vehicle access or where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 30 feet below the highest level of the designated Fire Department vehicle access. Designated Fire Department vehicle access shall be established by the Fire Chief or the Chief's representative. 
Exceptions: 
(i)  Class I stand pipes are allowed in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA. 
(ii)  Class I semi automatic dry standpipes are allowed in open parking garages that are subject to freezing temperatures. A key operated activation device shall be provided at each point of vehicle access into garage. 
(3)  Building Area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story, Class I automatic wet standpipes shall be provided where any portions of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet of travel vertically and horizontally from the designated point of Fire Department vehicle access. 
(4)  Quantity. In any building the number of standpipes shall be such that all parts of every floor can be reached within 35 feet of a nozzle attached to 100 feet of hose connected to a standpipe. 
(5)  Pipe. All standpipes and automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed in strict compliance with NFPA 14, generally accepted standards and as approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Minimum pipe materials and fittings for fire standpipes shall be per NFPA 14. Minimum schedule 40 pipe shall be installed whenever a combined sprinkler/standpipe riser system is proposed. Pipes for all standpipes and sprinkler systems shall be designed so that every pipe is fed by a supply line of at least the same diameter or greater. Pipes run to hose cabinets shall be of a minimum diameter of one and one-half inches. 
(6)  Hose. 
(i)  Standpipes located inside of buildings shall have approved lined hose, (where required) sufficient to reach all parts of the floor, but not in excess of 100 feet, attached to the one-half inch outlet 
(ii)  Such hose shall not be less than one and one-half inches in diameter. 
(iii)  Each line of hose shall be provided with washers at both ends and fitted with an approved nozzle. 
(iv)  Hose shall be kept on approved hose racks or in approved hose cabinets. 
(7)  Water Supply. 
(i)  Not withstanding exception FC Part 2, Subsection a(2)(ii), standpipes shall be supplied under full pressure from an adequate water supply or the water supply shall be furnished automatically by the opening of a hose outlet. 
(ii)  Such water supply shall be furnished by a "street main" in which the pressure is sufficient to maintain a residual pressure as required by NFPA 14 at the most hydraulically remote standpipe while flowing water as described in NFPA 14. 
(8)  Pumps. 
(i)  In buildings requiring a standpipe where the "street mains" cannot maintain a residual pressure as required by NFPA 14 at the top of the most hydraulically remote standpipe an approved fire pump(s) shall be installed in addition to the water supply that is provided, and permanently connected to the required standpipe systems. 
(ii)  The capacities of such pumps shall be sized to maintain the minimum flow rates established in NFPA 14, however the pump shall be not less than 500 gpm. 
(iii)  Such pumps shall have an adequate source of power and shall be supplied in accordance with NFPA 70 and 72. If an emergency power system is required or provided in the building, the fire pump shall be connected to such system. 
(9)  Tests. 
(i)  The fire pump shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 20 and 25. 
b.  Sprinklers. 
(1)  Required Installations. Not withstanding any other provisions of this Code or Section 903 of the Fire Code of New York State, approved automatic sprinkler systems installed in conformity with NFPA 13/13R (as applicable) shall be provided in all buildings herein specified: 
(i)  All new buildings, except as noted below, for which a building permit is issued on or after August 1, 2005. 
(ii)  Conversion of an existing building or portion therein to a more hazardous use group, and including the conversion to an area of public assembly or to a public restaurant, eating or drinking establishment, or cabaret use. 
(iii)  Building addition: including one or more additional stories, or any addition in excess of ten percent of the gross floor area of the existing building, or 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area whichever is greater, for which the addition itself shall comply with all of the Provisions of this Section. For any addition in excess of 50 percent of the gross floor area of the existing building (or exceeding 60 percent of the value of the existing building), both the addition and original building shall comply with all of the provisions of this Section. 
(iv)  If the Level 3 provisions of the existing Building Code of New York State apply to an existing building or a portion of an existing building, then the building or portion thereof shall be fully sprinklered in accordance with this Code. 
(2)  Exceptions. The following buildings are not required to have sprinklers systems: 
(i)  One- and two-family detached homes up to two stories. 
(ii)  Open parking garages and structures, for those stories above grade only. 
(iii)  Detached private parking garages, and open public parking garages of one-story in height, conditioned that such structures are used exclusively for parking and contain no cellars nor other uses, including the dispensing of any flammable fuels or liquids. 
(3)  Sprinkler System Design. All sprinkler systems required under this Section shall comply with the following: 
(i)  Sprinklers (or other approved fire suppression system) shall be installed within all areas and throughout all portions of buildings in accordance with NFPA 13/13R (as applicable), including, but not limited to boiler rooms, mechanical rooms, storage rooms, stairways, closets, etc. 
Sprinklers in stairways shall be located throughout the stairway including all landings and risers. 
Sprinklers shall not be installed in "dedicated" electrical closets, electrical equipment rooms, electrical switchgear rooms, elevator machine rooms, UPS rooms and battery rooms or any other space where the introduction of water would be considered hazardous. (These locations shall be reviewed with the Commissioner). Note: Battery rooms housing "flooded type" batteries shall be provided with an inert gas suppression system. 
Exceptions: 
1.  In Residential Occupancy buildings (R2 & R4), up to four stories, sprinklers shall be installed in all closets and bathrooms that are greater than six square feet in size. 
In all residential occupancy buildings (R1) and residential occupancies (R2) greater than four stories sprinklers shall be installed in all closets and bathrooms regardless of size. 
2.  Other exceptions permitted by NFPA may or may not apply in White Plains. Please Confer with Fire Department. 
(ii)  In buildings containing ceiling plenums, a two-tier sprinkler system (or other approved fire-suppression system) shall be installed with heads mounted at both the finished ceiling level, as well as within every ceiling plenum and/or cavity, except that all buildings of fireproof or noncombustible construction shall not be required to have sprinklers within such ceiling plenum/cavities. 
(iii)  All new sprinkler systems shall be of a "fully-supervised" design equipped throughout with both floor valve supervision and main sprinkler valve supervision (for each and all sprinkler valves) connected to the central fire alarm system. 
(iv)  Sprinkler system design drawings shall be submitted for permit prior to the start of any installation work. Designs shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). 
(4)  Pipe. 
(i)  Piping shall be ferrous or copper drawn, and shall be designed to withstand when ready for service, a water pressure of not less than 200 pounds per square inch for two hours without leakage at joints, valves, fittings or any part of the piping. 
Exception: Plastic pipe as defined and approved by the Fire Code of New York State shall be permitted for sprinkler systems in 1 & 2 family houses (R-3) and Residential (R-2 and R-4) occupancies up to four stories. 
(ii)  Minimum schedule 40 pipe shall be installed whenever a combined sprinkler/standpipe riser system is proposed. 
(5)  Valves. Inspector test valves, for testing the most remote sections shall be installed. Such valves may empty to the exterior of the building, or be of the approved interior type. Test valves shall have capped hose threads, to receive a hose for testing. 
(6)  Water Supply. Required sprinkler systems shall be connected to two independent sources of water supply, at least one of which shall be automatic in action. A single connection to the public street main of a reliable water system shall be deemed sufficient when tests indicate an adequate supply is available to the most hydraulically remote sprinklers. 
(7)  Fire Department Connections. 
(i)  Every sprinkler and standpipe system shall be equipped with approved Siamese connections. 
(ii)  There shall be a Siamese connection on each street frontage or, when the building sets back from the street lines, a Siamese shall be provided on each accessible exterior wall. If a frontage or exterior wall, is less than 50 feet in length, no such connection will be required on that frontage if the required Siamese connection is provided on the other frontages. All such Siamese connections shall be interconnected so that the water supply from any source will supply the complete sprinkler system. 
(iii)  Siamese connections shall be identified by color as ordered by the Fire Chief in addition to the regular markings of standpipes, automatic sprinkler, cellar sprinkler, basement sprinklers and wall hydrants. Colors shall be as follows: 
Sprinklers - Green 
Standpipe and Wall Hydrants - Red 
Combination Standpipe and Sprinkler - Yellow 
Deluge - Blue 
c.  Fire Alarm Systems. 
(1)  Not withstanding any other provisions of this Code or Section 907 of the Fire Code of New York State an approved manual fire alarm system shall be installed within and throughout all areas of the following occupancy groups in accordance with NFPA 72: 
(i)  Parking structures three stories (or 35 feet in height) or greater. 
d.  Fire Alarm and Detection Systems. 
(1)  Required Installations. Not withstanding with any other provisions of this Code or Section 907 of the Fire Code of New York State, an approved manual and automatic fire alarm system with smoke detection capabilities shall be installed as follows: 
(i)  Where work is proposed to be performed in an existing building or areas of existing building that is classified as an alteration "Level 2" as defined in the Existing Building Code of New York State such existing buildings or areas of existing buildings shall be equipped with a fire alarm and detection system with complete area smoke detection in accordance with NFPA 72. 
(ii)  All buildings or structures required to have sprinkler coverage per FC Part 2, Subsection b. shall be equipped with a fire alarm system with complete area smoke detection in accordance with NFPA72. 
Exceptions: 
(I)  A fire alarm system with smoke detection shall be provided in all R-2 occupancies in common/public corridors, storage rooms, shared amenity spaces, electrical/mechanical rooms etc. Smoke detectors (connected to the building fire alarm system) are not required within the dwelling units. Single/Multiple Station smoke detection shall be provided in each dwelling unit in accordance with the Fire Code of New York State. 
In addition to multiple station smoke detectors required in dwelling units a minimum of one heat detector shall be provided in each kitchen/kitchenette connected to the building fire alarm system. This provision applies to any R-1, R-2 & R-4 buildings that contain kitchens or kitchenettes. 
(II)  Parking garages. Smoke detection shall not be required in parking areas. 
(III)  Other exceptions permitted by NFPA may or may not apply in White Plains. Please confer with Fire Department. 
(2)  Detector Locations. 
(i)  In general, all areas shall be provided with smoke detection including, but not limited to, corridors, hallways, passageways, storage areas, lobbies, closets, offices, rooms, battery rooms, electrical equipment rooms, mechanical equipment rooms, elevator shafts and elevator machine rooms. 
(ii)  Smoke detection shall be installed within the ceiling cavity of all buildings. Detector spacing shall be approximately one per 5,000 sq. ft. of ceiling cavity space. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings equipped with return duct detection in the ceiling plenum shall not require area smoke detection within such plenum. 
2.  Buildings equipped with a smoke control system so described in The White Plains Smoke Control Code shall not require area detection within such plenum. 
3.  Ceiling cavities which are inaccessible (e.g. gypsum board ceilings) shall not require smoke detectors. 
(iii)  Heat detection (In lieu of smoke detectors) shall be installed in boiler rooms, janitors closets, kitchens, pantries, and spaces with high or low temperature or other environmental conditions that would preclude the use of smoke detectors. 
e.  Plans and Specifications. Plans and specifications for the installation, extension, modification, alteration or removal from service of any automatic fire, alarm and detection systems shall be submitted to the Division of Fire Prevention and the Department of Building prior to the commencement of any work. 
f.  Smoke Venting of Interior Exitway Stairways. All new enclosed exitway stairways shall be equipped with an approved automatic smoke-actuated roof scuttle vent, or other approved automatic smoke purge system located at the uppermost level. The scuttle shall be activated by a smoke detector. Ambient conditions shall be considered when selecting the type of smoke detection devices. 
Exception: If the building is required to have a stair pressurization system, smoke venting is not required. 
g.  Alarm Notification. Whenever a fire alarm is activated in any building occupancy (except institutional and others as directed by the Fire Chief), all occupants shall vacate the premises immediately in an orderly fashion. 
h.  Alarm Transmission. Unless otherwise permitted by the Fire Chief all firm alarm systems shall be remotely monitored. 
i.  Adequate Radio Coverage. No person shall erect, construct, maintain, change the use of or construct an addition to any building or structure of Type I or Type II construction which is located more than 75 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access and/or having a floor level more than 30 feet below the lowest level of exit discharge which fails to support adequate radio coverage for the City of White Plains Radio Communications System, including, but not limited to, radio coverage for emergency service workers, firefighters and police officers. 
j.  Equivalent Facilitation. Nothing in this Code is intended to prevent the use of designs or technologies as alternatives to those prescribed in this Code provided they result in substantially equivalent or greater construction, performance etc. The applicant shall provide all technical information requested by the Commissioner so the equivalent facilitations can be evaluated. The Commissioner reserves the right to approve or disapprove any submission at his/her discretion.  
Part 3. - Special Property Uses or Conditions 
a.  Places of Assembly. 
(1)  Permit required. A place of assembly as defined herein shall not be maintained, operated or used as such without a permit from the Commissioner, except that no permit shall be required for any place of assembly used solely as a place of religious worship as approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety. 
(2)  Overcrowding. A person shall not permit overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved number of occupants of any place of public assemblage. The fire department or police department, upon finding overcrowding conditions or obstruction in aisles, passageways, or other means of egress; or upon finding any condition which constitutes a serious menace to life and safety, shall cause the performance, presentation, spectacle or entertainment to be stopped until such a condition or obstruction is corrected. 
b.  Family Day Care Homes. 
(1)  Electrical heaters or other portable heating devices shall not be used in rooms accessible to children regardless of the type of fuel used. 
(2)  Extinguishers shall be installed in the kitchen, boiler room, and hallways. 
(3)  Children shall be cared for only on such floors as are provided with readily accessible alternate means of egress which are remote from each other. 
(4)  A procedure for evacuation of the children shall be established. 
(5)  Quarterly fire drills shall be held and a written record of such drills shall be on file. 
c.  Day Care Centers. Extinguishers shall be installed in the following areas: 
(1)  One fire extinguisher suitable for Class "A" fires shall be installed for each 2,500 square feet of floor space within 100 feet of travel distance from any point. 
(2)  Kitchens shall be equipped with a Class "B" extinguisher, minimum five pound capacity, wall mounted and easily accessible. 
The extinguisher shall be a dry chemical or carbon dioxide type. 
(3)  A Class "B" extinguisher shall be provided for the boiler room, if the boiler room is part of the day care center. 
d.  Vacant Buildings and Buildings under Construction or being Demolished. 
(1)  Vacant Buildings. Vacant or unoccupied buildings or portions thereof shall maintain all required sprinkler and standpipe systems and all component parts in a workable condition at all times. Fire alarm systems shall be maintained in operating condition at all times. 
(2)  Buildings Under Demolition. When a building is being demolished and a standpipe or sprinkler system is existing within said building, such standpipe and/or sprinkler system shall be maintained in an operable condition so as to be available for use by the Fire Department. Such standpipe and/or sprinkler system shall be demolished with the building, but in no case shall the system, or systems, be more than one floor below the floor being demolished. 
(3)  Buildings Under Construction. During construction in buildings in which standpipes are required by this Code, such standpipes shall be installed as construction progresses, in such manner that they are always ready for Fire Department use to the top and lowest most floor of construction that has been erected to date. Standpipes shall be provided with Fire Department connections on outside of building at street level and be indicated with a lighted red light and sign. One or more outlets with valves shall be provided on each floor as the standpipe rises. All connections and fittings shall be designed to fit the White Plains Fire Department equipment.  
Part 4. - Reserved  
Part 5. - Materials 
a.  Flammable and Combustible Liquids. 
(1)  General Requirements. 
(i)  Permit Required. A permit shall be required for the storage or handling of more than 55 gallons of corrosive liquids; or more than 500 pounds of oxidizing materials; or more than 500 millicuries of radioactive material; or more than 2,000 cubic feet of flammable compressed gas; or ten pounds or more of organic peroxides; or 500 pounds or more of ammonium nitrate; or any amount of highly toxic material or poisonous gas. 
b.  Explosives. 
(1)  General Requirements. No person shall manufacture any explosives, within the corporate limits of the municipality except that any explosives may be manufactured in the laboratories, in colleges and similar institutions for the purpose of investigation and instruction. 
(i)  The mixing of any substances which result in the creation or concoction of an explosive mixture is prohibited except in laboratories in colleges and similar institutions for the purpose of investigation and instruction, and the use of any such mixture is prohibited. 
(ii)  No person shall possess, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, discharge, transport, or dispose of in any manner any explosives within the municipality, except by the authority of a written permit therefore as specified herein. 
(iii)  No person shall discharge any explosives, except small arms ammunition and construction devices such as explosive rivets and explosive-driven pins or studs, for purposes other than blasting or demolition operations. 
(2)  Storage. 
(i)  Except while being transported or blasted or while in the custody of a common carrier awaiting shipment or delivery to a consignee during the time permitted by Federal Law, all explosives shall be stored in magazines in accordance with this section. Each such magazine shall be at all times in charge of a competent person at least 21 years of age, and is physically fit. It shall be unlawful for any other person to have access to the magazine or to place, handle or remove any explosives therein. 
(ii)  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to store or keep any explosives in a magazine without first having obtained from the Commissioner a permit therefore. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by a fee as outlined in for each magazine. Each permit shall state the maximum quantity of explosives that may be stored in the magazine, the location for which it is approved, the date issued, the name and signature of the person authorized to be in charge of the magazine, and such other information as the Commissioner may deem necessary. The permit shall be good for only the one location designated therein, shall not be transferable, and shall expire not later than one year from date thereof. No such permit shall be issued until the Commissioner, after inspection, has been satisfied that the magazine complies with the other provisions of this Article. Such permit shall be posted on the inside of the door or cover of the magazine in such position as will expose it to full view when the magazine is open. 
(3)  Transportation on City Street. 
(i)  License Required. It shall be unlawful to transport any explosives, except in a vehicle for which a license has been issued by the Commissioner. Application for such license shall be accompanied by a fee as outlined in each license, or renewal thereof, shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance and may be renewed upon payment of the permit fee. 
c.  Blasting. 
(1)  General Requirements. 
(i)  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to blast or carry on any blasting operations without first having obtained a permit therefore from the Commissioner. The permit shall state the location for which it is approved, the date issued, the name of the person authorized to do the blasting and such other information as the Commissioner may deem necessary. The permit shall be good only for the one location designated therein, shall not be transferable and shall expire not later than one year from date thereof. No such permit shall be granted unless the person to be authorized thereby to blast is at least 21 years of age and has satisfied the Commissioner as to such person's experience in blasting. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by a fee as outlined in. 
(ii)  Hours of Blasting. It shall be unlawful to blast or carry on any blasting operations after 5 p.m. or before 8 a.m., nor shall any blasting be done on Sunday, except with the prior written approval from the Commissioner. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
(i)  This article shall be strictly complied with except where extraordinary conditions exist in the opinion of the Commissioner. To meet these conditions not entirely covered in this article, the Commissioner may issue special orders to meet these conditions or the Commissioner may order complete compliance with the Standards of the U.S. Bureau of Mines and its amendments, as periodically adopted. 
(ii)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to the regular military or naval forces of the United States the duly authorized militia of this State, or to the Police and Fire Departments in the proper performance of their duty. 
(iii)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to signal rockets or devices or compositions used to obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic effects, which are covered in the Article on Fireworks of this Code. 
(iv)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to the laboratories of schools, colleges and similar institutions when confined to the purpose of instruction or research, or explosives in the forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia. 
d.  Ammunition. 
1.  General Requirements. 
(i)  Manufacture Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to manufacture small arms ammunition in The City of White Plains. 
(ii)  Use. It shall be unlawful to discharge unnecessarily in or into any street, highway or public place, or within 500 feet of a building, any rifle, gun, pistol, revolver, or other appliance whether projecting or exploding any bullet, cartridge, blank cartridge, cap or any explosive substance or mixture of chlorates or nitrates, except that a cannon or piece of artillery may be discharged or fired upon the written permission of the Commissioner, but no such permission shall be construed to incur on the part of the city any liability for damage by reason of such firing. 
2.  Storage and Sale of Small Ammunition. 
(i)  Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to store, sell or offer for sale any small arms ammunition without first having obtained a permit therefore from the Commissioner. Application for such permit shall be made on a form provided by the Commissioner and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee as outlined in. Each such permit, or renewal thereof, shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance and may be renewed for a period of one year from date of expiration after application and payment of an inspection fee. No such permit or renewal shall be issued until the Commissioner, after inspection, has been satisfied that the other provisions of this article have been complied with. Such permit shall state the location of the premises, the maximum amount of ammunition to be stored at any time and such other information as the Commissioner may deem necessary. 
(ii)  Precautions. The amount of ammunition authorized by any permit shall not exceed the normal amount required to carry on the business at the location specified. 
(iii)  Exception. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the hand loading of small arms ammunition for private personal use and not for resale. 
e.  Firearms. 
1.  General Requirements. 
(i)  Definitions. 
(I)  "Dealer" shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling firearms or ammunition at wholesale or retail; any person engaged in the business of repairing firearms or making or fitting special barrels, stocks, or trigger mechanism to firearms any person who is a pawnbroker. 
(II)  "Firearm" shall mean a pistol, revolver, or other firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person. 
2.  Display and Storage. Dealers shall not publicly display more than one model of any type of firearm. Display cases will be locked at all times when not guarded by the salesperson. Duplicate models shall be stored in an area on the premises that can be secured and is not in view of the public. At the close of each business day, all firearms shall be stored in a safe or locked storage container which is not in view of the public and which shall be approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety of the City of White Plains. 
e.  Fireworks. 
(1)  General Requirements. 
(i)  Definitions. Shall mean and include any combustible, or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which required fire underneath to propel the same, or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substances, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap manufactured in accordance with the DOT regulations for packing and shipping as provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps. 
(ii)  Manufacture, Sale and Storage Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to manufacture, store or sell fireworks in The City of White Plains. 
(2)  Use. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful to use, discharge, or cause to be discharged, ignited, fired or otherwise set in action any fireworks except as permitted by subdivision (ii) of this section. 
(ii)  The Commissioner may issue a permit to a properly qualified person for giving a public display of fireworks in public parks or other open spaces. 
Any person desiring to procure a permit for a public display of fireworks shall make written application to the Commissioner at least one week before the proposed display, giving the applicant's name, place of residence and age. Such application shall also state time and place at which it is proposed to give such public display, the name, address and experience of each person who is to discharge the fireworks, and the kinds, quantities and wholesale market value of the fireworks proposed for use. Such application shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. Such application shall be accompanied by an insurance policy approved as to sufficiency by the Commissioner and as to form by the Corporation Counsel and conditioned for the payment to the city or any other person entitled thereto of any loss, damage or injury resulting to persons or property by reason of the discharge of use of such fireworks, regardless of negligence. Such application shall be accompanied also by an inspection fee of $25.00. The Commissioner, upon receipt of such application, policy and fee, shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the premises named in the application as the place where it is proposed to give the public display of fireworks, and if in the Commissioner's judgement, it would not be hazardous to surrounding property or dangerous to any person or persons to permit such public display at such location, the Commissioner shall approve such application. If such application is so approved, and it appears therefrom that the applicant is of legal age and that each of the persons who are to discharge the fireworks has had experience, the Commissioner shall issue a permit in writing to such applicant, to conduct such public display of fireworks Such permit shall designate time and place at which the display is to be given, the kinds and quantities of fireworks to be used, and the distance to be preserved between the place of discharge and the bystanders and nearby buildings. No other kinds and not greater quantities of fireworks and no less distance than those specified in the permit shall be used or permitted in such public display. In case it shall be impracticable to make the display at the time authorized in the permit, the Commissioner may authorize such display at another time, under the original application and policy, by certification on the permit, and without exacting another fee therefore. 
(3)  Disposal of Unfired Fireworks. Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks remaining. 
(4)  Exceptions. Nothing in this article shall be held to mean or include any small arms ammunition or shall be deemed to apply to the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads or others requiring them, nor to the possession, sale or use of normal stocks of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies. 
(5)  Seizure of Fireworks. The Chief shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held, in violation of this article. 
e.  Material for Welding and Cutting. 
(1)  Calcium Carbide Storage. 
(i)  Calcium Carbide and Acetylene Manufacture Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to manufacture acetylene in The City of White Plains.  
Part 6. - Fire Safety Practices 
a.  Fire Safety Safeguards. 
(1)  Interior Protection. 
(i)  Handling Readily Combustible Materials. No person making, using, storing or having in charge, or control of any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible waste materials shall not fail or neglect at the close of each day to cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in an orderly manner to be removed from the building or stored in suitable vaults or in metal or metal-lined, covered, receptacles or bins. The Commissioner may require suitable baling presses to be installed in stores, apartment buildings, factories and similar places where accumulations of paper and waste materials are not removed at least every second day. 
(I)  Permit Required. No person shall store in any building or upon any premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible empty packing, cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, or rubber tires, or baled cotton, rubber or cork, or other similarly combustible material without a permit form [from] the Commissioner. 
(II)  Storage Requirements. Storage in buildings shall be orderly, shall not be within two feet of the ceiling, sprinkler head or girder whichever may be lowest, and not so located as to endanger exit from the building. Storage in the open shall not be more than 20 feet in height, and shall be at least 50 feet from the nearest building. All such storage shall be in a compact and orderly manner. 
b.  Miscellaneous Requirements. 
(1)  Additional Regulations. It shall be unlawful to: 
(a)  Remove switch box, fuse or junction box covers and leave exposed. 
(b)  Use improper fuses. 
(c)  Use extension cords over eight feet long. 
(d)  Use extension cords as lighting circuits. 
(e)  Store combustible materials near electric motors (minimum two feet). 
(f)  Operate electric motors that are in a dirty or hazardous condition. 
(g)  Use electrical fixtures which are defective or improperly installed. 
(h)  Use electric hot plates, glue pots, soldering irons, etc. on combustible surfaces. 
(i)  Pile or store combustible material against smoke pipes, flues furnaces, steam pipes, etc. 
(j)  Operate any furnace or other heating device with holes rusted through smoke pipes. 
(k)  Accumulate rubbish, newspaper, or flammable material in any assembly, educational, institutional, residential, mercantile office or industrial occupancies. 
(l)  Have exposed wood lath or exposed caused by breaks in plaster walls or ceiling. 
(m)  Have windows with broken ropes or chains opening into fire escapes, or windows that will not open. 
(n)  Have dumbwaiter shaft doors that are not self-closing. 
(o)  Have rubbish or flammable materials under stairs, bottom of elevator or dumbwaiter shafts, or stored in garages which are located under buildings. 
(p)  Operate kitchens with excess amount of grease around ranges, broilers, deep-fryers, or in hoods, exhaust ducts or fans. 
(q)  Leave oily waste, rags, or greasy material except in metal cans with metal covers. 
(r)  Obstruct any entrances, exit, exitway stairs, stair landings, aisle, passageway, hall or ramp. 
(s)  Lock any exit door during the hours when premises are occupied by persons who may have to use same in case of emergency. 
(t)  Obstruct fire escapes with air conditioners, clothes lines, or by placing any material or object on or under same. 
(u)  To block open any fire doors in basements, boiler rooms, refrigerator rooms, storage rooms, halls, fire towers, or passageways. 
(v)  Have fire doors with fusible links for self-closing purposes that have not been properly installed or are not in proper working condition. 
(w)  Store any combustible material or rubbish in boiler rooms or air conditioning machinery rooms. 
(x)  Clean any articles or parts with flammable liquids in open containers. 
(y)  Have an accumulation of paint pots, paint cans, paint rags, etc., in any assembly, educational, institutional, residential, mercantile, office, or industrial occupancies. 
(z)  Have painters' drop cloths, linseed oil, turpentine, thinners, open cans of paint, paint brushes soaking in any flammable liquid, etc. except in an approved paint locker or approved storage room. 
(aa)  Operate multiple residence laundries or laundry equipment when laundry rooms and dryers have an excess amount of lint and dust. 
(bb)  Have or erect wood partitions in multiple residence basements. 
(cc)  Have unsealed openings in chimneys. 
(dd)  Store flammable material in open basements. 
(ee)  Use for storage unused dumbwaiter shafts unless fire retarded with a one hour rating material. 
(ff)  Use dumbwaiter shafts unless shafts are vented to the outside. 
(gg)  Use coal or oil heaters without first fire protecting the wood floors under same and adjacent walls. 
(hh)  Have loose excelsior, ribbon paper, or shredded newspaper in any assembly, educational, institutional, residential, mercantile, office, or industrial occupancies except in metal container with metal covers or metal lined bins with metal covered lids provided with a heat actuated releasing device, arranged to close the cover automatically in case of fire. 
(ii)  Leave cock loft scuttle holes open. 
(jj)  Tie-up electric wires on nails, pipes, etc. 
(kk)  Fill, store, or transport Class I or II flammable liquids in glass bottles, jugs, or containers. 
(ll)  Operate any steam boiler without safety guards on water gauge glass. 
(mm)  Handle or store hazardous materials without notifying the Fire and Police Departments. 
(nn)  No radio or television antenna or other wire suspended over a flat roof shall be erected less than eight feet clear above the roof so as to become a serious obstruction to the Fire Department. 
(oo)  It shall be unlawful to attach a television antenna to plumbing Vent pipes extending through the roof. 
(pp)  It shall be unlawful to operate a finishing shop, spray booth, or dip tank without having first obtained a permit from the Commissioner. Application for such permit shall be on a form supplied by the Commissioner and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) and plans showing all essential details and calculations for safe operation. Each such permit, or renewal thereof, shall expire on December 31 next following its issuance and may be renewed for a period of one year from date of expiration after application and payment of an inspection fee of sixty dollars ($60.00). No such permit or renewal shall be issued unitl the Commissioner, after inspection, has been satisfied that the other provisions of this article have been complied with by the applicant. 
( Ord. of 5-17-16, § 1 ; Ord. of 5-30-18, § 1 )  
Chapter 6 - WHITE PLAINS SMOKE CONTROL CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  Application of Code. 
The following uniform standards and procedures shall apply to the design, installation and testing of new smoke purge systems and alterations thereto. 
(1)  New uses: Smoke Purge Systems shall be installed in the following new uses, including, but not limited to, occupied areas and means of egress: 
(i)  Enclosed malls and atriums. 
(ii)  All theaters and auditoriums. 
(iii)  All Public Assembly Uses accommodating 300 persons or more. 
(iv)  All buildings greater than six stories or 75 feet in height. 
(v)  Within any building for those floors below grade that are greater than 7,500 sq. ft. in size and occupied or accessible to the public. 
(vi)  Institutional uses for persons whose movements are limited because of illness, physical or mental handicap. 
(2)  Existing uses: Smoke Purge Systems shall be installed in existing buildings for the uses listed in SCC Part 1, Subsection a, as follows: 
(i)  An addition in excess of 50 percent of the existing building gross floor area, for which both the original building and addition shall comply. 
(ii)  For any existing use where there is an increase in the pre-existing legal occupancy limit. 
(iii)  Any change of an existing occupancy to a use listed under SCC Part 1, Subsection a(1) herein. 
(iv)  Any major alteration (i.e., removal of all walls, ceilings, etc.) in excess of 50 percent of the existing building gross floor area, for those uses listed under SCC Part 1, Subsection a(1) herein. 
(3)  Any modification(s) to an existing smoke purge system, including those resulting from a building (or space) alteration or addition, shall be designed so as to be fully integrated and compatible with the base building smoke purge system. 
b.  Permit Filing and Review Procedure. 
(1)  Three sets of Mechanical drawings (signed and sealed by a Licensed Professional Engineer having mechanical engineering design experience) for smoke purge systems are to be submitted to the Department of Building for review. Drawings must clearly show and identify dampers, controls and smoke purge design and be approved prior to issuance of a mechanical permit. 
(2)  Mechanical design engineer to be required to submit the following along with mechanical drawings: 
(i)  Design Engineer's Affidavit for Mechanical Work. 
(ii)  Narrative description of system operation (describing various operational modes, and addressing all design parameters listed in Item (c.) below. 
c.  Mechanical drawings and permit to be noted as follows: "Mechanical engineer is required to witness for verification purposes the smoke purge system test upon completion of installation and verify that the installation and operation of the system meets the intent of the mechanical design."  
Part 2. - Smoke Purge System Design Parameters 
a.  Smoke purge system ducts, transfers, etc. passing through firerated partitions shall be protected as follows: 
(1)  One Hour rated wall or ceiling. 
(i)  Do not provide a fire or smoke damper at wall penetration. 
(ii)  Sprinkler head(s) are to be installed on fire load side of wall(s), at return air transfer openings. 
(2)  Two hour rated wall or ceiling. 
(i)  Provide automatic combination fire/smoke damper with manual control override. 
(ii)  Activation - Heat link closes damper. 
The damper shall be UL555S classified with low (285°F) and high limit (450°F) temperature stats and open/closed status switches. Dampers maybe electrically or pneumatically operated. 
The damper shall be no smaller than 16 square inches. 
b.  Conduit for Smoke Purge Control 
(1)  Control wiring shall be run in metal conduit. (rigid or EMT). 
(2)  Pneumatic tubing must be copper. 
c.  Ducts through Exitways and Within Rated Ceiling Assemblies. 
(1)  Smoke purge system supply and exhaust ducts passing through a rated exitway or within a fire-rated suspended ceiling assembly shall be wrapped with thermal fiber - two hours or encased in a two-hour rated enclosure. 
(2)  Trapeze hangers to be outside of thermal wrapping. 
d.  Smoke Purge Fans. 
(1)  Smoke Purge System fans must provide for a minimum of six air changes per hour (or greater if necessary), to obtain adequate visibility within legal means of egress within ten minutes of starting smoke purge. (Adequate visibility is interpreted as clear enough to see exit signs to permit a person to safely exit the building). 
(2)  The smoke purge fan system may be designed as either a separate fan system or as an integrated smoke purge /HVAC system, and as required by Section 4 (Building Alterations and Additions). 
(3)  All smoke purge fans (supply and return) and controls (including air compressors) shall be connected to the building emergency or standby generator and adequate electric power provided for same. If no emergency or standby power source is existing a new emergency or standby source shall be established to power the purge system for no less than 90 minutes upon loss of normal power. 
(4)  Manual override switches shall be provided at the fire alarm panel or fire command station panel to control both smoke purge supply and smoke purge exhaust fans separately. 
Refer to Part 3 for more information. 
e.  Duct Work. 
(1)  All smoke purge system ducts shall be galvanized steel with minimum thickness of 22 ga. constructed in accordance with ASHRAE and SMACNA sheetmetal ductwork construction details. Flexible ductwork is not permitted in duct systems that are part of a smoke purge system (return or exhaust ductwork). Flexible duct is permitted at supply diffuser connections and at air handling equipment for vibration isolation (maximum three ft. length). 
(2)  Design and spacing of duct hangers shall be in accordance with SMACNA duct construction details but hangers to be minimum of 20 ga. steel and be of the trapeze type. 
(3)  Where a smoke purge enters a rated shaft, utilized as a smoke exhaust riser, N.F.P.A. requirements for a vertical boot shall be followed (22-inch height, directed upward within the shaft itself), or in lieu of such boot, automatic combination fire/smoke dampers shall be provided at such core shafts. Smoke dampers shall be operated either pneumatically or electrically as previously described in this Part. 
(4)  All smoke purge system components (including ductwork) shall be clearly identified as such by stenciling the function and zone on the components, e.g. Smoke Purge Supply - Zone 2; Smoke Purge Exhaust - Zone 3; Smoke Damper No. 5; etc. Stenciling shall be 6" high red letters located (every ten feet along duct). 
f.  Smoke Purge Coverage. 
(1)  Smoke purge systems shall be designed for a minimum of one zone per floor. 
(2)  All areas of a building or space shall be capable of being purged except as follows: 
(i)  Dwelling units; 
(ii)  Hotel Guest rooms; 
(iii)  Electrical closets, telephone closets, or storage rooms, 75 square feet in size or less. 
g.  Smoke Exhaust of Interior Stairwells. 
(1)  All new interior exitway stairways shall be equipped with an approved automatic smoke-actuated roof scuttle vent, or other approved automatic smoke purge system located at the uppermost ceiling thereof. Such system shall activate the building fire alarm system. 
This provision shall not conflict with stair pressurization provisions of the State of New York codes.  
Part 3. - Sequence of Operation and Control Functions 
a.  Sequence of Operation. 
(1)  The activation of one automatic initiation device (e.g. smoke detector) or pullstation shall cause the central fire alarm system to go into alarm activation in accordance with the sequence required for the particular existing building. 
(Note: If a new building or new fire alarm system contact Fire Prevention Bureau for required sequence of operation). 
In addition, any combination fire/smoke dampers on the floor in alarm shall close. If the low limit temperature firestat (285°F) activates the combination fire/smoke dampers shall close. 
(2)  The simultaneous activation of any two automatic initiation devices (e.g. smoke detectors) or one heat detector or the activation of a single waterflow switch shall cause the central fire alarm system to go into alarm activation in accordance with the sequence of operation required for the particular existing building. 
(Note: If a new building or new fire alarm system contact Fire Prevention Bureau for required sequence of operation). 
In addition, the smoke purge system shall automatically initiate and the following shall occur: 
(i)  Index all smoke dampers on the particular floor in alarm to an "open" position (supply and return) and index all other building smoke dampers (supply and return) to a "closed" position. 
(ii)  Index supply air handling unit(s) air handling (unit(s) or fans) to 100 percent outside air and return air handling unit(s) or fans to 100 percent spill. The return damper (between the supply and return systems) shall be fully closed. 
Note: The return dampers within the air handling units that are part of a smoke purge system shall be a UL smoke damper. 
The smoke purge system shall override the low limit temperature sensor on the fire smoke damper if it was activated. If the high limit temperature firestat (450°) is activated during the purge process the fire/smoke damper shall close permanently and smoke purge will be halted. 
b.  Control Functions: 
(1)  Purge manual control shall be provided at the fire alarm panel or fire command station in the main lobby. This control shall consist of the following: 
(i)  A switch shall be provided for each floor or area that is part of the smoke purge system. The switch shall have three positions "on" "off" and "automatic". 
(ii)  The switch when indexed to the "on" position shall: 
I.  Index all smoke dampers on the particular floor to an open position (supply and return) and index all other building smoke dampers (supply and return) to a "closed" position. 
II.  Index the appropriate supply air handling unit(s)or fans to 100 percent outside air and the appropriate return air handling unit(s) or fans to 100 percent spill. The return damper (between the supply and return systems) shall be fully closed. 
Note: The return dampers within the air handling units that are part of a smoke purge system shall be a UL smoke damper. 
Note: The smoke control system ductwork and components shall be designed and configured to accommodate excessive static pressure that may occur during purge cycle. 
(iii)  The switch when indexed to the "off" position shall: 
I.  Index all smoke dampers on the particular floor or zone to "closed" position (supply and return). 
II.  Index the appropriate supply and return air handling units or fans to their normal mode of operation. 
Note: The smoke control system ductwork and components shall be designed and configured to accommodate excessive ductwork static pressure that may occur during purge cycle. 
(iv)  The switch when indexed to the "automatic" position shall: 
I.  Cause the smoke purge system to be controlled automatically via the fire alarm system. Alarm initiation devices shall cause the purge system to automatically activate. 
During non-alarm conditions the H.V.A.C. systems and fire/smoke dampers that are part of the smoke purge system can be controlled by a building management or similar control system( if one exists) as long as the fire alarm system has override priority. 
The control switches shall not be able to override the fire/smoke damper if the high limit temperature (450°) is activated.  
Part 4. - Smoke Purge System Test 
(1)  Upon completion of system installations, the mechanical design engineer of record shall personally conduct, and oversee, for verification purpose, a field smoke purge test (in the presence of the City of White Plains Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Prevention Bureau representative). 
(2)  Such tests shall be conducted under both normal and emergency power conditions. 
(3)  Any and all necessary modification and system reinforcements (such as boosters, fans, ducts, etc.) shall be provided if smoke purge tests result in unsatisfactory performance. 
(4)  Testing Criteria-Smoke shall be evacuated to such a degree that exit signs shall be clearly visible from a distance of 50 feet within ten minutes of the commencement.  
Chapter 7 - WHITE PLAINS PLUMBING CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  New Plumbing and Gas Piping Systems. This code in conjunction with the Plumbing and Fuel Gas Codes of the State of New York shall apply to plumbing and gas piping systems and to parts thereof, which are hereafter installed in the City of White Plains. 
b.  Existing Plumbing and Gas Piping Systems. 
(1)  General. This code shall also apply to the following existing plumbing and gas piping systems: 
(i)  Plumbing and gas piping systems in a building hereafter occupied for occupancies or uses other than those for which it was occupied when this code became effective. 
(ii)  Plumbing and gas piping systems where the extent of replacements or repairs exceeds 50 percent of the total length of piping in the existing system. 
(2)  Addition or Alteration. 
(i)  Any addition or alteration, regardless of cost, made to a plumbing or gas piping system shall be made in conformity with applicable regulations of this Code. 
(ii)  Where additions or alterations subject parts of existing systems to loads exceeding those permitted herein, such parts shall be made to comply with this Code. 
(3)  Minor Repairs or Replacements. Minor repairs or replacements of any existing system may be made in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system provided such repairs or replacements are made in a safe and sanitary manner. 
(4)  Existing Uses Continued. Except as otherwise provided herein, nothing in this code shall require the removal, alteration, or abandonment of, nor prevent continued use of an existing plumbing or gas piping system. 
c.  Maintenance. Plumbing and gas piping systems subject to this Code shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
d.  Workmanship. Workmanship shall conform to generally accepted good practice. 
e.  Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful to install, extend, alter, repair, or maintain plumbing and gas piping systems in or adjacent to buildings except in conformity with this Code. 
f.  Razing or Removing Structures. When any building is removed or any drainage, sewer, water or gas system is dismantled, before any drainage or plumbing is disturbed or removed, the drainage, sewer, water and gas connections shall be properly disconnected and sealed and inspected in the presence of a plumbing inspector of this city. 
g.  Permits. 
(1)  Permits Required. 
(i)  The following systems shall only be installed under a plumbing permit and only by a Licensed Master Plumber: Sanitary drainage systems, potable water systems, medical gas piping systems; central evacuation (vacuum) piping systems within medical centers and solar energy systems for domestic hot water supply. 
(ii)  Except for the initial connection to a potable water supply (down stream of the backflow device) and the final connection that discharges indirectly into a public or private disposal system the following shall be understood to be components of an automatic sprinkler system and may be installed without a plumbing permit and by other than a licensed master plumber: All piping, tubing, appurtenances and equipment connected or pertaining to such a system, including without limitation sprinkler laterals, sprinkler heads, private overhead and underground water service laterals, fire hydrants and hydrant mains, sprinkler risers, combination risers, combination fire standpipes, hose and fire department connections, sprinkler tank heaters, air lines, thermal systems, gauges, valves, tanks and pumps, beginning at the point where the water is limited to use exclusively for fire protection by installation of an approved backflow prevention device within the building proper. 
h.  Applications. 
(1)  Application for any installation, repair or alteration to any plumbing or gas piping system shall be filed with the Commissioner, on forms furnished by the Commissioner, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location, the type of occupancy and such other pertinent information as may be required. 
(2)  Duplicate drawings and descriptions for all plumbing, drainage, and gas piping shall be properly filed by the owner or agent. The plans must be drawn to scale, or they must be prints of such scaled drawings, and shall consist of such floor plans and sections as may be necessary to show clearly all plumbing and gas piping work to be done, and must show partitions and methods of ventilating water closet compartments. 
(3)  Plumbing, drainage, and gas piping shall not be commenced or proceeded with until said drawings and descriptions shall have been so filed and approved by the Commissioner. 
(4)  No modification of the approved drawings and descriptions will be permitted unless an amendment to the original drawings and descriptions, covering the proposed change or changes is filed with and approved by the Commissioner. 
(5)  Minor repairs or alterations of plumbing, drainage, or gas piping systems may be made without filing drawings and descriptions but such repairs or alterations shall not be construed to include cases where new vertical lines or horizontal branches of soil, waste, or vent pipes are proposed to be used. Notice of such minor repairs or alterations shall be given to the Commissioner and approval of the repair or alteration shall be obtained before the same are commenced and the work shall be done in accordance with the rules and regulations of this Code. 
(6)  Where repairs or alterations, ordered by the Board of Health for sanitary reasons, including cases where new vertical or horizontal lines of soil, waste, vent or gas pipes are proposed to be used or old ones replaced, drawings and descriptions must be filed with and approved by the Commissioner before said repairs or alterations shall be commenced or proceeded with. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Notices must be given to the Commissioner by the plumber when any work is begun, and at such times as the work is ready for mandatory inspections. 
i.  Fees. Refer to Section BCAE Subsection r. 
j.  Plumbers. 
(1)  No person, corporation or co-partnership other than the one licensed by the Westchester County Board of Plumbing Examiners [registered with the Commissioner as required by this section] shall be allowed to install plumbing or gas piping in any building or make connections with any sewer, drain, soil or waste pipe or to any pipe connected therewith, or to carry on or engage in the plumbing business within the City of White Plains. 
(2)  No person, corporation or co-partnership registered as provided in this section, shall for the benefit of any person engaged in the plumbing business who is not registered, apply for, receive or make use of, any permit granted to him by reason of being so registered. 
(3)  The licensed master plumber shall be personally responsible for the proper supervision and layout work for any plumbing work for which he has made application. All workmen engaged by said licensed master plumber for installation of any plumbing work, including site utility sanitary and potable water systems, must be on such licensed master plumber's own payroll and covered by the master plumber's own Workmen's Compensation and Disability Insurance Coverages.  
Part 2. - Water Supply Systems 
a.  Domestic & Fire Service Water (Single vs. Dual Source). 
(1)  Single Supply. For construction of a new building, expansion of an existing building, or change from one use to a more critical use the domestic and fire protection water to the building (off the public water main) need only be a single water service where the building "use" is not determined to be a critical "use". The service size shall be based upon hydraulic calculations of both the total demand of the domestic and fire suppression requirements of the building with a minimum diameter size of two inches. If the calculations dictate a pipe size that is greater in diameter, than the available street main then a dual supply as described under Item 2 shall be provided. 
(2)  Dual Supply. For construction of a new building, expansion of an existing building, or change from one use to a more hazardous use the domestic and fire protection water service to the building (off the public water main) shall consist of two pipes of equal size with a full interconnect inside the building where the building's "use" is determined to be a critical "use". The service size shall be based upon hydraulic calculations of both the total demand of the domestic and fire suppression requirements of the building with a minimum diameter of two inches. "Critical" uses shall include, but not be limited to: 
—  Handling and storage of flammable liquids or gases. 
—  Hospitals, nursing homes, infirmaries, clinics, mental hospitals etc. 
—  Assisted living facilities, retirement homes, etc. 
—  Multifamily residential buildings greater than three stories. 
—  Other institutional uses as deemed by the Commissioner. 
Determinations as to the need for dual services, based on the degrees of criticality, will be made by the Building Department on a case-by-case basis. 
Where provided, separate services are the domestic and fire service lines shall be a minimum of six feet apart. 
The connections from each "water service" supplying domestic and fire suppression requirements shall be equipped with approved backflow prevention devices and installed within the building proper. 
Refer to Figure "A" for a schematic detail of a dual service installation. 
GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Figure A 
b.  Water Supply Tanks. 
(1)  Special Approval. Water supply tanks, other than domestic hot water tanks, shall not be permitted, unless where approved by the Commissioner of Building for conditions where supply and booster pumps are not functionally feasible. If approved, erection of tanks and tank structures shall be in accordance with drawings prepared by a licensed professional engineer (or registered architect) and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Department of Building. 
c.  Water Supply Piping Installation. 
(1)  Water Service Pipe. Water service pipes shall be installed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Commissioner. Connections to the street main shall be in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Department of Public Works of The City of White Plains. 
(2)  Sizing the Water Supply System. 
(i)  Water Service Pipe. The water service pipe shall be of sufficient size to furnish an adequate supply of water to meet the requirements of the building at peak demand. No water service pipe shall be smaller than one inch nominal size, except that where direct supply flush valves are supplied at pressure from the water service pipe, such pipe shall be at least one and one-fourth inch nominal size. 
d.  Methods for Disinfecting Potable Water Supply System. 
(1)  As part of the chlorination of the overall potable water supply system of a building, the plumber of record for such system shall also chlorinate all fire standpipes, combination risers and automatic sprinkler systems within said building. The installer of the automatic sprinkler system shall provide the necessary fittings for such chlorination. All chlorination shall undergo bacteriologic testing by an independent testing laboratory and shall be certified in writing.  
Part 3. - Fixtures and Devices 
a.  Floor Drains. 
(1)  Vent. Floor drains shall be provided with a vent when connected to a sanitary drainage system. 
(2)  Floor Drain Locations and Flashing. An adequate number of floor drains shall be installed within each of the following areas for all buildings except one- and two-family residences: Common area laundry rooms; boiler, furnace and hot water heater areas; commercial cooking kitchens and multiple stall bathrooms.  
Part 4. - Drainage and Vent Systems 
a.  In buildings in which plumbing fixtures are installed, a sanitary drainage system shall be provided for conveying sewage from the fixtures by gravity to a public sanitary sewer system except as otherwise permitted herein. 
(1)  A septic tank will be permitted only after an applicant has shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that its use is necessary and that the soil absorption rate and conditions at the site and adjacent area are safe and adequate according to standards prescribed by the Westchester County Department of Health or by the Commissioner. Every such applicant shall first submit to and file with the Commissioner a recent verified report from an approved testing expert showing satisfactory soil absorption rate and absence of hazardous conditions at the proposed site and adjacent area. 
(2)  Private sewage systems shall be constructed and maintained in strict compliance with state and county health department codes, rules and regulations and with any more exacting rules and regulations which the Commissioner is hereby authorized to adopt and promulgate in the interest of public safety, health and general public welfare, and as he may be guided by standards provided in any other approved plumbing codes, and amendments or revisions thereof. 
(3)  Every owner of property in which a septic tank is permitted shall be deemed to and shall agree that upon construction and installation of a public sewer in a public street or easement area abutting the applicant's property pursuant to the provisions of the City charter, local laws or ordinances of The City of White Plains such property shall bear its proportionate assessment for such public sewer system whether or not a sewer connection thereto shall be ordered by the common council. Upon the construction of such public sewer and the order of the common council to connect thereto, whenever deemed expedient, the owner and occupant of premises on which a cesspool, privy vault or septic tank is located shall have the same emptied, cleaned, disinfected and filled with fresh earth and shall have a sewer connection made as prescribed in this code. 
b.  Building Sewers. Building sanitary sewers shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter. 
c.  Building Traps and Fresh Air Inlets. 
(1)  Building (House) Traps. Building (House) traps shall be required in the building sanitary (house) drain for all new systems. When the plumbing system of any existing building is altered by the addition of new soil, waste or vent lines and no house trap and fresh air inlet exists on the house drain, same shall be provided at the time of alteration. 
(2)  Building Trap Cleanouts. Building traps shall be provided with two brass cleanout plugs. Such plugs shall be of the same size as the trap, for traps up to four inches in size, and shall be at least four inches in size for larger traps. Cleanout plugs shall be located at the trap so as to provide access for cleaning the trap interior and for rodding upstream and downstream from the trap. Cover screws shall be set with graphite paste. 
(3)  Fresh Air Inlets. Every sanitary or combined building drain equipped with a building (house) trap, sewage sump, ejector, receiving tank oil separator, or similar equipment shall be provided with a fresh air inlet pipe connected to the building drain in accordance with The New York State Plumbing Code. 
d.  Methods for Handling Drainage Below Sea Level. Drainage from parts of drainage systems which cannot drain by gravity into the sewer shall be disposed of through subbuilding (subhouse) drainage systems and shall be discharged into the building gravity drainage system by automatic equipment or by another approved method. Drainage and vent piping of sanitary subbuildings drainage systems shall be installed in the same manner as for gravity systems, except that a fresh air inlet shall be installed between trap and sump and the building drains of such systems shall drain into airtight and vented sumps, ejectors, or receiving tanks from which the sewage shall be discharged as required herein. Sumps, ejectors and receiving tanks which receive only clear water drainage and from which sewage is excluded, need not be airtight and vented. (Refer to Figure B) 
GRAPHIC UNAVAILABLE: Figure B  
Part 5. - Materials 
(a)  Standards for Plumbing Materials. 
(1)  Plastic plumbing materials are not permitted for installation in buildings in the City of White Plains exceeding six stories above grade, or 75 feet in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, whichever is lowest.  
Chapter 8 - WHITE PLAINS VERTICAL TRANSPORTATION CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  Posting. Every elevator shall have posted the following information in a permanent manner by means of an engraved plate: 
• The city elevator number; 
• The address of the building; 
• The car capacity in pounds; 
• The car capacity in number of passengers. 
The engraved figures on said plate shall be a minimum height of one-half inch. This plate shall be located immediately adjacent to or above the elevator control panel and shall be attached to the elevator by means of non-reversing screws. 
(1)  Posting Annual License. The owner or lessee shall post the last issued annual license in the elevator machine room, on the controller for said elevator, in a noncombustible frame with a plexiglass vision plate. For all other approved equipment, the license shall be located immediately adjacent to the lowest entrance of said equipment, or as directed by the department. 
(2)  Filing Fee. The annual filing fee to be paid to the City of White Plains for issuance of annual license shall be per BCAE Subsection r. 
b.  Permits. No equipment or device subject to the provisions of this Code shall be constructed, installed, relocated or altered unless a permit has been received from the Commissioner before the work is commenced. A copy of such permit shall be kept at the construction site at all times while the work is in progress. 
c.  Identification of Equipment. Every elevator, and device subject to annual inspection, shall be identified by a serial number assigned by the Commissioner and attached to or painted, stenciled or otherwise registered on the crosshead of the elevator car and on the motor or machine; and on devices other than elevators, on the motor or machine, in figures not less than one inch high. After such devices have been so designated, their numbers shall not be changed except by permission of the Commissioner and all correspondence in regard to such device shall refer to said number. 
d.  Scheduled Periodic Inspections. Scheduled annual inspections shall be performed as follows: 
(i)  For passenger elevators, power freight elevators and escalators, scheduled annual inspections shall be made only by the City of White Plains' own employed Code Enforcement Officers. 
(ii)  For all other elevator, conveyor and lifting equipment requiring annual inspection, scheduled periodic inspections shall be made by a Certified Elevator Inspection Agent. The Certified Elevator Inspection Agent shall submit a detailed written report of the inspection to the building official on forms approved by him not more than 15 days following the completion of such inspection. 
e.  Elevator Keyed Switches. All keyed switches required by this Code shall be operable only by a city-wide standard key. The city-wide standard key shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the Commissioner of Building. 
f.  Emergency Hoistway Door Unlocking Devices. Hoistway door shall be provided with emergency unlocking devices at every landing where elevators can stop at every floor, and at every landing when the elevator does not stop at each floor through which it travels. The unlocking devices shall be in accordance with the Safety Code for Elevators listed in Appendix B of this Code. All access openings to the unlocking devices above the second landing for the said elevators shall be covered with a solid plate attached to the door with clutch head screws or spanner screws. 
g.  Unsafe Conditions. If upon inspection, any equipment covered in this article is found in an unsafe condition, or not in accordance with the provisions of the Code, the building official shall thereupon serve a written notice of such finding upon the building owner or lessee stating the time when recommended repairs or changes must be completed. After the service of such notice, it shall be the duty of the owner to proceed within the time allowed to make such repairs or changes as are necessary to place the equipment in a safe condition; and it shall be unlawful to operate such equipment after the date stated in the notice unless such recommended repairs or changes have been made and the equipment has been approved by the building official, or an extension of time secured from him in writing. 
h.  Power to Seal Equipment. The building official in addition to any other penalties herein provided shall have the power to seal out of service any device or equipment covered by this article for the following reasons: when in case of emergency in the opinion of the building official, any such device is in a condition to render it totally unsafe for operation; or for willful to comply with recommendations and orders issued by the building official. 
i.  Notice of Sealing Out of Service. Before sealing any device out of service the building official, except in case of emergency, shall serve written notice upon the building owner or lessee stating intention to seal the equipment out of service and the reasons therefor. 
j.  Unlawful to Remove Seal. Any device sealed out of service by the building official shall be plainly marked with a sign or tag indicating the reason for such sealing, and any defacing or removal of the sign or tag, or any tampering with or removal of the seal without approval of the building official shall constitute a violation of this article. 
k.  Accidents Reported and Recorded. The owner of the building shall immediately notify the building official of every accident involving personal injury or damage to apparatus on or about or in connection with any equipment covered by this article, and shall afford the building official every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the apparatus or mechanism, it shall be unlawful to use such device until after an examination by the building official and approval of the equipment for continued use. It shall be the duty of the building official to make a prompt examination into the cause of the accident and to enter a full and complete record thereof in the records of the building department. Such records shall be open for public inspection at all reasonable hours. 
l.  Removal of Damaged Parts. It shall be unlawful to remove any part of the damaged construction or operating mechanism of elevators or other equipment subject to the provisions of this article from the premises until permission to do so has been granted by the building official. 
m.  Passenger Rescue. Rescue of passengers from elevator cab(s) shall only be performed by the fire department or trained personnel. 
n.  Definitions. 
Amusement Device - A device or structure, open to the public, by which individuals are conveyed or moved in an unusual manner for diversion. 
Automotive Lift - A fixed mechanical device for raising an entire motor vehicle above the floor level but not through successive floors of the building or structure. 
Industrial Lift (Material Lift) - A non-portable power operated raising or lowering device for transporting freight vertically, operating entirely within one story of the building or structure. 
Loading Ramp - A hinged, non-portable device, either mechanical or hydraulic, hand or power operated, used for spanning gaps or adjusting height between loading surface and carrier or between loading surface and loading surface. 
Manlifts - A power-operated belt device with steps and handholds for transporting persons in a vertical position through successive floors or levels of the building or structure. 
Material Lift - A power-operated rising or lowering device for transporting freight vertically, operated entirely within one story of the building or structure. 
Material Platform Hoist - A power or manually operated suspended platform conveyance operating in guide rails for the exclusive raising or lowering of materials, which is operated and controlled from a point outside the conveyance. 
Special Hoisting and Conveying Equipment - Manually or power-operated hoisting, lowering or conveying mechanisms, other than elevators, moving stairways or dumbwaiters for the transport of persons or freight in a vertical, inclined or horizontal direction on one floor or in successive floors. 
Personnel Hoists. All buildings under construction, which exceed 75 feet or five stories in height above adjoining grade level (whichever is less), shall be provided throughout construction with an approved personnel hoists to afford adequate access to all work areas above such levels for firefighting purposes and for emergency medical access to, and evacuation of injured workmen. Such personnel hoists shall comply with this Code and with ANSI A 10.4, and may include temporary construction elevators complying with said standard.  
Part 2. - Installation And Design Requirements 
a.  New or Modernized Elevator. 
(1)  Electrical Disconnecting Devices. 
(2)  Main Line Disconnect - For all new or modernized elevators and escalators, the main line electrical service disconnect shall be fused. Circuit breakers are not permitted. This device shall be as close as possible to the machine room entrance. When opened, this switch shall interrupt all power to the equipment, except car lighting. 
(3)  Communication Systems. 
(i)  An intercom system shall be installed to serve all individual cabs. Such system shall be connected to, and activated from a console installed within the elevator machine room. 
(ii)  In all office buildings not manned 24 hours a day, an emergency telephone shall be installed within all individual cabs. Such emergency telephone systems shall be connected to, and be continuously monitored by an outside central station monitoring company. 
(4)  Machine Room Design. 
i)  Grating is not permitted as a floor in an elevator machine room. 
ii)  For all hydraulic elevators, accessible shut-off valves shall be provided for the main hydraulic fluid line, in both the elevator machine room and elevator pit. 
iii)  Smoke detection shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. If a fire alarm system does not exist, the detectors shall be connected to a dedicated fire alarm control unit that shall be designated "Elevator Recall Control and Supervisory Panel". 
b.  New or Modernized Escalators - For all new or modernized escalators, the following safety devices shall be installed: 
i)  Smoke detectors shall be installed within each work area pit of the escalator (top and bottom). Such smoke detectors upon activation shall automatically shut down the escalator, but need not be connected to the central fire alarm system. 
ii)  An automatic shutoff switch shall be provided for each work area pit access plate at both top and bottom of each escalator. 
c.  Elevator Keyed Switches. All keyed switches required by this Code shall be operable only by a city-wide standard key. The city-wide standard key shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the Commissioner of Building. 
d.  Emergency Hoistway Door Unlocking Devices. Hoistway door shall be provided with emergency unlocking devices at every landing where elevators can stop at every floor, and at every landing when the elevator does not stop at each floor through which it travels. The unlocking devices shall be in accordance with the Safety Code for Elevators listed in Appendix B of this Code. All access openings to the unlocking devices above the second landing for the said elevators shall be covered with a solid plate attached to the door with clutch head screws or spanner screws. 
Material Hoists. 
(i)  Hoist Protection. All materials hoists shall be adequately protected, and when erected on the outside of a building over 85 feet or seven stories in height, the structure shall be built of noncombustible or approved fire retardant materials with the exception of the loading platform. 
(ii)  Passengers Prohibited. No persons shall be permitted to ride a material hoist; and personnel hoists or temporary elevators shall be installed when necessary to transport workers as provided in GCC Part 1. 
(iii)  Guarding of Cables. All hoisting cables and signal cords shall be guarded wherever they pass through or cross working spaces to prevent injury to persons.  
Chapter 9 - WHITE PLAINS PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Part 1. - General Requirements 
a.  Applicability to all Dwellings. Every portion of a building or premises, used or intended to be used for any dwelling purpose, except temporary housing, shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance, irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired; and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, for the constructions or repair of the buildings, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this ordinance. This ordinance establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or use of building equipment or facilities except as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection b(1). 
b.  General Provisions: 
(1)  Conflict With Other Ordinances. In any case where a provision of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, or health ordinance, or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any other law, ordinance, code, or regulation of the City of White Plains, Westchester County Health Department, County of Westchester or State of New York, the provision which establishes the highest standard shall prevail. 
(2)  Conflict of Permits and Licenses. All departments, officials, and employees of the City of White Plains who have the duty or the authority to issue permits or licenses in regard to the construction, installation, repair, use or occupancy of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, or rooming units, equipment, or facilities, shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance, and no such permit or license shall be issued, if such would be in conflict with this ordinance, except as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection b(1). 
(3)  Existing Remedies. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the City of White Plains or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary. 
c.  Responsibility of Owner, Operator or Agent. The owner, operator, or agent in control of the building shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  limiting occupancy to the maximum number of occupants permitted; 
(2)  posting required statements of the maximum number of occupants permitted; 
(3)  maintenance of the premises in a clean, safe and sanitary condition; 
(4)  maintenance of the operation of service facilities in good order and condition; 
(5)  maintenance of plumbing, heating and electrical equipment and systems, appliances, fixtures, as well as other building equipment and facilities, in an appropriate, good operative, clean and sanitary condition; 
(6)  maintenance of walls, floors and ceilings in public places in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(7)  keeping exits free and clear; 
(8)  disposing of garbage, refuse and junk in a safe and sanitary manner, and keeping the premises free and clear therefrom, and broom-clean; 
(9)  extermination of insects, vermin, rodents, pests, and elimination of harborage; and 
(10)  provide a leak-proof, covered, approved rubbish container located on a washable, sweepable surface. 
(11)  providing emergency contact information to the Department of Building and the Department of Public Safety. This shall include Name, address and phone number for responsible party in the event of an emergency. 
Phone number shall include land line and cell phone. 
The party must be accessible 24 hours per day, seven days a week. 
d.  Responsibility of Occupants or Tenants. With respect to that part of a building which the occupant occupies, controls or uses, the occupant shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  occupancy limitations and its lawfully permitted use; 
(2)  maintenance in a clean, safe and sanitary condition; 
(3)  maintenance of plumbing, cooking and refrigeration equipment, appliances, fixtures and facilities, in a clean and sanitary condition, and providing reasonable care in the operation and use thereof; 
(4)  keeping exits free and clear; 
(5)  disposing of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a sanitary manner, and keeping the premises free and clear therefrom; and 
(6)  keeping domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and under control. 
e.  Enforcement 
(1)  Housing Surveys. The Commissioner of Building shall be authorized to make, or cause to be made, surveys in any area of the city to determine the general condition of structures used for human habitation, the extent of deterioration, lack of facilities and maintenance, unsafe and insanitary conditions, the extent of overcrowding, land use, and other relevant factors. 
(2)  Inspection of Dwellings. The Commissioner of Building shall be authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units, and premises in order to safeguard the health, safety, morals and welfare of the public. The Commissioner of Building, or the Commissioner's designated representatives, shall be authorized to enter any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises at any reasonable time, or at such other time as may be necessary in an emergency, for the purpose of performing the duties specified under this ordinance. Inspections herein authorized shall be limited to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  Access to Dwellings. The owner, operator, agent, or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises shall give personnel authorized in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(2) access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, and premises, for the purpose of such inspections at any reasonable time during business hours, or at such other times as may be necessary in an emergency. 
(4)  Identification of Inspectors. Inspectors and authorized personnel of the Department of Building shall be supplied with official identification and, upon request, shall exhibit such identification when entering any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises. 
(5)  Notice of Violation. Whenever the Commissioner of Building determines that there has been a violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this ordinance, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, notice shall be given of such violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible for such violation. Such notice shall be in writing and shall specify the alleged violation and shall provide a reasonable time for compliance, and shall be served upon the owner, agent, operator or occupant, as the case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, agent, operator or occupant, if a copy is served to such person personally; or if a copy thereof is sent by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person; or if a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the building affected by the notice, and if a copy is mailed by registered mail on the same day it is posted to the owner, agent, operator, or occupant; or by such other method authorized by the laws of the State of New York. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(6)  Final Order. Any notice of violation provided for in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) shall automatically become a final order if written request for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Commissioner within ten days after receipt of the notice. A copy of the order shall be served as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance. 
f.  Appeals 
(1)  Request for Hearing. Any person affected by any notice of violation, issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this ordinance, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing before the Appeals Committee, provided that such person shall file, in the office of the Appeals Committee a written request for such hearing, setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor, designating the person and such person's address upon whom orders may be served, and setting forth the reasons by such notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn. If this request is filed within ten days after the service of notice of violation, compliance with such notice shall not be required while the hearing is pending. 
(2)  Hearing. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection f(1), the Appeals Committee shall set a time and a place for such hearing, and shall give the applicant at least ten days written notice thereof. Such hearing shall commence not later than 30 days after the date on which the request was filed; however, hearings may be postponed beyond such 30 days period for good and sufficient reason. At such hearing, the applicant, or the applicant's representative, shall be given an opportunity to show cause why such notice of violation should be modified or withdrawn. 
(3)  Finding of Hearing. After a hearing held in accordance with Sections PMC Part 1, Subsections f(1) and f(2) of this ordinance, and, on consideration of the evidence presented, the Appeals Committee shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice. If the notice of violation is sustained or modified, such decision shall be deemed a final order and shall be served as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance on the person or persons whom the Appeals Committee shall find to be responsible for the violation. Where there are practical difficulties or unreasonable hardships in the literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance, the Appeals Committee shall have the power to authorize a variance from the provisions of this ordinance, provided that the intent of the ordinance shall be observed, with respect to the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals, or welfare. 
(4)  Record of Hearing. The Appeals Committee shall file with the Commissioner a summary of testimony which shall be kept together with every relevant notice or order, the request for a hearing, entries of appearance, findings of fact, if any, and the final determination, and such record shall be maintained as a public record. 
(5)  Appeals Committee. The Building Code Appeals Committee, shall constitute the Appeals Committee, to hear any appeal from a decision of the Commissioner regarding the enforcement of this ordinance. The Committee shall have power to modify or withdraw any notice of violation provided that the intent of the ordinance shall be observed with respect to the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals or welfare. With respect to any appeal made to the Committee, the Committee shall have power to: 
(i)  Enter, or delegate to any employee or officer of such Appeals Committee power to enter any building or property for the purpose of conducting investigations, surveys or inspections necessary for consideration. 
(ii)  To conduct examinations and investigations, administer oaths, hear testimony and take proof, under oath, if the Committee should so determine, of any matter relevant or necessary to carry out the provisions of this ordinance. 
g.  Rule Making: Administrative Relationships; Penalties; Repealing Clause. 
(1)  Rules and Regulations. The Commissioner is authorized to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement and interpretation of this ordinance and to secure the intent thereof. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance or any other ordinance of the City of White Plains nor shall they have the effect of waiving any provisions of this ordinance or any other ordinance. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this ordinance, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this ordinance. Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Common Council by the Commissioner. Failure of the Common Council to approve, reject, or modify such rules and regulations within 30 days after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval thereof. Said rules and regulations, as approved by the Common Council, shall be on file in the Department of Building and available as a matter of public record. 
(2)  Administrative Liability. No officer, agent, or employee of the City of White Plains shall be rendered personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any omission or act required or permitted in the discharge of the duties authorized under this ordinance. 
(3)  Penalties. Any person who shall knowingly and willfully violate or assist in the violation of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as outlined in BCAE Subsection aa.; or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The term, person, as used in this section, shall include the owner, occupant, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent, or any other person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control or management of a building or part thereof. 
(4)  Duties of Legal Officer. The Corporation Counsel shall, upon complaint of the Commissioner, or upon the Commissioner's own motion, institute appropriate action to restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, correct, or remove such violation, and to take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this ordinance. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law; any and all remedies may be pursued concurrently or consecutively, and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the others. 
(5)  Judicial Review. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any final order of the Commissioner, may seek to have such order reviewed by the Supreme Court in the manner prescribed by Article 78 of the Civil Practice Act and as otherwise provided for in the laws of the State of New York. 
h.  Discontinuance of Utilities. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility, which is required to be supplied by the provisions of this Code, to be removed from, or shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling unit, except for necessary repairs, alterations, or emergencies. 
i.  Referral of Violations. Whenever it is determined that the condition of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises is in violation of any applicable code which is not provided for by this ordinance, or which is provided for by a higher standard of such other law, code, ordinance, or regulation, as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection b(1), such condition or violation shall be referred to the appropriate authority. 
j.  Power to Act in Emergencies. Whenever the Commissioner, at any stage of the proceedings instituted under the provisions of this ordinance, finds that a violation of this ordinance exists which, in the Commissioner's opinion, required immediate action to abate a direct hazard, or immediate danger to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of the occupants of a building or of the public, the Commissioner may, without prior notice or hearing, issue an order citing the violation and directing that such action be taken as is necessary to remove or abate the hazard or danger. Such order may include an order to vacate as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection t. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, such an order shall be effective immediately upon service and shall be compiled with immediately or as otherwise provided. 
k.  Department to Abate Hazards in Emergencies. Whenever any violation of this ordinance, which in the opinion of the Commissioner causes a direct hazard or immediate danger to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of the occupants of a building or the public, has not been corrected in the time specified by the order issued under PMC Part 1, Subsection z. of this ordinance, the Commissioner may take such direct action as is necessary to abate the hazard or danger. Expenses incurred in the execution of such orders shall be recovered as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection aa. of this ordinance. 
l.  Demolition as Compliance. Any owner of a building receiving a notice of violations stating that such building does not comply with the provisions of this ordinance, may demolish such buildings, and such action shall be deemed compliance. 
m.  Reinspection. At the end of the period specified in the notice of violation, or any extension thereof, it shall be the duty of the Commissioner to make, or cause to be made, a reinspection of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises, and if compliance has not been established, appropriate legal action shall be instituted as specified in PMC Part 1, Subsection g(3) of this ordinance, provided that additional notices of violation are not required. 
n.  Extension of Compliance Time. The Commissioner may extend the compliance time specified in any notice, or order, issued under the provisions of this ordinance where there is evidence of intent to comply within the period specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist which prevent immediate compliance. 
o.  Recording of Notices. Whenever a notice or order has been issued for any infraction of this ordinance, the Commissioner may keep on file a copy of such notice or order in his office. Such recording shall constitute appropriate notice of such violation, infraction or order to any subsequent purchases, transferee, grantee, mortgagee, or lessee of the property affected thereby. 
p.  Transfer of Ownership. No owner of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit, or premises, upon whom any notice or order pursuant to this ordinance has been served, shall sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose thereof, such property to another until compliance of the provisions of such notice or order has been secured; or until such owner shall furnish to the purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee, or lessee, prior to such sale, transfer, grant, mortgage, or lease, a true copy of such notice or order and, at the same time, give adequate notification to the Commissioner of the intent to sell, transfer, grant, mortgage, or lease, and supply the name and address of such person, persons, or firm to whom the sale, transfer, grant, mortgage, or lease is proposed. A purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee, or lessee, who has been informed of the existence of any notice or order issued pursuant to this ordinance, shall be bound thereby. 
q.  Records and Searches. Upon request, the Department of Building shall be required to make a search and issue a certificate of any of its public records, including violations, and shall have the power to charge and collect reasonable fees for such searches or certificates. 
r.  Variances. Where there are practical difficulties or unreasonable hardships in the literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance, the Appeals Committee shall have the power to authorize a variance from the provisions of this ordinance, provided that the intent of the ordinance shall be observed with respect to the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
s.  Unfit Dwelling Units. Any dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit having any of the defects listed below may be designated by the Commissioner as unfit for human habitation and may be placarded. 
(1)  The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or other facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or the public. 
(2)  The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin infested in such a manner as to create a serious hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or the public. 
(3)  The structure, because of the location, general conditions, state of the premises, or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe, overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to health and safety that it creates a serious hazard to the occupants or the public. 
(4)  The structure, because of the failure of the owner or occupant to comply with such notices or orders issued pursuant to this ordinance, is unfit for human habitation. 
t.  Notice of Intent to Vacate. Whenever the Commissioner determines that a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit, is unfit for human habitation as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection s., the Commissioner shall include such finding within the notice of violation provided for in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance. Also included shall be a statement of the Commissioner's authorization to order to vacate and placard the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit, if compliance with the provisions of the noticed of violation has not been secured. 
u.  Order to Vacate. Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection f(1) of this ordinance, has not been complied with or where PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance has not been invoked, the Commissioner may order the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit to be vacated. A copy of such notice to vacate shall be served on the owner, agent, operator, and the occupant, as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection t. of this ordinance. 
v.  Vacation of Unfit Dwelling. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit, designated as unfit for human habitation pursuant to the Property Maintenance Code of New York State and ordered vacated as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection t., shall be vacated within such reasonable time as the Commissioner may specify in the order. No such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit shall again be used for human habitation or the placard removed until written approval is secured from the Commissioner. 
w.  Removal of Placard. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for human habitation. 
x.  Vacated Dwelling Made Secure. The owner, agent or operator of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit which has been designated as unfit for human habitation and vacated, shall make such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit safe and secure in whatever manner the Commissioner shall deem necessary. Any vacant building, open at the doors and windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance within the meaning of this provision. 
y.  Notice of Intent to Demolish. Whenever the Commissioner designates a building unfit for human habitation, as provided in this ordinance, and determines that the cost necessary to correct the violation is not reasonably related to the value of the building, the Commissioner shall include within the notice of violation provided for in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance, a statement of the intent to order the demolition of the structure. A copy of such notice shall be served on the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee, as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance. The owner may demolish such structure as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection l. of this ordinance, or correct the violation regardless of cost, provided that the requirements of the building code in effect at the time of attempted compliance are satisfied. 
z.  Order to Demolish. Whenever a notice of violation as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance has not been complied with, the Commissioner may order the building demolished. Such order shall be served as provided in PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance, and demolition shall be completed within the time specified by the Commissioner. 
aa.  Department to Make Repairs or Demolish. Whenever a notice or order to remove a violation, secure, vacate, or demolish a building has not been complied with, and when such failure to comply is deemed by the Commissioner to constitute a nuisance, the Commissioner may proceed to cause the structure to be demolished, repaired, altered, secured, vacated, or take such other action as is necessary to abate the nuisance. Whenever the Commissioner determines that such nuisance exists, sufficient proof shall be recorded to support such determination, and the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee shall be notified of such finding pursuant to PMC Part 1, Subsection e(5) of this ordinance. Abatement authorized by this section shall not commence until at least ten days after service of such notice. 
bb.  Recovery of Expenses. The expenses incurred pursuant to PMC Part 1, Subsection k. and PMC Part 1, Subsection aa. of this ordinance shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the premises, or by the person who caused or maintained such nuisance or other matter. The Commissioner of Building will keep a record of the work performed, the date of performance, the name of the person to be charged, a brief description of the property, and the charges to be assessed. The amount to be charged shall be the actual cost plus five per centum for inspection, and other additional costs in connection therewith. A bill or statement thereof shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the person charged on or before the first day of November of that year. If payment is not made by the first of December of the year, the Commissioner of Building shall add said property owner's name to the list of all unpaid charges, file it in his office, and give public notice of such filing by publication in the official newspaper. Such notice shall state that said list has been made and filed, and will be available for inspection by interested persons for ten days from publication. At the expiration of the ten day period, the Building Commissioner shall hold a hearing on a day and hour and at a place specified in said notice, at which time interested persons may offer objections, and, if need be, alter, and correct such lists. The corrected list shall be filed with the Commissioner of Finance, whereupon the Commissioner of Finance shall notify the property owner by mail, if the property owner's name and address is ascertainable, of the amount of the charges. The assessment shall be a lien against the property when the list is filed with the Commissioner of Finance. Such lien shall be included in the next general tax assessment roll, and shall be collected at the same time, in the same manner, and by the same proceedings as other taxes on said roll. Any lien which shall remain unpaid at the end of the period specified for collection by the Commissioner of Finance shall bear interest and penalty of one percentum per annum for each month that the charge remains unpaid. Failure to notify the person charged does not affect validity of the assessment or the penalties imposed. This lien does not supersede any mortgage lien that is executed and recorded prior to the present lien, except with respect to a lien imposed for expenses incurred in demolition.  
Part 2. - Physical Standards 
a.  Exterior Protection 
(1)  Screening Required. Every window, door, and other openings to outdoor space in the exterior of every structure, used for human habitation, shall be effectively protected against the entrance of insects. 
(2)  Rules and Regulations. From May first to October first, every opening, except bulkheads, used for ingress or egress from a structure used for human habitation, directly to or from outdoor space, shall be supplied with either a self-closing device or a self-closing screen door, and every window of every habitable room, bathroom, toilet room or compartment, and every other opening to outdoor space shall be equipped with approved screening; provided, that such screening is necessary for effective protection against insects. 
b.  Locking Mechanisms. In multiple dwellings only "privacy" type locks shall be permitted on bedroom doors. 
c.  Building Security Provisions for Multiple Residences 
(1)  Applicability. All Residential buildings (R-2) containing nine (9) or more dwelling units, and having an individual entrance through which common access may be gained to nine or more dwelling units. 
(2)  Security of Building Entrances and Openings for new Buildings constructed on or after September 1977. All new buildings must be provided with the following: 
(i)  Main Entrance System. 
(I)  Entrance vestibule with exterior and interior sets of doors, each with full visions panels of unbreakable glazing, vandal proof announcer-buzzer, and two-way voice intercom system located between the exterior and interior doors of the entrance vestibule, and such intercom connecting to each dwelling unit. The exterior set of doors leading from the outside to the vestibule shall be left unlocked. 
(II)  Interior main entrance doors of automatic self-closing and self-locking type; capable of being unlocked by electro mechanical device, directly from within any individual apartment or office suite. 
(III)  Each apartment unit shall be equipped with two-way voice intercom and a buzzer release control for unlocking the main entrance doors(s). 
(IV)  All automatic door release and intercom controls shall be accessible to the handicapped. 
(ii)  All other Exterior Doors and Passageways Leading to Exterior Exits, Garages and other Buildings. 
(I)  Shall be equipped with automatic self-closing and self-locking doors, of tamper proof design. Such doors shall be kept in good operating order and repair, and not held in the open position at any time. 
(II)  Readily openable from the inside without the use of keys and equipped with a panic exit device with crossbar assembly panic bar or touch bar device. 
(iii)  Accessible Windows. 
(I)  Definition. Any window with its bottom sill within eight(8) feet of adjacent ground, wall level, or lower roofs, and including all windows below grade. 
(II)  All such accessible windows shall be of security type design consisting of heavy metal frame and metal mullions spaces no greater than nine (9) inches on centers in either directions with security type locking device or of other approved security type design. 
(3)  Security of Building Entrances and Openings for Existing Building. The following provisions shall apply: 
(I)  Building with Intercom and Buzzer Release Systems for Main Entrances. 
(i)  If operational, landlord must so maintain at all times. 
(ii)  If not operational, landlord must completely repair and reactivate within one month of notification by the Building Department. 
(iii)  All other exterior doors and entrances shall have automatic self-closing and self-locking doors.  
Part 3. - Heating, Plumbing, Electrical and Miscellaneous 
a.  Heating Systems. Heating equipment shall be installed in a manner which will avoid the dangerous concentration of fumes and gases. Unvented portable space heaters, burning liquid or gaseous fuels, shall be prohibited. Heating equipment shall not be forced to operate beyond the safe capacity for which it was designed. Where necessary, exposed heating risers, heating ducts, and hot water lines shall be covered with an insulating material or guard. Repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the applicable regulations of the City of White Plains. 
b.  Cooking and Refrigeration 
(1)  Communal Cooking and Dining Facilities. Every communal kitchen and dining room located in a rooming house shall have adequate floor space and facilities, and shall be so located as to be accessible to the occupant of each rooming unit, sharing the use of such facilities, without going through a dwelling unit or rooming unit of another occupant. The preparation and eating of meals in rooming units is prohibited. 
Rules and Regulations. Communal kitchens and dining rooms shall comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Communal kitchens. Minimum gross floor area 60 square feet, minimum width five feet, where cooking is permitted. 
Communal kitchens used for combined cooking and eating purposes - minimum gross floor area 100 square feet, minimum width seven feet. 
Dining space and eating facilities shall comply with requirements for communal dining rooms. 
Required facilities: at least one kitchen sink; at least one kitchen gas or electric stove containing at least two top burners and an oven; at least one electric, gas or other mechanical or suitably constructed ice refrigerator with adequate food storage capacity; at least 12 lineal feet of shelf storage space. 
(ii)  Communal Dining Rooms. Minimum gross floor area 70 square feet. 
Required facilities: at least one dining chair and two lineal feet of dining space for each occupant permitted in dining room at any particular time. 
 
