The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Williamsville shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of
Wil]iamsville," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in
any of the local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of
the Village of Williamsville" to any other local law, ordinance or resolution
appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate
chapter titie, chapter number, Article number or section number appearing
in the Code as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally
amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Williamsville, and it is
the intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions
of former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Williamsville in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal.
1:1
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Williamsville prior to the effective
date of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. An offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Williamsville or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pprsuant to any legislative provision of the Village of
Williamsville.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Wiliiamsville.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Williamsviile providing for
the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway. park or
other public place within the Village of Williamsville or any portion
thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Williamsville appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Williamsyule or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any legislation adopted subseqent to February 25, 1991.
§ 1-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 1-6
1:2
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Williamsville and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law;
and, if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by
the Village Clerk of the Village of Williamsville by impressing thereon the
Seal of the Village of Wiliiamsville, and such certified copy shall remain
on file in the office of said Village Clerk to be made available to persons
desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
The enactment and publication of this local law, coupled with the availability
of a copy of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendment.s or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances anti resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Williamsville" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of
Trustees to be a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ]ocal law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Williarnsvilie required to
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village of
Williamsville upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:3
of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes
or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code
of the Village of Williamsville or who alters or tampers with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village
of Williamsville to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other
provision of this local law shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.) or imprisonment for a term of not more than fifteen (15)
days, or both.
§ 1-11. Penalties for offenses.
Except where specifically provided elsewhere, any person who shall commit
an offense against any provision of the Code of the Village of Williamsville
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.) or by imprisonment for not exceeding fifteen
(15) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 1-12. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
§ 1-13. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of the
Code of the Village of Williamsville, such local law to be entitled "General
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Williamsville, no changes in
the meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions
have been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In
addition, certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive
changes were made in one (1) or more of said pieces of legislation. It is
the intention of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-12B, the following Code sections were amended: §§ 8-7,
25-6, 25-10, 31-4, 31-8, 31-10A(4), 31-11E(2) and (3), 31-12, 31-13, 39-7, 39-9E, 47-9,
67-1, 70-23, 93-5A, 93-7A(1) and 97-8. A complete description for these changes is on file
in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-9 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 1-13
1:4
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-14, inclusive.
§ 1-14. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
Chapter 6
ALARMS
§ 6-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Williamsville Alarm Code."
§ 6-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Williamsville by
reducing the number of avoidable alarms of fire, intrusion, holdup or other
emergencies which contribute to ineffective utilization of police and fire
emergency agencies, require emergency responses which are susceptible
to high accident rates, interfere with genuine emergencies (responses) and
produce unnecessary alarm noise to the surrounding community.
§ 6-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectfully ascribed to them by this section:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which is designed
to detect smoke, abnormal rise in temperature, fire, medical emergency or
an entry into or exit from a building, structure or facility and by reason
thereof emits an audible response intended to alert persons outside of the
premises and/or transmit a signal or message to an emergency agency
either directly or through a private answering point.
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to an emergency agency.
EMERGENCY AGENCY — The Town of Amherst Police Department or
Williamsville Fire Company, central fire dispatch or other emergency
dispatch center.
§ 6-4. Compliance required.
The owners and lessees of premises having alarm systems shall comply with
all provisions of this chapter on or before the first day of January 2000.
§ 6-5. Automatic cutoff system required.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-5
1:5
§ 6-6. Connection to enhanced 911 or 911 emergency service
restricted.
§ 6-7. Avoidable alarms.
A. No person shall install or maintain an external audible alarm device
which does not contain an operational automatic cutoff system which
turns off the external audible alarm after a period not to exceed 10
minutes.
B. An automatic dialer connected directly to an emergency agency shall
automatically disconnect and/or terminate its message after the
message has been transmitted a maximum of two times.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the total transmission time of
all messages shall not exceed five minutes.
A. No alarm system shall have an automatic dialer feature or other type of
alarm alert which connects automatically to enhanced 911 or the 911
emergency telephone system.
B. There shall be no automatic alarm system with direct communication of
any type to an emergency agency without prior written authorization
from the emergency agency where the alarms terminate.
A. General provisions.
(1) The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner,
user, custodian or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees
requiring an emergency response when in fact an emergency does
not exist constitutes an avoidable alarm. An avoidable alarm also
includes intentional activation of an alarm system when the
activator knows an emergency situation does not exist.
(2) Avoidable alarm does not include alarms activated by violent
conditions of nature or similar causes beyond the control of the
user, owner or operator of the alarm system. The activation of an
alarm system under any circumstances in which the activator
reasonably believes that an emergency situation exists shall not be
deemed to be an avoidable alarm.
B. Charges. An owner or lessee of real property to which an emergency
agency responds as a result of avoidable alarm shall pay a fee for each
such response in each calendar year as follows:
(1) Town of Amherst Police Department response:
(a) First through fifth avoidable alarm responses: no charge.
(b) Sixth through seventh avoidable alarm responses: $25 for
each.
(c) Eighth and over avoidable alarm responses: $50 for each.
§ 6-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 6-7
1:6
§ 6-8. Enforcement. [Amended 5-28-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
The Town of Amherst Chief of Police shall enforce this chapter for alarm
systems which detect entry or exit from a building, structure or facility.
The Village of Williamsville Building Inspector shall enforce this chapter for
alarm systems which detect medical emergencies, smoke, fire or abnormal
rise in temperature. For that purpose, the Village of Williamsville Building
(2) Williamsville Fire Department response:
(a) First avoidable alarm response: no charge.
(b) Second avoidable alarm response: $50.
(c) Third and over avoidable alarm responses: $100 for each.
C. Notice of excessive use. The owner or lessee of real property which
received an emergency response by reason of an avoidable alarm shall
be notified, in writing, by means of first class mail of all avoidable
alarms up to five police alarms and/or one fire alarm in a calendar year.
The letter shall inform the owner or lessee of the times and types of
emergency responses provided to the address location and shall contain
with a copy of the Alarm Code.
D. Administrative review. The Town of Amherst Chief of Police and the
Village of Williamsville Building Inspector shall establish a policy and
procedures whereby an owner of real property or lessee thereof on
which an alarm system has been installed and who has been notified of
an avoidable alarm may present evidence as to why any such alarm
should not be classified as an avoidable alarm. The Town of Amherst
Chief of Police and the Village of Williamsville Building Inspector shall
designate members of their departments, not to exceed five in total, to
receive such evidence and make recommendations and findings of fact
concerning such classification. The Town of Amherst Chief of Police and
the Village of Williamsville Building Inspector shall make the final
determination concerning a classification, which determination shall be
reviewable only pursuant to procedures under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules. To challenge the classification of any alarm as
an avoidable alarm, the real property owner or lessee thereof shall, in
writing, notify the Town of Amherst Chief of Police and/or the Village of
Williamsville Building Inspector within 20 days after receipt of notice of
the avoidable alarm. The failure to give timely notice shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to review the determination.
E. Payment of charges. Avoidable alarm charges shall be paid to the
Village Clerk of the Village of Williamsville at 5565 Main Street,
Williamsville, New York 14221.
F. Failure to remit fee. Failure of a real property owner or lessee of
property on which an alarm system is installed to pay the avoidable
alarm charge within 30 days following notice of the amount due is a
violation of this code.
§ 6-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8
1:7
Inspector and the inspectors employed by the Village of Williamsville are
authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets
§ 6-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, business, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity that does not pay the fee as established in this code or who violates
any other provisions of this code shall be subject to a civil penalty, not
to exceed $1,000 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs, continues or is
permitted.
§ 6-10. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not effect other
sections, clauses or provisions of the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 6-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective January 1, 2000.
Chapter 8
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and public areas — See Ch. 70.
§ 8-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL WILDLIFE — Any nondomesticated rodent life, including but not
limited to squirrels, chipmunks, woodchucks, moles, muskrats, beavers and
raccoons.[Added 6-14-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993]
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal which is trained or adapted to live with
and be of use to human beings.
HARBOR — To give permanent or long-term home or shelter to an animal.
The feeding of community cats in conjunction with TNVR practices as
provided in § 8-6(B)(7) shall not constitute the harboring of cats.[Added
6-24-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
KENNEL — Any premises that:
§ 6-8 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 8-1
1:8
WILD WATERFOWL — Any nondomesticated waterfowl, migratory or
otherwise, including but not limited to mallard ducks and Canada
geese.[Added 6-14-1993 by L.L. No. 6-1993]
§ 8-2. Harboring of dogs.
§ 8-3. Harboring of cats.
Cats are prohibited within the village except as follows:
§ 8-4. Public nuisances.
Any domestic animal shall be considered a public nuisance if it has no
known owner, no known place of care or shelter and habitually trespasses
upon private or public property.
Accommodates the boarding, sale or care of more than three (3)
domestic animals.
A.
Harbors more than three (3) domestic animals over the age of three (3)
months.
B.
A. Any person harboring a dog shall be responsible for the control of the
animal at all times. It shall not be permitted to stray off the premises of
such person unless restrained by a chain or leash which may not exceed
six (6) feet in length.
B. No person shall harbor any dog which by its frequent barking, howling
or whining shall unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of the
community.
C. No person owning or occupying any premises on which a dog is
harbored shall permit the premises to become unclean, unsanitary or to
become the source of offensive odors due to an accumulation of animal
droppings.
D. Any person harboring a dog shall make a reasonable effort to
expeditiously remove any droppings left by the dog on any public place
or private property not under the control of said person.
E. No person shall harbor a dog not licensed as required by Article 7 of the
Agriculture and Markets Law of New York State.
A. Any person harboring a cat shall make a reasonable effort to keep the
animal on the premises and under the control of said person.
B. No person shall harbor a cat which by its frequent yowling shall
unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of the community.
C. Any person harboring a cat shall make a reasonable effort to
expeditiously remove any droppings left by the cat on any public place
or on any private property not under the control of said person.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5
1:9
§ 8-5. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 8-6. Community cats. [Added 9-29-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
A. No person shall harbor, breed or maintain any chickens, turkeys, ducks,
geese or any other fowl, or any horses, mules, goats or any other
uncaged animal, other than a domestic animal.
B. Except activities conducted pursuant to licensed wildlife rehabilitation
or TNVR practices conducted pursuant to § 8-6, no person shall at any
time take with traps any birds or animals or engage in the trapping of
any birds or animals within the Village without first having obtained a
permit from the Mayor. [Amended 9-29-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
C. No person shall operate a kennel except as permitted in Chapter 112,
Zoning.
D. Except for TNVR practices conducted pursuant to § 8-6, no person shall
at any time feed or otherwise provide or make available any food to or
for any wild waterfowl or animal on any public or private property
within the Village of Williamsville. [Added 6-14-1993 by L.L. No.
6-1993; amended 9-29-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014; 6-24-2019 by
L.L. No. 4-2019]
A. Definitions for the purpose of this section shall be as follows:
AT LARGE — Not confined, outside an area of escape such as a pen,
corral, yard, cage, house, vehicle, or other secure enclosure, unless
otherwise under appropriate human control.
BEST FEEDING PRACTICES — Best feeding practices means a person
supporting one or more community cats which shall adhere to the
following:[Added 6-24-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
COLONY — Group of one or more community cats.
COMMUNITY CAT — Any cat that is:
(1) Feeding is conducted on a regular schedule;
Feeding is limited to the offering of food intended for community
cats to approximately one hour per day;
(2)
Providing only food appropriate for cats, and not scraps or other
foods that may be dangerous, deadly, or hazardous to other cats or
other animals;
(3)
(4) The community cat feeding area is kept clean and free of trash;
Food and/or water intended for community cats is kept in
containers and not on the ground;
(5)
Feeding shall be conducted only within the confines of the property
of the person engaged in TNVR practices.
(6)
§ 8-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 8-6
1:10
DOMESTICATED CAT — A cat:
EAR TIPPING — A straight line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat
while the cat is anesthetized.
NEUTER — To permanently sterilize male cats to render them
incapable of impregnating female cats by means of either surgery
performed to remove the reproductive organs or chemical sterilization
by which the cats are injected with a drug approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for that purpose.
SPAY — To permanently sterilize female cats to prevent estrus (heat)
cycles and eliminate their ability to become pregnant by means of
either surgery performed to remove the ovaries and uterus or chemical
sterilization by which the cats are injected with a drug approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for that purpose.
STERILIZE — To spay or neuter a cat.
TRAP, NEUTER, VACCINATE AND RETURN PROGRAM (TNVR) —
A program in which community cats are humanely trapped, which
sometimes requires feeding, evaluated, vaccinated, sterilized, and eartipped
by a veterinarian and returned to the trap location with the
intent of controlling or reducing feline population and reproduction.
VETERINARIAN — A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in
the State of New York.
Homeless, stray, or at large, where the cat:
(a) Has been socialized to people, or is less than five weeks old;
Could become feral as connection with humans is farther
removed; and
(b)
In the case of cats older than five weeks, has a good potential
to quickly become domesticated once again; or
(c)
(1)
Feral, where the cat:
(a) Is not socialized toward humans;
(b) Is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned cat; or
(c) Is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned; or
(2)
A cat that lives in the community but is not owned by a human,
sometimes referred to as a "free-roaming" or "street" cat.
(3)
(1) That is social towards humans;
That currently lives within the residence or on the property of a
person or persons accepted as the cat's owner; and
(2)
(3) That is considered appropriate as a companion for humans.
B. General policy. [Amended 6-24-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
§ 8-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-6
1:11
§ 8-7. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village Code Enforcement Officials,
Town of Amherst Dog Warden and Amherst Police Department, each of
whom are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets upon
any person in violation of this chapter.
(1) TNVR of community cats shall be legal in the Village of
Williamsville and interested citizens are encouraged to participate
in and support TNVR activities on a voluntary basis on their own
private property or residence.
(2) All persons who attempt to trap community cats for TNVR in the
Village of Williamsville should be familiar with the guidelines
supported by regional and national feral and community cat
organizations, as well as the American Veterinary Medical
Association (AVMA), regarding appropriate methods of TNVR.
(3) Socialized cats and all kittens subjected to TNVR shall be eligible to
be, but not mandated to be, resocialized and put up for adoption.
(4) An ear-tipped cat received by local shelters shall be returned to the
location where trapped unless veterinary care is required. A
trapped ear-tipped cat shall be released on site unless veterinary
care is required.
(5) Animal control officers shall use appropriate opportunities to
inform stakeholders about TNVR.
(6) It shall not be a violation of this section to determine that the best
course of action for a particular cat, or cat colony, is to be left alone.
(7) It shall be permitted in the Village of Williamsville to feed
community cats pursuant to the best feeding practices.
C. Implementation. The Code Enforcement Officer, or such other official as
designated by the Village Board, shall implement and administer this
section with the goal of reducing intakes and eliminating humane
destruction of cats via TNVR, in consultation with community cat
welfare experts including Alley Cat Allies, NYC Feral Cat Initiative, Best
Friends Animal Society, Neighborhood Cats, IndyFeral, and No Kill
Advocacy Center. [Amended 6-24-2019 by L.L. No. 4-2019]
D. Severability. Should any section or provision of this section be declared
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such determination
shall not affect the validity of the section, other than the part declared
to be invalid.
§ 8-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 8-8
1:12
§ 8-8. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-26-1991 by L.L. No.
7-1991]
Except as otherwise provided in Article 7 of the Agriculture and Markets
Law, any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation as defined by the Penal Law and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable for each offense by a fine not to
exceed $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both a fine
and imprisonment.
Chapter 11
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 39. Landscaping — See Ch. 57.
§ 11-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to protect and promote the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village through regulation of
the accumulation of weeds and the permitted height of grasses on private
premises and parts of the public right-of-way, and also the elimination of
poisonous and/or deleterious plants on premises within the Village and
the establishment of uniform procedures for the enforcement of such
regulations.
§ 11-2. Unlawful growth of weeds, grass or poisonous plants.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises within the Village of
Williamsville to:
A. Permit thereon any growth of weeds or grass to a height greater than
eight inches on the average or to permit the accumulation thereon of
any dead grass, weeds or brush, except where the accumulation is part
of a regularly maintained composting program.
B. Permit on that part of the public right-of-way between the front lot line
of the premises and the paved roadway and, in the case of a corner lot,
on that part of the public right-of-way between an exterior side lot line
and the paved roadway any growth of weeds or grass to a height
greater than eight inches on average or to permit the accumulation
thereon of any dead grass, weeds or brush, except in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter 39, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse, of this
Code.
§ 8-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2
1:13
§ 11-3. Duty of owner upon notice of violation. [Amended 8-25-2014
by L.L. No. 7-2014]
It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the Village of
Williamsville within five days after receipt of written notice from the Village,
after direct observation and determination of existing violation of this
chapter by the Code Enforcement Officer, to bring the premises into
compliance. Upon failure of compliance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
oversee entry upon the offending premises for the purpose of bringing the
same into compliance.
§ 11-4. Computation of cost to compel compliance.
§ 11-5. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any civil charges or penalties, any offense against any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation as defined by the
Penal Law and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable for each offense
by a fine not to exceed $250 per day.
Chapter 12
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF; BLASTING
§ 12-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION FOR DEMOLITION — The application for a permit to
demolish a building or structure.
C. To permit, after receipt from the Village of notice to remove, the
continuation on the premises of any growth or poison ivy, ragweed or
other poisonous plant.
A. The cost to the Village of bringing the premises into compliance,
including, if necessary, that of bringing the public right-of-way into
compliance, shall be computed, certified to the Village Administrator
and billed directly to the owner of the premises.
B. If the charge as billed is not paid within 30 days, interest at the
maximum permissible rate shall be added thereto until paid in full. If
the charge remains unpaid by the 30th day of April next, it shall be
added to the Village tax assessed against the premises.
C. Computation of the cost to the Village in bringing about compliance
shall include the cost to the Village of the labor of any Village employee
or, if required, that of an independent private contractor, together with
all administrative costs attendant upon the computation, certification
and billing to the owner of the premises.
§ 11-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 12-1
1:14
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly below grade and
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor level to ceiling,
above the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
as a structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls or within
exterior or party walls and having a roof, affording shelter to persons,
animals or property. The word "building" shall be construed, when used
herein, as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
CELLAR — That portion of a building that is partly or entirely below grade,
which has more than half its height, measured from floor to ceiling, below
the average established curb level or finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer for the
Village of Williamsville.
CONTRACTOR — That person, firm or corporation employed by the owner
of the property, empowered by written consent of the owner to perform the
specific duty of demolition as may be specified in authorizing permits.
DEMOLITION or DEMOLISH — The alteration of an existing building or
structure, the purpose of such alteration being the discontinuance of the
existing building or structure or a portion thereof. "Demolition" shall not
include the repairing, remodeling or extending of an existing building or
structure where such is incidental to the improvement of that building
or structure and the primary intent is shown to be that of repairing,
remodeling or extending the existing building or structure.
DEMOLITION PERMIT — The permit for demolition of an existing building
or structure.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Any large machinery employed to complete the
proposed demolition work, including, but not limited to, backhoes,
excavators, front-end loaders, tandem-axle dump trucks, tractor-trailers,
dumpsters, and cranes.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Village
of Williamsville Historic Preservation Commission as created pursuant to
Chapter 47 of the Code.
OWNER and PROPERTY OWNER — The person who has the legal title to
land together with ownership of the building or structure located thereon.
PUBLIC WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY — A street, alley, sidewalk or other
thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons
or vehicles. The term "public way" shall be construed, when used herein, as
though followed by the words "or part thereof."
SALVAGE — Component parts of a building or structure being demolished,
removed or to be removed from said building or structure for reuse or
resale.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1
1:15
SALVAGE CONTRACTOR — A person, firm or corporation identified in the
application for demolition, authorized by the owner, in writing, to remove
items of salvage from premises, which may or may not be the same person,
firm or corporation designated by the owner as the demolition contractor.
SITE — The actual confines of the demolition. The site as described in the
application for permit and as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer
therein shall be the only area approved for the demolition.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials, other than a building, to form
a construction that is safe and stable, and includes, among other things,
gazebos, trellises, decks, platforms, radio towers, sheds and storage bins.
For purposes of this chapter, a fence is not a structure.
§ 12-2. Permit requirements; fees.
A. Applicability. This chapter shall apply to all properties located within
MU, NMU, M-1 or R3M Zones as established in Chapter 112, Zoning.
Single-family and two-family dwellings in such zones are exempt from
application of this chapter where indicated herein.
B. Except for emergency demolitions ordered pursuant to Chapter 15 of
the Village Code, no person shall demolish an existing building or
structure having a gross floor area of 500 square feet or more without
first obtaining a demolition permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer pursuant to this chapter, allowing such demolition. Such permit
shall be applied for and issued to the owner of the property or the duly
authorized agent thereof.
C. Form; contents.
(1) An application for demolition permit shall be in writing on the
form(s) provided by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include
the following information:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of the owner;
(b) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of all contractors
(general, special or salvage) authorized by the owner to
perform work;
(c) Insurance coverage information as required by § 12-5,
including the name of each insurance company, policy number
and date of expiration of policy;
(d) A brief description and, where requested by the Code
Enforcement Officer, photograph(s) of each building or
structure to be demolished which depict neighboring adjacent
properties or structures which may be directly affected by the
proposed demolition;
(e) A current survey showing the location of the building(s) or
structure(s) to be demolished, complete with property and
§ 12-1 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 12-2
1:16
public ways, adjacent on-site buildings and locations of all
utilities and easements;
(f) A survey or inspection report with photographs noting the
condition of any public way adjacent to the site;
(g) A survey or drawing indicating the proposed new grades and
type of fill to be used, if any;
(h) An asbestos survey and/or inspection letter for any building(s)
or structure(s) to demolished that was constructed before
January 1, 1974, and, if such survey indicates the presence of
asbestos, an asbestos abatement plan prepared and certified
by a licensed asbestos abatement contractor;
(i) Identification of the source of any fill material and certification
that such material will meet the specifications set forth in
§ 12-7K herein;
(j) Expected start and completion dates for all proposed work,
which dates must comply with the time limitations set for in
§ 12-8 herein;
(k) List of materials to be salvaged, if any;
(l) Provision for disposal of refuse;
(m) A statement as to security and/or barricades to safeguard
premises from unauthorized entry during the demolition work,
as well as the protection of the general public, and a diagram
of such barricades or other security measures;
(n) A proposed redevelopment plan for approval by the Planning
and Architectural Review Board, except that such
redevelopment plan shall not be required for the proposed
demolition of a single-family or two-family dwelling;
(o) An estimate of the cost to complete all work to be authorized
by the demolition permit; and
(p) Any other information deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by:
(a) An application and permit fee in an amount established from
time to time by the Board of Trustees; and
(b) If required by the Code Enforcement Officer, at his or her
discretion based upon the scale of the proposed demolition, a
bond or other financial assurance acceptable to the Village in
an amount sufficient to complete the work authorized by the
requested demolition permit or required by this chapter.
§ 12-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:17
§ 12-3. Referral of certain applications to Historic Preservation
Commission.
§ 12-4. Redevelopment plan.
D. Posted notice.
(1) Within five days of submission of an application for demolition, the
owner shall post one sign for each public way upon which the
subject property abuts, identifying the building(s) or structure(s)
proposed to be demolished, and securely placed so as to be clearly
visible from each public way or street upon which the property
abuts.
(2) Each sign required to be posted shall be made of durable, weather
resistant material measuring two feet by three feet in area, with a
white background and black letters of sufficient size to be legible
from the public way to which the sign relates, and shall list the
name and telephone number of an authorized representative of the
applicant who can provide information regarding the proposed
demolition; the expected date of completion; and the telephone
number for the Village Building Department.
(3) Once a demolition permit has been issued, the expiration date of
the permit shall be added to the sign(s), which shall remain erected
on the site until all work required under the demolition permit is
completed.
A. If an application for demolition relates to a building or structure that is
50 or more years old, the Code Enforcement Officer shall refer the
application to the Village of Williamsville Historic Preservation
Commission before making a decision. The Commission shall review the
possible historic significance of such building or structure pursuant to
Chapter 47 of the Village Code no later than its next regularly
scheduled meeting.
B. In the event the Commission recommends that the building or structure
proposed to be demolished be designated as a landmark pursuant to
Chapter 47 of the Code, no demolition permit may be issued until a final
decision is made with respect to such nomination.
C. If the Commission declines to recommend that the subject building or
structure be nominated as landmark, it shall promptly notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of that determination, and the Code Enforcement
Officer may proceed with reviewing and acting upon the application as
provided in this chapter. If the Commission takes no action with respect
to the application within 30 days after receiving the referral required by
Subsection A, the Code Enforcement Officer shall proceed with
reviewing and acting upon the application as provided in this chapter.
§ 12-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 12-4
1:18
§ 12-5. Certificate of insurance.
§ 12-6. Permit issuance.
Upon a determination that an application for demolition is complete as
provided herein, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a demolition
permit as authorized by this chapter. In addition to the requirements
expressly set forth in this chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer may
impose additional conditions or restrictions regularly determined to be
necessary to protect public health and safety and the general welfare of the
Village.
§ 12-7. Demolition procedures and standards.
A. Except for emergency demolitions ordered pursuant to Chapter 15 of
the Village Code, no demolition permit shall be issued pursuant to this
chapter until a redevelopment plan has been approved by the Planning
and Architectural Review Board.
B. Alternately, in lieu of obtaining site plan approval for a new
development, an interim landscaping plan may be approved by the
Planning and Architectural Review Board for a period not to exceed one
year from the date of demolition. Such interim landscaping shall be in
place and stabilized no later than 30 days after demolition occurs. Any
damage to public sidewalks shall be repaired. Within a period of 30
days following completion of the interim landscaping, all construction
debris, fencing, toilets, etc shall be removed from the site until such
time as construction begins anew on the proposed future development.
A. As part of the application for a demolition permit, proof of worker's
compensation insurance and a certificate of insurance for liability shall
be delivered to the Code Enforcement Officer, as agent for the Village.
The minimum limits of said liability for the demolition of buildings and
structures, whether in a homeowner's insurance policy or separate
liability policy, shall be in an amount as required by the Village.
B. All insurance certificates shall include the Village as an additional
named insured.
A. Upon the request of the Code Enforcement Officer, the person making
the application for a permit to demolish a building or structure shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a written report from a
licensed exterminator regarding extermination of the building or
structure prior to the issuance of a demolition permit.
B. The owner or contractor shall give notice to the Code Enforcement
Officer no less than 24 hours prior to the start of the demolition work.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the demolition regularly
and shall be empowered to halt any such demolition that, in the
judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer, is not being performed in a
safe and sanitary manner or in accordance with the approved permit.
§ 12-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7
1:19
C. Prior to demolition, the contractor will erect a system of barricades (as
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer) around the site which shall
remain in place, and properly secured during all phases of demolition of
the site. Such barricades shall not be placed so as to obstruct any public
way unless determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
necessary for public safety or operational necessity. All barricades or
fencing shall be maintained in an upright and secure position at all
times. Upon notification of any violation of this requirement, the owner
shall have three days to properly secure the site, and upon the failure of
the owner to correct any violation within such time, the Code
Enforcement Officer may, through the use of Village employees or
private contractor(s), take such steps as are necessary to correct such
violation(s), with the cost of such corrective actions assessed to the
owner. If the owner fails to reimburse the Village of the costs within 30
days of being billed therefore, the charge shall be added to the Village
tax assessed against the property.
(1) At the discretion of the Code Enforcement Official and in the
interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the general public, a
sidewalk may be closed for a period of time during demolition/
construction. Such closure shall be accompanied by a drawing
indicating a detour plan, complete with signage, that will be
maintained in good condition, upright, and secure for the duration
of the closure as well as the proposed length of the closure. Certain
conditions may be imposed on the applicant's plan by the Code
Enforcement Officer to facilitate special events or other public
interests which would otherwise be inconvenienced by the
sidewalk closure.
D. Prior to demolition, the owner or contractor shall have all utilities
service properly disconnected at the owner's expense.
E. The contractor shall obtain appropriate approval for the water use on
the site from the head of the Department of Public Works and/or the
Erie County Water Authority for dust control and have sufficient lengths
of one-and-one-half-inch and/or two-and-one-half-inch hose for this
purpose. Dust from all activities associated with the demolition work
shall be controlled so as not to impact neighboring properties or public
ways by watering down the site or other dust control measures
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. The contractor shall provide a flagman for traffic control when
necessary, and should a street have to be closed, he shall obtain
permission from the head of the Department of Public Works, the Chief
of Police and the Fire Chief.
G. In the case of the demolition of an existing building which has a
common or party wall with one or more adjoining buildings, the owner
of the building to be demolished shall be responsible for and bear all
costs in relation to the safeguarding of said adjacent wall.
§ 12-7 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 12-7
1:20
H. Where beams, girders and joists are removed from party walls, the
resulting pockets in said walls shall be cleaned out and filled with solid
masonry. Necessary repairs shall be made to put the party wall in a safe
condition. This work shall be done by the contractor at the expense of
the property owner having said demolition performed.
I. During the demolition work, debris must be systematically removed
from the site and not allowed to pile up or cause any obstruction,
hazard or attractive nuisance.
J. When a building to be demolished contains a cellar or basement, the
contractor shall remove all debris and organic material from the cellar
or basement and then break up and/or perforate the cellar floor. The
bearing or foundation wall shall be removed to a depth of at least 24
inches below the present grade or at least 24 inches below any future
grade to be established. The material resulting from the cellar or
foundation wall demolition may remain in the excavation, provided that
the material is crushed and compacted and the overall mix of fill
conforms to the standards set forth in Subsection K.
K. In filling excavations, voids and/or other depressions, fill material must
conform to the following standards: a minimum of 66% clay materials
over a compactable, well-graded, engineered fill (e.g., general fill or
crusher run) compacted in lifts with not less than 90% compaction. The
fill shall have no particles greater than six inches (216 cubic inches) in
dimension and shall be free of organics and asphaltic materials. The
final grade shall be of 12 inches of 100% soil content free of all
aggregate materials, sod, roots, stumps, trees, brush, stone and
asphaltic or bituminous materials. Documentation of sources and
custody of the fill materials shall be provided to the Code Enforcement
Officer.
L. Where there is no cellar or basement, the bearing or foundation wall
shall be removed to a depth of at least 24 inches below any future grade
to be established.
M. The final grade must also provide for proper drainage and prevent the
accumulation of standing water.
N. Demolition of any building or structure shall proceed only on normal
Village workdays and in compliance with § 73-3A.
O. Salvage materials that are a structural part of the building or structure
shall not be removed except as part of the actual demolition of said
building or structure. Removal of salvage shall be by the owner or
salvage contractor only.
P. In-ground storage tanks shall be removed from the demolition site.
Q. No explosives may be used in connection with demolition of buildings or
structures in the Village unless a special permit is first obtained from
the Village Board of Trustees pursuant to § 12-11.
§ 12-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8
1:21
§ 12-8. Time limit on permit validity.
§ 12-9. Final inspection of certification of completion.
A. Unless different time frames are approved in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer based upon conditions unique to the particular
application, demolition permits shall be valid as follows:
(1) For structures not exceeding 2 1/2 stories in height above grade:
30 days;
(2) For structures more than 2 1/2 stories and less than five stories in
height above-grade: 45 days;
(3) For all structures in excess of five stories in height above grade: 60
days.
B. At the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, the applicable time
periods provided in § 12-8A may be extended once for a period not to
exceed 10, 20 or 30 days, respectively, upon good cause shown by the
owner. Any request for an extension shall be in writing and submitted to
the Code Enforcement Officer at least 10 days prior to the applicable
expiration date.
C. All work authorized by the demolition permit or otherwise required by
this chapter must be completed within the time frames provided herein.
Each day that such work remains incomplete beyond the applicable
expiration date shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
A. Upon notification by the owner that the demolition work has been
completed, or upon the expiration of such permit, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the site to ensure compliance with all
applicable requirements. Any damage to existing sidewalks, curbs or
streets caused in the performance of demolition work shall be replaced
in kind and/or repaired in accordance with Village specifications. All
remedial work shall be done by the contractor (or owner, in the case of
work done by owner) at his own expense, bearing the cost of restoring
affected streets and curbs to a good and satisfactory condition.
B. If any fill material utilized at the site is found to be contaminated or
unsuitable in any way, the Code Enforcement Officer may order its
removal from the site and the replacement with suitable fill at the
owner's expense.
C. Upon determination that the owner has fully complied with all
applicable requirements, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a
certificate of completion to the owner and file such certificate in the
office of the Building Department.
D. Upon a determination that the owner has failed to comply with all
applicable requirements or that the site is otherwise in violation of any
applicable provision of the Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
§ 12-8 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 12-9
1:22
§ 12-10. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any other remedies available to the Village, any person
committing an offense against any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a violation, punishable as follows: by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days or by a fine not exceeding $500, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate
and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 12-11. Explosives, blasting.
Chapter 15
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE AND UNFINISHED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings - See Ch. 12.
Fire prevention and building code
administration - See Ch. 25.
Historic prservation - See Ch. 47.
issue an order requiring immediate action to cure such noncompliance
or Code violation.
E. In the event that the owner fails or refuses to cure such noncompliance
or Code violations within 15 days of receipt of such order, the Village
may perform or contract for the necessary work to bring said property
into compliance, with the cost of making the site safe being assessed
against such property and shall be a lien thereon; or may seek any other
available legal remedies to ensure compliance.
A. No person shall employ the use of powder, dynamite or other explosives
for any purpose without prior approval of the Board of Trustees and all
appropriate permits required by § 28-6 for fire prevention and building
code administration issued by the Building Department.
B. A preblast survey of all buildings or structures within a radius of 800
feet of the blast site shall be required prior to issuance of a permit,
unless such survey is waived by the Board of Trustees upon satisfactory
evidence supplied by the applicant that such survey is not necessary
under the circumstances.
C. No charge shall be used larger than is necessary to achieve the purpose
of the blasting or use of explosives.
§ 12-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-1
1:23
§ 15-1. Purpose.
This chapter shall provide for the removal or repair of a building, structure
or any part thereof that has been determined to be a hazard to health and/
or safety and provide for a timely completion of construction or renovation
projects.
§ 15-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior or
party walls and a roof.
DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE BUILDING — Any building so designated by the
Board of Trustees, upon recommendation by the Code Enforcement Official,
in accordance with standards hereinafter set forth.
UNFINISHED BUILDING — Any building, structure or part thereof under
construction or exterior renovation for which no certificate of occupancy
has been issued within two (2) years after issuance of a building permit.
§ 15-3. Dangerous or unsafe buildings.
A building maybe determined to be dangerous or unsafe when any one of
the following conditions exist
§ 15-4. Boarding of windows, doors and portals.
A. Any part of the building has been damaged (e.g., by fire, wind, neglect
or vandalism) to such an extent as to be a hazard to the safety or health
of the inhabitants of the village.
B. Any part of the building is in danger of collapse.
C. The building or part thereof remains unoccupied for a period of one (1)
year and, because of damage or destruction to windows, doors, other
portals or other physical deterioration, constitutes a hazard to health or
safety.
D. The building or structure or part thereof constitutes or creates a fire
hazard because of lack of proper repair, construction or supervision.
A. Any building or structure or part thereof damaged by fire or natural
hazard or that has damaged windows, doors or other portals must
immediately be protected by temporary enclosures for a period of time
not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days. Thereafter, the window, door or
other portal must be completely restored.
B. In all other instances where windows, doors or other portals have been
subject to damage or destruction (e.g., accidents or vandalism),
immediate temporary enclosures will only be permitted for a period of
§ 15-1 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 15-4
1:24
§ 15-5. Inspection; report order to repair or demolish.
§ 15-6. Failure to comply; assessment of costs.
§ 15-7. Unfinished buildings.
time not to exceed ten (10) working days. Thereafter, the window, door
or other portal shall be restored.
A. The Code Enforcement Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected
any building, structure or part thereof reported as being dangerous or
unsafe and shall provide written report to the Board of Trustees of the
findings, together with recommendations as to the razing or repair of
the building or structure.
B. The Board of Trustees thereafter, by resolution, may declare the
building dangerous or unsafe and order the razing or repair. Demolition
or repair shall begin within fifteen (15) days of receipt by the record
owner or his agent of a true copy of the order of the Board of Trustees.
Service of said order shall be by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service. Said demolition or repair shall be
completed within sixty (60) days of receipt of said order.
A. Sixty (60) days after the service of the order to raze or repair upon the
owner, the Code Enforcement Official shall schedule an inspection of
the property to ensure compliance with the order to raze or repair. If
the owner has failed to comply with the order of the Board of Trustees
to raze or repair, the village may make application to the State Supreme
Court for an order declaring the structure or part thereof to be a public
nuisance and directing its razing or repair in accordance with the order
of the Trustees. Application to the Court shall be made within one
hundred twenty (120) days after inspection reveals noncompliance by
the owner.
B. All expenses incurred by the village in razing or repairing a dangerous
or unsafe building shall be a charge against the property and shall be
added to the next taxes assessed against the property if not paid within
thirty (30) days after notice of said charge.
A. The Code Enforcement Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected
any building, structure or part thereof which qualifies hereunder as
unfinished and shall make written report thereof to the Board of
Trustees of the findings, together with his recommendations.
B. The Board of Trustees thereafter may, by resolution, order the razing of
a building or completion thereof under such terms as the Board may
direct. The order shall be served upon the record owner by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service. Full compliance,
except where otherwise directed by the Board order, shall be had within
sixty (60) days of receipt thereof.
§ 15-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:25
Chapter 21
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW FEES
§ 21-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Development Plan Review Fees."
§ 21-2. Legislative findings; intent and purpose.
The Village Board hereby finds and determines that in order to protect
and safeguard the Village of Williamsville, its residents and their property
with respect to certain land developments within the Village, all should be
designed and constructed in a competent and workmanlike manner and in
conformity with all applicable governmental codes, rules and regulations
and dedicated and conveyed to the Village in a legally sufficient manner. In
order to assure the foregoing, it is essential that the Village have available
to it all necessary professional expertise to assist in the review of plans,
designs, applications and related materials in order to make
recommendations to the Village Board, Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Appeals. The Village of Williamsville takes great pride in the skill and
professionalism of its staff. However, from time to time the staff is called
upon to review and evaluate matters outside the range of staff training.
These situations may require the Village to seek out skills not possessed
by the Village employees but which are not required frequently enough
to justify the hiring of new staff. At the same time, the cost of retaining
such outside expertise should not be borne by the taxpayers of the Village,
but rather by those who seek to profit from the decisions of the Village
and its boards. Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to establish a
mechanism whereby the Village may hire necessary expertise that is needed
infrequently without imposing the cost on its taxpayers.
§ 21-3. Statutory authority; local supersession.
This chapter is enacted under the authority of Subparagraphs (a)(12) and
(d)(3) of the Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii) and Municipal Home Rule
Law § 22. To the extent that the Village Law of the State of New York does
not authorize the Village Board, Village Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Appeals to require the reimbursement to the Village of expenses incurred
by the Village in connection with the professional review of applications
for development and land use approvals, it is the expressed intent of the
Village Board to change and supersede such statutes. More particularly,
such statutes do not authorize the deferral or withholding of such approvals
in the event such expenses are not paid to the Village. It is the expressed
C. In the event of the refusal or failure of the record owner to comply with
the completion order of the Village Board, the record owner shall be
subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) per day until full compliance with said order is certified by the
Code Enforcement Official.
§ 15-7 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 21-3
1:26
intent of the Village Board to change and supersede Village Law §§ 4-412,
7-712,7-712-A, 7-712-B, 7-718, 7-725-A, 7-725B, 7-728, 7-730 and 7-732
to empower the Village to require such payment as part of the approval
process.
§ 21-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, limited liability company or organization of any kind who or which
requests the Village Board, the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Appeals, to approve a land use application or take other action to advance a
proposed land use development project within the Village.
CONSULTANT or EXPERT — Any consultant or professional, including,
but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, accountants, financial advisors,
architects, surveyors, retained by the Village for any purpose authorized
pursuant to this chapter.
LAND USE APPLICATION — An application for subdivision approval, site
plan approval, area variance, use variance, special use permit, or any
similar approval issued pursuant to the Code of the Village of Williamsville,
as amended, and any additional review for those as needed to comply with
any other applicable state or local law, including, but not limited to, the
New York Village Law, General Municipal Law, Highway Law, Municipal
Home Rule Law, Local Finance Law and the State Environmental Quality
Review Act, Environmental Conservation Law Article 8, and any regulations
adopted pursuant to such laws.
VILLAGE — The Village of Williamsville.
§ 21-5. Engineering cost recovery.
A. Any person who applies to the Village or any of its duly constituted
boards for the issuance of any permit, recommendation, rezoning,
approval and review shall be required to pay a fee in the manner as set
forth in this chapter for each improvement proposed.
B. No approval, permit, recommendation or review shall be processed
until the required deposit is paid to the Building Department.
C. Such fee shall be in addition to all other fees required by law.
D. Deposit and fee schedule:
§ 21-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-5
1:27
§ 21-6. Retention of experts; reimbursement by applicant.
Type of Zoning
Class Fee Required
Engineering
Reimbursement Fee
Deposit
Nonresidential and
Mixed Use (MU, NMU
and M-1)
All cases $2,000 per building or
structure
Residential (R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-3M)
As determined by
Building Department
$500 per lot or living
unit
For Mixed Use developments incorporating residential units, only the
per structure or building fee is required.
A. In addition to any fee required pursuant to § 21-5 or any other
applicable law, in the event the Village determines that is necessary to
retain an expert or consultant to evaluate a land use application or
proposed development plan, it may retain such expert of consultant and
charge the applicant for the cost of such service as set forth herein.
B. Except as otherwise provided in Chapters 100 and 112 of the Code of
the Village of Williamsville with respect to applications for special
permits for telecommunications facilities, if, prior to the completion of a
review of a land use application or development proposal, the Village
discovers the need to retain consultant and/or expert services, the
applicant shall deposit with the Village funds in an amount determined
by the Village to be sufficient to reimburse the Village for the
reasonable costs of consultation and/or evaluation in connection with
review of the application. The Village will maintain a separate escrow
account for such funds.
C. Upon receipt of such funds, the Village Clerk shall cause the money to
be placed in an account in the name of the Village and shall keep a
separate record of all money so deposited and the name of the applicant
and the project for which the sums were deposited.
D. The Village's consultants and experts shall invoice the Village for
services rendered in reviewing the application. The Village shall furnish
a copy of each invoice received to the applicant upon receipt of the
invoice by the Village.
E. The Village shall review and audit all invoices received and shall
approve payment only of such fees as are reasonable in amount and
necessarily incurred by the Village in connection with a review of a land
use application. For purposes of this chapter, a fee is reasonable in
amount if it bears a reasonable relationship to the average charge by
such an expert to the Village or others for services performed in
connection with the review of a project similar to that involved in the
land use application. In this regard, the Village may take into
consideration the size and type of project involved in the land use
§ 21-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 21-6
1:28
§ 21-7. Exceptions
§ 21-8. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof that can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
Chapter 23
application and any special conditions or considerations as the Village
may deem relevant in connection with review of the particular land use
application.
F. Contracts for the retention of experts shall be let pursuant to the
purchasing policy of the Village of Williamsville unless the contract is
one that must be competitively bid.
G. After payment of all outstanding invoices, any funds held by the Village
upon completion of a review of a land use application shall be returned
to the applicant.
A. The following developments are hereby exempt from the application of
§ 21-6:
(1) Any development of land of 0.5 acre or less.
(2) Any development of land for the purposes of single- or two-family
residential development.
(3) Any proposed development constituting a Type II action pursuant
to the State Environmental Quality Review Act.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, an
applicant or developer shall not be required to reimburse the Village for
any part of a fee incurred by the Village for services performed in
connection with matters, including but not limited to those resulting
from complaints by third parties, as to which the Village determines the
applicant had no responsibility or were beyond the reasonable control
of the applicant.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the negotiation of alternative fee
agreements with any consultant or expert containing different terms
than those contained herein, including without limitation, the timing
and amount of payment, whether such different terms are between the
consultant or expert and the Village or the consultant or expert and the
applicant. In the event that such alternative agreement is entered into,
the terms of this chapter shall not apply.
§ 21-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-8
1:29
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 67.
§ 21-8 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 21-8
1:30
ARTICLE I
Code of Ethics
[Adopted 9-10-2012 by L.L. No. 8-2012]
§ 23-1. Purpose.
Officers and employees of the Village of Williamsville hold their positions
to serve and benefit the public and not for obtaining unwarranted personal
or private gain in the exercise and performance of their official powers and
duties. The Village of Williamsville recognizes that, in furtherance of this
fundamental principle, there is a need for clear and reasonable standards of
ethical conduct. This Code of Ethics establishes those standards.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Village Board and any municipal administrative board (e.g.,
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals), commission or other agency
or body comprised of two or more municipal officers or employees, not
including volunteer committees.
CODE — This Code of Ethics.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Information, in any form, that is either
prohibited from disclosure by federal or state law; or prohibited from
disclosure by local law, ordinance, or resolution of the municipality, and
exempt from mandatory disclosure under the New York State Freedom of
Information Law and the New York State Open Meetings Law.
INTEREST — A direct or indirect financial or material benefit, but does not
include any benefit arising from the provision or receipt of any services
generally available to the residents or taxpayers of the municipality or an
area of the municipality, or a lawful class of such residents or taxpayers. A
municipal officer or employee is deemed to have an interest in any private
organization when he or she, his or her spouse or a member of his or her
household is an owner, partner, member, director, officer or employee or
directly or indirectly owns or controls more than 5% of the organization's
outstanding stock.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Williamsville. The word "municipal" refers
to the municipality.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — A paid or unpaid officer or
employee of the Village of Williamsville, including, but not limited to, the
members of any municipal board.
RELATIVE — A spouse, domestic partner, parent, stepparent, sibling,
stepsibling, stepsibling's spouse, child, stepchild, uncle, aunt, nephew,
niece, first cousin or household member of municipal officer or employee
and individuals having any of these relationships to the spouse of the officer
or employee.
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:31
§ 23-3. Applicability.
This Code of Ethics applies to the officers and employees of the Village of
Williamsville and shall supersede any prior municipal Code of Ethics. The
provisions of this Code of Ethics shall apply in addition to all applicable
state and local laws relating to conflicts of interest and ethics, including,
but not limited to, Article 18 of the General Municipal Law and all rules,
regulations, policies and procedures of the Village of Williamsville.
§ 23-4. Use of municipal position for personal or private gain
prohibited.
No municipal officer or employee shall use his or her municipal position or
official powers and to secure a financial or material benefit for himself or
herself, a relative or any private organization in which he or she is deemed
to have an interest.
§ 23-5. Disclosure of interest in legislation and other matters.
§ 23-6. Treatment of public.
An officer or employee of the Village of Williamsville shall treat all members
of the public, whether a person, firm or corporation or other organization,
with respect and in a professional manner, with equal consideration and
without special advantage in carrying out his or her official duties.
§ 23-7. Recusal and abstention.
A. Whenever a matter requiring the exercise of discretion comes before a
municipal officer or employee, either individually or as a member of a
board, and disposition of the matter could result in a direct or indirect
financial or material benefit to himself or herself, a relative or any
private organization in which he or she is deemed to have an interest,
the municipal officer or employee shall disclose, in writing, the nature
of the interest.
B. The disclosure shall be made when the matter requiring disclosure first
comes before the municipal officer or employee or when the municipal
officer or employee first acquires knowledge of the interest requiring
disclosure, whichever is earlier.
C. In the case of a person serving in an elective office, the disclosure shall
be filed with the Village Board of the municipality. In all other cases, the
disclosure shall be filed with the person's supervisor, or, if the person
does not have a supervisor, the disclosure shall be filed with the
municipal officer, employee or board having the power to appoint to the
person's position. In addition, in the case of a person serving on a
municipal board, a copy of the disclosure shall be filed with the board.
Any disclosure made to a board shall be made publicly at a meeting of
the board and must be included in the minutes of the meeting.
§ 23-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 23-7
1:32
§ 23-8. Exceptions.
A. No municipal officer or employee may participate in any decision or
take any official action with respect to any matter requiring the
exercise of discretion including discussing the matter and voting on it,
when he or she knows or has reason to know that the action could
confer a direct or indirect financial or material benefit on himself or
herself, a relative or any private organization in which he or she is
deemed to have an interest.
B. In the event that this section prohibits a municipal officer or employee
from exercising or performing a power or duty:
(1) If power or duty is vested in a municipal officer as a member of a
board, then the power or duty shall be exercised or performed by
the other members of the board;
(2) If the power or duty is vested in a municipal officer individually,
then the power or duty shall be exercised or performed by his or
her deputy, or if the officer does not have a deputy, the power or
duty shall be performed by another person to whom the officer may
lawfully delegate the function; or
(3) If the power or duty is vested in a municipal employee, he or she
must refer the matter to his or her immediate supervisor, and the
immediate supervisor shall designate another person to exercise or
perform the power or duty.
A. This code's prohibition on use of a municipal position (§ 23-4),
disclosure requirements (§ 23-5) and requirements relating to recusal
and abstention (§ 23-7) shall not apply with respect to the following
matters:
(1) Adoption of the municipality's annual budget.
(2) Any matter requiring the exercise of discretion that directly affects
any of the following groups of people or a lawful class of such
groups:
(a) All municipal officers or employees;
(b) All residents or taxpayers of the municipality or an area of the
municipality; or
(c) The general public.
(3) Any matter that does not require the exercise of discretion.
B. Recusal and abstention shall not be required with respect to any
matter:
§ 23-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-8
1:33
§ 23-9. Investments in conflict with official duties.
§ 23-10. Private employment in conflict with official duties.
No municipal officer or employee, during his or her tenure as a municipal
officer or employee, may engage in any private employment, including
the rendition of any business, commercial, professional or other types of
services, when the employment:
(1) Which comes before a board when a majority of the board's total
membership would otherwise be prohibited from acting by § 23-7 of
this code.
(2) Which comes before a municipal officer when the officer would be
prohibited from acting by § 23-7 of this code and the matter cannot
be lawfully delegated to another person.
A. No municipal officer or employee may acquire the following
investments:
(1) Investments that can be reasonably expected to require more than
sporadic recusal and abstention under § 23-7 of this code;
(2) Investments that would otherwise impair the person's
independence of judgment in the exercise or performance of his or
her official powers and duties; or
(3) Investments from any Village of Williamsville auction if the
employee or officer is in the position to negotiate, prepare,
authorize or approve the contract for the sale upon which he or she
is bidding.
B. This section does not prohibit a municipal officer or employee from
acquiring any other investments or the following assets:
(1) Real property located within the municipality and used as his or her
personal residence;
(2) Less than 5% of the stock of a publicly traded corporation; or
(3) Bonds or notes issued by the municipality and acquired more than
one year after the date on which the bonds or notes were originally
issued.
A. Can be reasonably expected to require more than sporadic recusal and
abstention pursuant to § 23-7 of this code;
B. Can be reasonably expected to require disclosure or use of confidential
information gained by reason of serving as a municipal officer or
employee;
C. Violates § 805-a(1)(c) or (d) of the General Municipal Law; or
§ 23-8 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 23-10
1:34
§ 23-11. Future employment.
§ 23-12. Personal representations and claims permitted.
This code shall not be construed as prohibiting a municipal officer or
employee from:
§ 23-13. Use of municipal resources.
D. Requires representation of a person or organization other than the
municipality in connection with litigation, negotiations or any other
matters to which the municipality is a party.
A. No municipal officer or employee may ask for, pursue or accept a
private post-government employment opportunity with any person or
organization that has a matter requiring the exercise of discretion
pending before the municipal officer or employee, either individually or
as a member of a board, while the matter is pending or within the 90
days following final disposition of the matter.
B. No municipal officer or employee, for the one-year period after serving
as a municipal officer or employee, may represent or render services to
a private person or organization in connection with any matter
involving the exercise of discretion before the municipal office, board,
department or comparable organizational unit for which he or she
serves.
C. No municipal officer or employee at any time after serving as a
municipal officer or employee, may represent or render services to a
private person or organization in connection with any particular
transaction in which he or she personally and substantially participated
while serving as a municipal officer or employee.
A. Representing himself or herself, or his or her spouse or minor children,
before the municipality; or
B. Asserting a claim against the municipality on his or her own behalf, or
on behalf of his or her spouse or minor children.
A. Municipal resources shall be used for lawful municipal purposes.
Municipal resources include, but are not limited to, municipal
personnel and the municipality's money, vehicles, equipment, materials,
supplies or other property.
B. No municipal officer or employee may use or permit the use of
municipal resources for personal or private purposes, but this provision
shall not be construed as prohibiting:
(1) Any use of municipal resources authorized by law or municipal
policy;
§ 23-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-13
1:35
§ 23-14. Interests in contracts.
§ 23-15. Nepotism.
Except as otherwise required by law:
§ 23-16. Political solicitations and campaign activities.
(2) The use of municipal resources for personal or private purposes
when provided to a municipal officer or employee as part of his or
her compensation; or
(3) The occasional and incidental use during the business day of
municipal telephones and computers for necessary personal
matters such as family care and changes in work schedule.
C. No municipal officer or employee shall cause the municipality to spend
more than is reasonably necessary for transportation, meals or lodging
in connection with official travel.
A. No municipal officer or employee may have an interest in a contract
that is prohibited by § 801 of the General Municipal Law.
B. Every municipal officer and employee shall disclose interests in
contracts with the municipality at the time and in the manner required
by § 803 of the General Municipal Law.
A. No municipal officer or employee, either individually or as a member of
a board, may participate in any decision specifically to appoint, hire,
promote, discipline or discharge a relative for any position at, for or
within the municipality or a municipal board.
B. No municipal officer or employee may supervise a relative in the
performance of the relative's official powers or duties.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall directly or indirectly compel or
induce a subordinate municipal officer or employee to make, or promise
to make, any political contribution, whether by gift of money, service or
other thing of value.
B. No municipal officer or employee may act or decline to act in relation to
appointing, hiring, promoting, discharging or disciplining, or in any
manner changing the official rank, status or compensation of, any
municipal officer or employee, or an applicant for a position as a
municipal officer or employee, on the basis of the giving or withholding
or neglecting to make any contribution of money or service or any other
valuable thing for any political purpose.
C. No municipal officer or employee shall engage in political campaign
activities during the course of his or her official Village of Williamsville
duties.
§ 23-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 23-17
1:36
§ 23-17. Confidential information.
No municipal officer or employee who acquires confidential information
in the course of exercising or performing his or her official powers or
duties may disclose or use such information unless the disclosure or use
is required by law or in the course of exercising or performing his or her
official powers and duties.
§ 23-18. Gifts.
A. No municipal officer or employee shall solicit, accept or receive a gift in
violation of § 805-a(1)(a) of the General Municipal Law as interpreted in
this section.
B. No municipal officer or employee may directly or indirectly solicit any
gift.
C. No municipal officer or employee may accept or receive any gift, or
multiple gifts, from the same donor, having an annual aggregate value
of $75 or more when:
(1) The gift reasonably appears to be intended to influence the officer
or employee in the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties;
(2) The gift could reasonably be expected to influence the officer or
employee in the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties; or
(3) The gift is intended as a reward for any official action on the part of
the officer or employee.
D. For purposes of this section, a gift includes anything of value, whether
in the form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
thing or promise, or in any other form. The value of a gift is the gift's
fair market value, determined by the retail cost of the item or a
comparable item. The fair market value of a ticket entitling the holder
to food, refreshments, entertainment or any other benefit is the face
value of the ticket, or the actual cost to the donor, whichever is greater.
Determination of whether multiple gifts from a single donor exceed $75
must be made by adding together the value of all gifts received from the
donor by an officer or employee during the twelve-month period
preceding the receipt of the most recent gift.
E. Gifts intended to influence or reward.
(1) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended
to influence the exercise or performance of his or her official
powers or duties when the gift is from a private person or
organization that seeks municipal action involving the exercise of
discretion by or with the participation of the officer or employee.
§ 23-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-18
1:37
(2) A gift to a municipal officer or employee is presumed to be intended
as a reward for official action when the gift is from a private person
or organization that has obtained municipal action involving the
exercise of discretion by or with the participation of the officer or
employee during the preceding 12 months.
F. This section does not prohibit any other gift, including:
(1) Gifts made to the municipality;
(2) Gifts from a person with a family or personal relationship with the
officer or employee when the circumstances make it clear that the
personal relationship, rather than the recipient's status as a
municipal officer or employee, is the primary motivating factor for
the gift;
(3) Gifts given on special occasions, such as marriage, illness or
retirement, which are modest, reasonable and customary;
(4) Unsolicited advertising or promotional material of little intrinsic
value, such as pens, pencils, note pads and calendars;
(5) Awards and plaques having a value of $75 or less which are publicly
presented in recognition of service as a municipal officer or
employee or other service to the community; or
(6) Meals and refreshments provided when a municipal officer or
employee is a speaker or participant at a job-related professional or
educational conference or program and the meals and
refreshments are made available to all participants.
§ 23-18 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 23-18
1:38
Chapter 25
FENCES
§ 25-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the placement and
height of fences and hedges within the Village of Williamsville.
§ 25-2. Definitions.
§ 25-3. Permit required.
§ 25-4. Fences and hedges in residentially zoned districts.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — Any structure, regardless of composition, except a living
fence, enclosing in full or in part any open space, lot or yard or dividing
the same into distinct portions.
HEDGE — Any row of closely planted shrubs or bushes forming a
boundary or serving as a fence or barrier which limits or prevents clear
vision through or around its foliage or limb structure.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the ground to the top of a fence
or hedge. "Height" shall be measured from the average finished grade
of the lot.
B. In all other cases, definitions as provided in § 112-2 of Chapter 112,
Zoning, shall control. [Amended 5-10-1993 by L.L. No. 4-1993]
A. No fence shall be erected unless a permit for the same has been issued
by the Building Inspector.
B. Application for a fence permit shall be made on a form or forms
provided by the Village Building Department. An application shall be
accompanied by a survey clearly outlining thereon the location of the
proposed fence and the material of which it shall be constructed, all of
which shall be in conformity with local law and accompanied by the
appropriate fee as established by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees.
A. A fence may be erected in any residentially zoned district, after the
securing of a fence permit, as follows:
(1) In any rear or interior side yard, provided that the fence does not
exceed six feet in height.
(2) (Reserved)2
(3) In any front yard, as follows:
§ 23-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-4
1:39
§ 25-5. Fences in districts zoned other than residential.
(a) A fence intended for decorative purposes may be erected as
part of a landscape plan in a front yard, along, next to or in
connection with an entrance to a residence or along or next to
a drive or corner of a front yard or at the juncture of a driveway
and a public sidewalk.
(b) Such fence shall be erected wholly within the lot line of the
property and at least three feet inside of the interior edge of
the public sidewalk.
(c) Such fence shall in no event enclose a front yard, nor shall it
exceed three feet in height. It shall be of open, decorative
design and permit clear visibility through at least 80% of its
vertical area.
(d) On any lot fronting two or more public streets, each and every
yard fronting such street shall be considered a front yard for
the purposes of this section. [Added 6-24-2013 by L.L. No.
5-2013]
(4) Enclosing a tennis court, provided that the fence does not exceed
12 feet in height.
(5) Fencing of a swimming pool shall continue to be regulated by
Chapter 93, Swimming Pools and Hot Tubs.
B. A hedge planted in a district zoned residential shall, if planted in an
interior side or rear yard, an exterior side yard or any front yard, be
subject to the same limitations and restrictions, including height, as a
fence if the hedge is planted at or near the property line and is designed
to serve the function of a fence.
C. For a lot whose rear lot line abuts the New York State Thruway
Authority, fences in a rear yard shall be permitted to be erected to a
height of 10 feet. [Added 7-20-1998 by L.L. No. 5-1998]
A. No fence shall be erected on any premises zoned other than residential
until a permit has been issued by the Building Inspector after approval
by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall grant approval only
after a determination that the proposed fence is to be constructed of
material which will ensure the privacy of adjoining premises and that
the fence affords adjoining premises an environment reasonably free of
offensive noise, smell, dust and debris.
B. No permit shall be issued for the erection of a fence on premises
abutting a residentially zoned property where the proposed fence
exceeds eight feet in height.
2. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), concerning fences in corner lots, as amended, was
repealed 6-24-2013 by L.L. No. 5-2013.
§ 25-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 25-6
1:40
§ 25-6. Visibility at intersections. [Amended 8-26-1991 by L.L. No.
7-1991]
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or modify in any way the existing
sections of the Village Code relating to visibility at intersections. The
provisions of § 103-20E shall control in any conflict with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 25-7. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 25-8. Prohibited fences.
The following fences and fencing material are specifically prohibited:
§ 25-9. Existing fences.
All existing fences and other barriers which do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter may be continued as they presently exist, as long
as the same are not altered, extended or modified.
§ 25-10. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 8-26-1991 by L.L. No.
7-1991]
Any person committing an offense against any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation as defined by the Penal Law and, upon
A. A fence, whether of wood, chain link, stockade or any other type, shall
be erected so that the smooth or finished side shall face to the outside
of premises. All fence posts shall be placed on the inside of the fence.
B. Painted fences shall be of one color only.
C. No fence shall be erected in such manner as to inhibit or divert the
natural drainage flow or to cause the blockage or damming of surface
water, creating ponding.
D. No fence shall be erected which may create a fire hazard or other
dangerous condition or which may result in obstruction to the effective
combat of fire.
A. Barbed wire.
B. Short, pointed fences.
C. Electrically charged fences.
D. Temporary fences, such as snow fences, except by express permission
of the Village Board upon good cause shown.
E. Chain link fences in a front yard.
F. Canvas or cloth fences.
G. A fence constructed within the right-of-way of any public street.
§ 25-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10
1:41
conviction thereof, shall be punishable for each offense by a fine not to
exceed $250 or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both a fine
and imprisonment.
Chapter 28
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 12.
Unsafe and unfinished buildings — See Ch.
15.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 31.
Landscaping — See Ch. 57.
Lien on fire insurance proceeds — See Ch. 60.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 28-1. Title, legislative intent and purpose.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code)
in the Village of Williamsville.3 This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section
10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the
Uniform Code, other state law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings,
structures, and premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the
provisions of this chapter. It is intended that this chapter shall supersede
any provisions of local law not consistent herewith.
§ 28-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITION — An extension or increase in area, height or equipment of a
building.
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to a building, other
than repairs, or any modification in construction or in building equipment.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior and party walls, and a roof.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 28-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued pursuant to § 28-9B
of this chapter.
3. Editor's Note: See 19 NYCRR Part 1203.
§ 25-10 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-2
1:42
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to § 28-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all Inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 28-17A of this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION — All the on-site work done in building or altering
structures, from land clearance through completion, including excavation,
erection and the assembly and installation of components and equipment.
CONVERSION — A change in the use of a building to another use which has
different requirements according to the Uniform Code.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
EQUIPMENT — Plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilating, air conditioning,
refrigerating, elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators and other mechanical
additions or installations.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to § 28-3D of this chapter.
LOT SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel into two or more lots,
plats, sites, or other division of land, which may or may not front on one or
more streets, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership or development, including resubdivision.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 28-12 of this chapter.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
REPAIR — Replacement or renewal (excluding additions) of any part of a
building, structure, device or equipment with like or similar materials or
parts for the purpose of maintenance, preservation or restoration of such
building, structure, device or equipment.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 28-8 of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION PLAT or FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing a
proposed subdivision, containing all information or detail required by law
and by these regulations which, if approved, may be duly filed or recorded
by the applicant in the office of the Erie County Clerk.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 28-9D of
this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 28-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2
1:43
VILLAGE — The Village of Williamsville.
§ 28-3. Code Enforcement Officer and Inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and
construction documents submitted with such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates and operating
permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits such
terms and conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may
determine to be appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, fire safety and property maintenance
inspections, inspections incidental to the investigation of
complaints, and all other inspections required or permitted under
any provision of this chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 28-17, Penalties for offenses,
Subsection A, of this chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
(8) To collect fees as set by the Village Board of Trustees;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with the Village Attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Trustees. The Code Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction or fire prevention and shall,
§ 28-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-3
1:44
§ 28-4. Building permits.
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State
of New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and the
Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain certification from the State Fire
Administrator pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Mayor to
serve as Acting Code Enforcement Officer. The Acting Code
Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of his or her appointment,
exercise all powers and fulfill all duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more Inspectors may be appointed by the Board of Trustees to
act under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Code
Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each Inspector shall, within the
time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each Inspector
shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to
the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and Inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Village Board of Trustees.
A. Building permits required. A building permit shall be required for any
work which must conform to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code,
including, but not limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration,
improvement, removal, relocation or demolition of any building or
structure or any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuelburning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No
person shall commence any work for which a building permit is
required without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(1) In addition to the above, building permits shall also be required for
the following:
(a) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures
associated with one- or two-family dwellings or multiple singlefamily
dwellings (townhouses), which are used for tool and
storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses;
(b) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or twofamily
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses), where such pools are designed for a water depth
§ 28-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4
1:45
of greater than 24 inches (reference Chapter 93, Swimming
Pools and Hot Tubs);
(c) Installation of fences;
(d) Construction of retaining walls including such walls which
support a surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids;
(e) Replacement of any equipment whose replacement alters the
equipment's listing or renders it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications; and
(f) Repairs, provided that such repairs involve: i) the removal or
cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition, or portion
thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing component;
ii) the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
the rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress; iii) the enlargement, alteration, replacement or
relocation of any building system; or iv) the removal from
service of all or part of a fire protection system for any period
of time.
(g) Any proposed paving or sealing work in Mixed Use or R-3M
Districts. [Added 10-22-2012 by L.L. No. 10-2012;
amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
(2) All electrical work shall be inspected by the Town of Amherst
Building Department, 5583 Main Street, Williamsville, New York,
as the designated electrical inspector performing electrical
inspections in the Village of Williamsville, with all inspection fees
being paid directly to the Town of Amherst by the applicant at the
Town rate in effect at the time of inspection, or by a certified
electrical company, as designated by the Board of Trustees at its
annual reorganization meeting, or from time to time as deemed
necessary by said Board. Electrical work shall only be performed by
an electrician licensed within the Town of Amherst, as defined in
Chapter 83 of the Code of the Town of Amherst. [Amended
9-28-2009 by L.L. No. 7-2009; 12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
(3) A permit for development in flood hazard areas shall be required if
the proposed construction or any other development is within the
area of special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) as set out in Chapter 31 of the Village
Code.
B. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
§ 28-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-4
1:46
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The tax map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which: i) define the scope of the proposed work; ii)
are prepared by a New York State registered architect or licensed
professional engineer where so required by the Education Law; iii)
indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of
the work proposed; iv) substantiate that the proposed work will
comply with the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and v) where
applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing and
proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location of any
existing or proposed well or septic system, the location of the
intended work, and the distances between the buildings and
structures and the lot lines.
C. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection B(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant to
be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the Code
Enforcement Personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
D. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
E. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4
1:47
§ 28-5. (Reserved)4
§ 28-6. Fire prevention permits. [Added 4-9-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012]
F. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
G. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this subdivision may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
H. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code and
all work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
I. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 28-18, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a building permit, for an
amended building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. A fire prevention permit specifying the specific activity or operation
shall be obtained for the following:
ACETYLENE GENERATORS — To operate an acetylene generator
having a calcium carbide capacity exceeding five pounds.
AREA OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — See 28-12A(1)(d) for operating permit.
4. Editor's Note: Former § 28-5, Exceptional development, was repealed 6-13-2011 by L.L. No.
2-2011. This local law also provided for the renumbering of § 28-6 to 28-18 as § 28-5 to
28-17, respectively, which §§ 28-5 through 28-17 were redesignated §§ 28-7 through 28-19,
respectively, 4-9-2012 by L.L. No. 5-2012.
§ 28-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-6
1:48
AUTOMOBILE TIRE REBUILDING PLANTS — To operate an
automobile tire rebuilding plant.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARDS — To operate an automobile
wrecking yard.
BOWLING ESTABLISHMENTS — For bowling pin refinishing and
bowling lane resurfacing operations involving the use and application
of flammable or combustible liquids or materials.
CELLULOSE NITRATE MOTION-PICTURE FILM — To store, keep or
have on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose nitrate motion-picture
film.
CELLULOSE NITRATE PLASTICS —
COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS — To store, handle or use combustible fibers in
quantities in excess of 100 cubic feet, except agricultural products on a
farm.
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS — To store combustible materials,
including but not limited to empty combustible packing cases, boxes,
barrels or similar containers, rubber tires, baled cotton, rubber, cork or
other similar materials in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume, on
any premises.
COMPRESSED GASES, NONFLAMMABLE — To store, handle or use
more than 6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas at normal
temperatures and pressures.
CRYOGENICS — To store, handle, produce, sell or use cryogenic fluids,
except cryogens used as a motor fuel and stored in motor vehicle tanks.
DISABLING OF FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT — To temporarily
disable any fire protection equipment in accordance with Section 311.2
of the Fire Code of New York State.
DRY-CLEANING PLANTS — To use in excess of four gallons of solvents
or cleaning agents classified as flammable or combustible.
DUST-PRODUCING PLANTS — To operate any grain elevator, flour,
starch or feed mill, woodworking plant, or plant pulverizing aluminum,
coal, cocoa, plastics, magnesium, spices, sugar, sulfur or other
materials producing explosive-potential dust.
EXPLOSIVE, AMMUNITION AND BLASTING AGENTS —
To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose
nitrate plastics.
(1)
To manufacture articles of cellulose nitrate plastics, which shall
include the use of cellulose nitrate plastics in the manufacture or
assembling of other articles.
(2)
To store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds of cellulose
nitrate plastics.
(1)
§ 28-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6
1:49
FIREWORKS DISPLAY (OUTDOORS) — For display not given for gain
or for admission when a fee is charged.
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS —
FLAMMABLE FINISHING — For spraying, coating or dipping
operations utilizing flammable or combustible liquids.
FRUIT-RIPENING PROCESS — To conduct a fruit-ripening process
using ethylene gas.
FUMIGATION AND THERMAL INSECTICIDAL FOGGING — To conduct
fumigation or thermal insecticidal fogging operations.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — See § 28-12 for operating permit.
HAZARDOUS PROCESSES — See § 28-12 for operating permit.
JUNKYARDS — To operate a junkyard.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS — For each installation of liquefied
petroleum gas employing a container or an aggregate of interconnected
containers of over 1,000 gallons' water capacity, and for each
permanent installation, irrespective of size of containers.
To manufacture, possess, store, sell or otherwise dispose of
explosives and blasting agents.
(2)
(3) To use explosives or blasting agents.
(4) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting agents.
To store, handle or use flammable liquids in excess of 6.5 gallons
inside dwellings or in excess of 10 gallons inside any other building
or other occupancy or in excess of 60 gallons outside of any
building. This provision shall not apply to:
Liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, portable or
stationary engine, boat or portable heating plant.
(a)
Paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures, when
such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or similar
purposes.
(b)
(1)
To store, handle or use combustible liquids in excess of 25 gallons
inside a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a building.
This provision shall not apply to fuel oil used in connection with oilburning
equipment.
(2)
A permit shall be obtained for the initial installation of an oil burner
and a fuel-oil tank used in connection therewith. A permit shall be
required for the replacement of a fuel-oil tank connection to an oil
burner.
(3)
For processing, blending or refining of flammable or combustible
liquids.
(4)
§ 28-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-6
1:50
LUMBERYARDS — To operate a lumberyard.
MAGNESIUM — For melting, casting, heat treating, machining or
grinding of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
MATCHES —
ORGANIC COATINGS — To perform organic coating operations
utilizing more than one gallon of organic coating on any working day.
OVENS AND FURNACES — To operate industrial processing ovens
and furnaces operating at approximately atmospheric pressures and
temperatures not exceeding 1,400° F., which ovens are heated with oil
or gas fuel or which, during operation, contain flammable vapors from
the material in the oven or catalytic combustion system.
POTENTIAL HAZARD TO PUBLIC SAFETY — See § 28-12 for operating
permit.
PYROTECHNIC INDOOR DISPLAYS — See § 28-12 for operating
permit.
SERVICE STATIONS and REPAIR GARAGES — To operate a service
station or repair garage.
TENTS — To erect a temporary tent in excess of 200 square feet on any
parcel being used for nonresidential purposes.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK (UST) REMOVAL — To remove any
underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank(s).
WELDING and CUTTING — To operate a welding and cutting business.
A record of all locations where welding or cutting operations are
performed shall be maintained and kept available for inspection by the
permit holder.
(1) To manufacture matches.
To store matches in excess of 25 cases. Note: One case equals one
matchman's gross of 14,000 matches.
(2)
B. Permits shall not be transferable, and any change in activity, operation,
location, ownership or use shall require a new permit.
C. Revocation or suspension of permit. A fire prevention permit may be
revoked or suspended because of any false statement or
misrepresentation of material fact in the application or because of
failure to supply additional information required within a reasonable
time or because the work is not being executed in accordance with the
codes, ordinances, laws, rules and regulations of the Village of
Williamsville, the state and county laws and regulations applicable, or
in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Notice of the
revocation or suspension of the permit shall be deemed to be duly given
by service upon a responsible individual in charge at the premises or by
mailing to the post office address of the party to whom the permit was
issued. It shall be unlawful to proceed with any work, except what may
§ 28-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6
1:51
§ 28-7. Construction inspections.
be authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer, after revocation or
suspension of the permit, and no permit may be reissued after
revocation or suspension while any violation of any code, ordinance,
law, rules or regulation or state and county law or regulation exists.
D. Procedures.
(1) An application for a fire prevention permit shall be made to the
Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided or prescribed by him
and shall contain the following information:
(a) The activity or operation for which a permit is requested,
including location, quantities and methods of storage of any
hazardous materials, substances or devices.
(b) The address or location where activity or operation is to be
conducted.
(c) The name and address of the applicant.
(d) The period of time for which the permit is requested.
(e) Any additional information or documents required by the Code
Enforcement Officer because of conditions or circumstances
peculiar to the location, parcel or premises or to the hazardous
substances, materials or devices involved.
(2) The application for a fire prevention permit shall be upon oath as to
the facts stated therein. The application shall be filed with the
Building Department. The fee prescribed by this chapter shall be
paid at the time of filing.
E. A certificate of occupancy issued for a building or structure shall
constitute the fire prevention permit if the activity or operation
requiring a permit is specifically certified as part thereof.
F. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct periodic inspections of all
occupancies for compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Code
and for compliance with the provisions of any fire prevention permit
issued and shall issue appropriate notices or orders citing all violations
and setting time limits for compliance or ordering such activity or
operation to cease until violations are corrected.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an Inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
§ 28-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-7
1:52
§ 28-8. Stop-work orders.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) A final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 28-18, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work;
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
§ 28-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-8
1:53
§ 28-9. Certificates of occupancy.
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall: 1) be in writing; 2)
be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer; 3) state the
reason or reasons for issuance; and 4) if applicable, state the conditions
which must be satisfied before work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by registered mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by registered mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not
affect the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 28-17, Penalties for offenses, of this chapter or under
any other applicable local law or state law. Any such other remedy or
penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or
after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy shall be
required for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for
all structures, buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from
one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another.
Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the work which was the subject
of the building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, that
§ 28-8 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-9
1:54
the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In addition, where
applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be
designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer,
at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy, shall be
provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall
contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and tax map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire
structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate of occupancy is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines:
1) that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely; 2) that any fire- and
§ 28-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-9
1:55
§ 28-10. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within the Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 28-11. Unsafe building and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in the Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Chapter 15 of
the Village Code, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 28-12. Operating permits.
smoke-detecting or fire protection equipment which has been installed
is operational; and 3) that all required means of egress from the
building or structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement
Officer may include in a temporary certificate such terms and
conditions as he or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety
or to further the purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary
certificate shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six
months, which shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer
and specified in the temporary certificate. During the specified period
of effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy or a temporary
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within
such period of time as shall be specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such
certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 28-18, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy or for
a temporary certificate.
A. Operating permits required.
(1) Operating permits shall be required for conducting the activities or
using the categories of buildings listed below:
(a) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication
§ 28-9 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-12
1:56
entitled "Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by
reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1;
(b) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited
to, commercial and industrial operations which produce
combustible dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and
waste handling;
(c) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(d) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with
an occupant load of 100 persons or more; and
(e) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Village Board of Trustees.
(2) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall be issued for
such period of time, not to exceed one year in the case of any operating
permit issued for an area of public assembly and not to exceed three
years in any other case, as shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer to be consistent with local conditions. The effective
period of each operating permit shall be specified in the operating
permit. An operating permit may be reissued or renewed upon
§ 28-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-12
1:57
§ 28-13. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections.
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, payment of the applicable
fee, and approval of such application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 28-18, Fees, of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an Inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or A(2) of this section,
and all nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies
not included in Subsection A(1) or A(2) of this section, shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a fire safety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an Inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon: 1) the request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner; 2) receipt by the Code Enforcement
Officer of a written statement alleging that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or 3)
receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or activities
failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code exist;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as
permitting an inspection under any circumstances under which a court
§ 28-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-13
1:58
§ 28-14. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement
order or warrant permitting such inspection is required, unless such
court order or warrant shall have been obtained.
C. OFPC Inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law § 807-b. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs fire safety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs fire safety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in Subsection A(1) or A(2) of this section if OFPC performs
fire safety and property maintenance inspections of such multiple
dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval specified in
Subsection A(3) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in Subsection A(1) or A(2)
of this section if OFPC performs fire safety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval specified
in Subsection A(3) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 28-18, Fees, of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
This subdivision shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
E. All graffiti or defacement shall be removed from a building or part
thereof within five days after receipt by the owner of written notice to
remove, issued by the Code Enforcement Official.
§ 28-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-14
1:59
of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for responding to a
complaint shall include such of the following steps as the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 28-15. Recordkeeping.
§ 28-16. Program review and reporting.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 28-17,
Penalties for offenses, of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary
certificates, stop-work orders, and operating permits issued;
(4) All inspections and tests performed;
(5) All statements and reports issued;
(6) All complaints received;
(7) All investigations conducted;
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 28-4 through 28-14, inclusive, of this chapter; and
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
§ 28-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-16
1:60
§ 28-17. Penalties for offenses.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Board of
Trustees a written report and summary of all business conducted by the
Code Enforcement Officer and the Inspectors, including a report and
summary of all transactions and activities described in § 28-15,
Recordkeeping, of this chapter and a report and summary of all appeals
or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of the Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of the Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials the Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of the Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
order in writing the remedying of any condition or activity found to exist
in, on or about any building, structure, or premises in violation of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any
such condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order consistent with, and contain all of the
information required by, 19 NYCRR 1203.5, as such regulation may be
from time to time amended. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the compliance order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of
the affected property personally or by certified mail within five days of
the date of said order. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance order, or a copy
thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work being performed at the
affected property personally or by certified mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not
affect the efficacy of the compliance order. [Amended 10-26-2015 by
L.L. No. 14-2015]
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer, each Inspector and
Supervisor of Public Works or Fire Chief are authorized to issue
appearance tickets for any violation of the Uniform Code or any local
law. If an incumbent Fire Chief does not possess the necessary
qualifications to act as a Code Enforcement Official, another qualified
individual recommended by the Fire Chief shall be designated by
resolution of the Village Board.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties proscribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
§ 28-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-17
1:61
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter, shall
be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day or
part thereof during which such violation continues. The civil penalties
provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an action instituted
in the name of the Village.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of the Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit, compliance order, or
other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant
to any provision of this chapter. In particular, but not by way of
limitation, where the construction or use of a building or structure is in
violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this
chapter, or any stop-work order, compliance order or other order
obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an
action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of the Village, in
the Supreme Court or in any other court having the requisite
jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the building or
structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of such
provisions. No action or proceeding described in this subsection shall
be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the Village
Board of Trustees.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 28-8, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 28-8, Stop-work orders, of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in subdivision (2) of Section
381 of the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this
section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously
with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in subdivision (2) of
§ 381 of the Executive Law.
§ 28-17 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 28-18
1:62
§ 28-18. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by like
resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be charged and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy,
temporary certificates, operating permits, fire safety and property
maintenance inspections, and other actions of the Code Enforcement
Officer described in or contemplated by this chapter.
§ 28-19. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Board of Trustees may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor to enter into
an agreement, in the name of the Village, with other governments to carry
out the terms of this chapter, provided that such agreement does not violate
any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, Part 1203 of Title 19
of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
Chapter 31
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building code
administration — See Ch. 28.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 47.
Landscaping — See Ch. 57.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 89.
Water — See Ch. 107.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 31-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Williamsville finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Village of Williamsville and that such damages may include:
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 31-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 28-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-2
1:63
§ 31-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are:
§ 31-4. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 31-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-4
1:64
100-YEAR FLOOD — The same meaning as "base flood."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure used solely for parking (twocar
detached garages or smaller) or limited storage, represents a minimal
investment of not more than 10% of the value of the primary structure, and
may not be used for human habitation.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent-orgreater
annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base
floodplain or 100-year floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term
"special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — The same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor, 18
inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside of the
lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed area, which
may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must be equal to or above
the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed crawl space area shall be
properly vented to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic forces which
would be experienced during periods of flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building: i) built, in the case of a
building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
§ 31-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-4
1:65
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones
A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes
a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet
the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map of the
community published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as
part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The FBFM delineates
a regulatory floodway along watercourses studied in detail in the Flood
Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of
flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as
Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm,
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A above.
B.
§ 31-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-4
1:66
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales, or
service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the Village Board of
Trustees as provided in § 31-11 of this chapter.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
D. Individually listed on a landmark pursuant to Chapter 47.
§ 31-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-4
1:67
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MOBILE HOME — The same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVEGROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in § 31-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided
that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition placement, or other improvement is within 180 days after the date
of issuance. The actual start of construction means the first placement of
permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on
a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, installation of pilings
or construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation (such as clearing, excavation, grading, or filling), or the
installation of streets or walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation
of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 31-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-4
1:68
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the Village's floodplain management regulations.
§ 31-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Williamsville.
§ 31-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the Code Enforcement Officer and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Maps: 36029C0209H, 36029C0226H,
36029C0228H; the effective date of which is June 7, 2019, and any
subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect areas
under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Erie County, New York (All Jurisdictions)," dated June 7, 2019.
§ 31-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-6
1:69
§ 31-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 31-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 31-9. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of
Williamsville from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under § 31-20 will be
declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 31-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at the
Village of Williamsville Building Department.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 31-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-10
1:70
Village of Williamsville, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 31-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Code Enforcement Enforcer of the Village of Williamsville, or such
other individual as designated by the Village Board of Trustees, is hereby
appointed local administrator to administer and implement this chapter by
granting or denying floodplain development permits in accordance with its
provisions.
§ 31-12. Floodplain development permits; fees.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in the Village of Williamsville for the purpose of
protecting its citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that
new development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its
exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development
in an area of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map enumerated in § 31-6, without a valid floodplain development
permit. Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the local administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee in an amount established from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village for any additional costs
necessary for review, inspection and approval of this project. The local
administrator may require a deposit of no more than $500 to cover
these additional costs.
C. Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information as appropriate. Additional information may be required on
the permit application form.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion
of the lowest floor, the permitee shall submit to the local
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 31-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-12
1:71
§ 31-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 31-15C, Utilities.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 31-17, Nonresidential structures.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 31-6, when notified by the
local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed
by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide
assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated
stream segment will be maintained.
(6) A technical analysis, prepared by a licensed professional engineer,
if required by the local administrator, which shows whether
proposed development to be located in an area of special flood
hazard may result in physical damage to any other property.
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from
other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the
permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 31-12C, Application for a permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
§ 31-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-13
1:72
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of § 31-14, General construction standards,
and, in particular, § 31-14A, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§ 31-14, General construction standards, no permit shall be issued.
The applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the Village's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation data
(these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor identified
a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 31-12C(7), as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
(3) When an area of special flood hazard, base flood elevation, and/or
floodway data are available from a federal, state or other
authoritative source, but differ from the data in the documents
enumerated in § 31-6, the local administrator may reasonably
utilize the other flood information to enforce more restrictive
development standards.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
§ 31-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-13
1:73
(1) Notification to adjacent municipalities that may be affected and the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation prior
to permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notification to the Regional Administrator,
Region II, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the applicant's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 31-9 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 31-9 of this chapter.
§ 31-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-13
1:74
§ 31-14. General construction standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 31-6.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 31-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the
use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 31-13E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain, and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures
required pursuant to § 31-13D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 31-13D(1), and
whether the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to § 31-20; and
(5) Notices required under § 31-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
§ 31-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-14
1:75
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Williamsville applies to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM revision,
FEMA approval is received and the applicant provides all
necessary data, analyses and mapping and reimburses the
Village of Williamsville for all fees and other costs in relation to
the application. The applicant must also provide all data,
analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Williamsville for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 31-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
demonstrates through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Williamsville applies to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional FIRM and
floodway revision, FEMA approval is received, and the
applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping
and reimburses the Village of Williamsville for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Williamsville for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
(3) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, if any development is found to
§ 31-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-14
1:76
§ 31-15. Standards for all structures.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 31-6.
increase or decrease base flood elevations, the Village of
Williamsville shall as soon as practicable, but not later than six
months after the date such information becomes available, notify
FEMA and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation of the changes by submitting technical or scientific
data in accordance with standard engineering practice.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas below lowest floor.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE, AO or A, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings of each enclosed area having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade; and
[3] Openings not less than three inches in any direction.
§ 31-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-15
1:77
§ 31-16. Residential structures; elevation.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved residential
structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition to the
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation, or at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade in
a Zone A without an available base flood elevation, or be designed
to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the
components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated or designed
to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the
components unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of
the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the
Residential Code of New York State for location of such items in
wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Storage tanks.
(1) Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
and lateral movement during conditions of the base flood.
(2) Aboveground tanks shall be:
(a) Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood; or
(b) Installed at or above the base flood elevation as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 31-6 plus two feet.
§ 31-15 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-16
1:78
requirements in §§ 31-14A, Subdivision Proposals, 31-14B, Encroachments,
and 31-15, Standards for all structures.
§ 31-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in §§ 31-14A,
Subdivision proposals, 31-14B, Encroachments, and 31-15, Standards for all
structures.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood elevation
data are available, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 31-6 plus
two feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. All structural components located below the base
flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM plus two feet (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified); or
§ 31-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-17
1:79
§ 31-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in §§ 31-14, General
standards, and 31-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in
areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 31-17A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 31-17A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones A1-1 and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 31-18B, C
and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation and is
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
§ 31-17 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-18
1:80
§ 31-19. Accessory structures including detached garages.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved accessory
structures, including detached garages, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 31-6.
§ 31-20. Appeals Board; variance procedure.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is
supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home
chassis shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 31-6 plus two feet (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, A, accessory structures must meet
the standards of § 31-15A, Anchoring,
B. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, areas below two feet above the base flood
elevation shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
C. Within Zones AO and Zone A, if base flood elevation data are not
available, areas below three feet above the highest adjacent grade shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
D. Structures must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters
in accordance with § 31-15B(3).
E. Utilities must meet the requirements of § 31-15C, Utilities.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of
Williamsville shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
§ 31-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-20
1:81
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 31-20D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
§ 31-20 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 31-20
1:82
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
G. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 31-20D(1) to (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(a) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(b) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
(3) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(a) The criteria of § 31-20G(1), (4), (5) and (6) are met; and
(b) The structure or other development is protected by methods
that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create
no additional threat to public safety.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(6) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification
of:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
§ 31-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31-20
1:83
Chapter 36
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 36-1. Issuance of permits by Town Clerk.
The Town Clerk of the Town of Amherst may issue a permit for the conduct
of games of chance in the corporate limits of the Village of Williamsville, as
authorized by the Constitution of the State of New York and by § 187 of the
General Municipal Law. Such permit shall be issued only in accordance with
state law and subject to the same conditions or limitations as imposed on
the conduct of games of chance in the unincorporated area of the town.
§ 36-2. Continuation in effect.
This chapter shall remain in effect until superseded or repealed as provided
in state law, and the Town Clerk shall have the authority granted by this
chapter only so long as the Clerk has authority to issue permits in the
unincorporated areas of the Town of Amherst.
§ 36-3. Permissive referendum authorized.
This chapter is subject to permissive referendum and shall take effect upon
approval of the voters of the Village of Williamsville as provided in Article
9 of the Village Law, or if no petition is filed, it shall take effect thirty (30)
days from the date hereof.
(7) Notice.
(a) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with
the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:
[1] The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below
the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100
of insurance coverage; and
[2] Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property.
(b) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all
variance actions as required in § 31-13H of this chapter.
§ 31-20 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 36-3
1:84
Chapter 39
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and public areas — See Ch. 70.
Public order — See Ch. 73.
Recycling — See Ch. 74.
§ 39-1. Purpose.
It is the goal of the Village of Williamsville to facilitate the disposal of
solid waste generated within the Village in the most economical and
environmentally acceptable manner and to reduce the total amount of solid
waste disposed of in the Village. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish
a source-separation and recyclables collection program within the Village
to reach the goal of maximizing recycling of the Village waste stream,
considering costs, marketability of recyclables and public involvement. It is
hereby found and determined that, in order to ensure the greatest public
involvement and to assist the Village in complying with the mandates of the
New York State Solid Waste Management Act of 1988, such a program must
be made mandatory. This program is further designed to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the Village of Williamsville. No person shall
dispose of refuse except pursuant to and in accordance with this chapter.
§ 39-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEARANCE TICKET — Written notice, issued and subscribed to by a duly
authorized person, directing a designated person to appear in a designated
local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with an
alleged commission of a designated offense. A notice conforming to such
definition constitutes an appearance ticket regardless of whether it is
referred to in some other provision of law as a summons or by any other
name or title.
ASH RESIDUE — The noncombustible constituents of waste remaining after
combustion or incineration (e.g., residue from a fireplace, solid fuel stove or
incinerator).
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Waste material from
building, remodeling, repair and/or removal of homes, office buildings,
industrial plants and schools, including but not limited to wood scraps,
metal, concrete, brick, block, wire and industrial packaging material.
CONTAINER — A permanent container made for household waste or for
green waste of sufficient strength to prevent breakage and leakage. It shall
not include a disposable plastic bag of any type.
§ 36-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2
1:85
CURBSIDE — The grass area at the curb or pavement line immediately
adjacent to the street, but shall not include any paved portion of said street.
GARBAGE — Any decayable waste material, other than sanitary sewage.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any hazardous or toxic substance material or waste
which is or becomes regulated by any local or state governmental authority
or the United States Government.
PORTABLE TRANSFER CONTAINER — A dumpster or other container that
is privately contracted by the property owner and/or occupant.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Includes items as designated from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Trustees.5
REFUSE — The rubbish and recyclable materials resulting from the normal
day-to-day operation of a household or business. Refuse may be generated
by a household, a business establishment or a public or quasi-public facility.
Refuse does not include rubble, bulk items, industrial waste, collectible yard
waste or any other materials not covered under this definition.
REFUSE OFFICER — Representative of the Village of Williamsville
designated to oversee the collection and enforcement of Chapters 39 and
74 of the Village of Williamsville Code.
RUBBISH — Any dry material, other than garbage, trash, recyclable
materials or debris, produced routinely by households or commercial or
industrial establishments, including but not limited to window glass,
mirrors, ceramics, china or containers made of any other material, ashes
and any nonhazardous waste material.
SOFT PLASTIC — Soft, cloudy or colored high-density polyethylene items,
excluding styrofoam, plastic bags, food wrap, toys or hard plastics that will
easily crack or break.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The required separation of recyclable materials
for collection.6
TOTE CONTAINER — A pest-proof, permanent receptacle constructed of
high-quality vinyl or plastic which is watertight, and provided with an
attached, tight-fitting cover which stores garbage or nonrecyclable waste
material, refuse and rubbish. Such a receptacle shall be suitable for
semiautomated or automated collection methods and shall be approved for
use and furnished by the Village of Williamsville. The receptacles described
herein shall be used by the owners of all improved properties in the Village
of Williamsville, regardless of being residential or nonresidential, when
storing and placing garbage and nonrecyclable waste material, refuse and
rubbish for collection by the Village of Williamsville.
TRASH — Bundles of brush, leaves, holiday trees and bulky objects,
including but not limited to household appliances, equipment or furniture
and construction debris.
5. Editor's Note: See Chapter 74, Recycling, of the Village Code.
6. Editor's Note: See Chapter 74, Recycling, of the Village Code.
§ 39-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 39-2
1:86
YARD WASTE — Grass, leaves, brush, plants, weeds or dirt materials from
vegetable and flower gardens, lawns and yards or ash from fireplaces or
wood stoves.
§ 39-3. Containers required.
§ 39-4. Seasonal or special items.
A. The occupant of any premises shall maintain suitable and sufficient tote
containers for all garbage and refuse that may accumulate on or about
the premises.
B. All refuse for routine collection, other than recyclables and yard waste,
must be placed in a tote container. Any premises that requires, on a
regular basis, more than two such tote containers for collection shall be
required to secure a portable transfer container for all excess over two
tote containers. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant
to contract privately for the securing of said container service for the
excess material. Exceptions will be made at the discretion of the Refuse
Officer.
C. All yard waste shall be placed in the following containers: tote
container issued by the Village of Williamsville, bushel basket or other
container. No container shall weigh more than 65 pounds when filled.
D. Portable transfer containers shall be used for outdoor storage of refuse
on any premises as required under Subsection B. Such containers shall
be emptied or replaced whenever full or at least once each week and
shall be equipped with a tight-fitting lid so as to prevent dispersal of the
contents about the premises.
A. Any furniture, washer, dryer, television, refrigerator or other large item
not capable of being enclosed in a container shall be placed curbside for
collection only on a day specified by the Refuse Officer. It shall be the
sole responsibility of the owner to dismantle or secure the appliance or
item of furniture in order that it does not constitute a hazard to the
public. Refrigerator and freezer doors or broken glass shall be removed
from an appliance or item of furniture before placement curbside for
collection. Disposal of appliances or other items containing Freon or
any other substance must comply with federal and state regulations.
The Refuse Officer may accept or decline collection of any such
material in accordance with his/her considered judgment as to the
ability of the Village to handle and dispose of such items. Collecting and
disposal by the Village of such items shall extend only to those
appliances or items of furniture actually used in a dwelling located
within the Village.
B. Any contractor creating debris from construction, demolition,
landscape yard maintenance or from tree pruning or removal shall
remove and dispose of said debris in a sanitary and safe manner at his
own expense. If such debris results from work performed personally by
§ 39-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-4
1:87
§ 39-5. Placement for collection.
an occupant, the debris must be placed in a tote container curbside for
collection and/or bundled by the approved refuse guidelines between
the Village of Williamsville and the private contractor. To reduce the
risk of bodily harm, protruding nails, glass and/or other sharp objects
shall be rendered harmless prior to being deposited in containers or
bundled for collection. Large quantities of debris shall be inspected by
the Refuse Officer and if deemed necessary shall be removed by the
property owner or occupant at his or her own expense.
C. During the months of October, November and December, leaves may be
placed curbside in piles not exceeding six feet in diameter. At all other
times of the year, leaves and similar material must be placed in an
appropriate container.
D. The Department of Public Works will pick up tree logs larger than four
inches in diameter which shall be cut to a length not to exceed two feet
and placed curbside for collection.
E. The Department of Public Works will pick up tree branches not
exceeding four inches in diameter which shall be cut to a length not to
exceed six feet and placed curbside for collection with the butt end of
the branches facing the same direction. Tree branches that are to be
picked up by the private collector must conform to the approved refuse
guidelines between the Village of Williamsville and the private collector.
F. Tree trimmings, shrubs or vines not exceeding 1/2 inch in diameter
shall be cut and placed in a permitted container for collection, which
must be separated from refuse, recyclables and rubbish, and placed
curbside for collection. In no event shall such container exceed 65
pounds in weight. These items may also be placed in a tote container
provided that the lid can be securely closed.
G. Holiday trees may be placed curbside for collection in December and
January without being cut and bundled as otherwise herein required.
H. All ash residues must be cool, dampened and contained so as to reduce
the risk of fire and personal injury.
A. All garbage, recyclable rubbish, nonrecyclable rubbish, construction
and demolition debris, major appliances and large household
furnishings must be placed curbside. All garbage and other municipal
solid waste shall be maintained in a tote container while awaiting
collection and placed curbside for collection.
(1) Yard waste may be placed in a separate open container for
collection which must be separated from refuse, recyclables and
rubbish.
(2) Domestic animal waste shall be wrapped in dry paper or placed in a
sealable or tied bag and placed in the tote container.
§ 39-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 39-5
1:88
(3) The lid of the tote container shall be tightly closed while being
stored and when placed curbside.
(4) The owner of the property and/or tenant is not permitted to allow
the tote to overflow. No solid waste shall be placed on top of, next to
or around the tote container.
(5) Every owner of the property shall supply an adequate number of
tote containers for the safe storage and/or disposal of garbage and
nonrecyclable waste material, refuse and rubbish as may be
required by the occupants of the property.
(6) Prior to being placed curbside for collection, all tote containers
shall be stored in such a fashion as to be screened from public view.
(7) The tote container shall be cleaned as necessary by the property
owner and/or tenant to avoid noxious or offensive odors and to
prevent rodent breeding and infestation.
B. The Village of Williamsville shall be responsible for collecting or
causing the collection of, on a regular basis, only those waste materials
which constitute refuse generated by a residence or establishment
within the Village of Williamsville. The Village of Williamsville shall also
be responsible for collecting or causing the collection of any additional
waste materials generated by residences which the Village may
announce will be collected on particular days or during particular time
periods. These additional waste materials may include, for example,
bulk items, trees, tree stumps and large branches. The Village of
Williamsville shall not be responsible for collecting any waste materials
which have been placed or prepared in ways that do not comply with all
the provisions of this chapter. In particular, the Village of Williamsville
shall not be responsible for collecting waste materials consisting of
recyclable and nonrecyclable materials, mixed-together waste
materials not placed in the Village-provided container or recyclable
materials which have not been placed or prepared in accordance with
this chapter, nor shall the Village of Williamsville be responsible for the
collection of waste materials generated other than from a residence or
establishment within the Village of Williamsville.
C. Any refuse to be collected, except that in portable transfer containers,
shall be placed curbside before 7:00 a.m. on the day of scheduled
collection, but in no event shall said refuse be placed curbside before
6:00 p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled collection.
D. Refuse and tote containers shall be removed before 11:00 p.m. of the
day on which collection is made from the premises.
E. The Village of Williamsville hereby assumes no responsibility to collect,
and no person shall place curbside, waste material not separated and
prepared pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the recycling
regulations of the Refuse Officer.7
§ 39-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-5
1:89
§ 39-6. Accumulation.
§ 39-7. Burning except in incinerators prohibited.
No person shall ignite, burn or cause to be ignited or burned any refuse
except in an incinerator constructed for such burning which has been
properly installed in conformity with manufacturer's specifications and the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.8
§ 39-8. Hazardous waste.
F. Material in public right-of-way.
(1) The Village of Williamsville hereby assumes no responsibility to
collect, and no person shall place curbside, the following waste
material:
(a) Waste material generated outside of the Village of
Williamsville.
(b) Waste material generated on premises which does not abut the
curbside where the waste material is placed for collection.
(2) The fact that waste material is in a public right-of-way shall be
rebuttable prima facie evidence that such material was placed
there by the owner of the property abutting that curbside area.
A. No person shall accumulate or permit the accumulation of refuse on any
premises owned or occupied by said person, except for the purpose of
collection by the refuse collector.
B. The owner or occupant of any premises shall keep the same free, clear
and clean of all refuse and maintain sidewalks and yard areas free and
clear of all refuse and, upon written notice, shall, within five days, cause
to be corrected any unsanitary or unsafe condition on or about the
premises.
C. Any compost or mulch pile shall be maintained in such fashion as not to
attract rodents or cause the development of any odor or other hazard to
the public health and safety.
D. Toxic, flammable or hazardous wastes not otherwise regulated by a
public authority shall not be accumulated on any premises, improperly
disposed of or placed curbside for collection or recycling.
A. The Village of Williamsville shall not collect or allow to be collected
dangerous, hazardous, chemically toxic or medical wastes, including
but not limited to the following:
7. Editor's Note: See Chapter 74, Recycling, of the Village Code.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Fire Prevention and Building Code Administration.
§ 39-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 39-8
1:90
§ 39-9. Deposit on public or private property.
No garbage or refuse shall be carted to, dumped on or otherwise deposited
upon any private or public property except under the supervision and
direction of the Refuse Officer.
§ 39-10. Enforcement.
§ 39-11. Penalties for offenses.
(1) Dangerous wastes. Wastes that represent an immediate threat to
the safety of employees of the Village of Williamsville and/or the
general public, including but not limited to waste with jagged or
protruding objects, broken glass or nails.
(2) Hazardous wastes, as defined in the New York State Environmental
Conservation Law and regulations pursuant thereto, as well as
applicable federal statutes and regulations.
(3) Chemically toxic wastes, as defined in the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation regulations, as well as
applicable federal statutes and regulations.
(4) Medical waste. Any infectious medical waste, subject to the
provisions of the New York State Health Law and classified as
infectious waste, as well as applicable federal statutes and
regulations.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall dispose of any hazardous or toxic
or potentially hazardous or toxic chemicals in any place or places in the
Village of Williamsville.
C. Dangerous, hazardous or chemically toxic wastes shall be disposed of
by their owner or producer in accordance with applicable state and
federal environmental laws and regulations.
A. The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the Refuse Officer and all
other persons or agencies as may be designated by resolution of the
Village Board.
B. To assure compliance with this chapter, all portions of vehicles and
containers used to haul, transport or dispose of recyclable materials,
including such containers placed outside residences, shall be subject to
inspection by the refuse officers, Code Enforcement Officer and any
other public official designated by the Village.
C. The Refuse Officer may issue appearance tickets for any violations of
this chapter.
A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $300 a day or by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 15 days, or both. Fines for violators are as follows:
§ 39-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-11
1:91
§ 39-12. Fees.
Each parcel receiving a tote container(s) shall be billed at a per tote
container rate to be determined by the Village of Williamsville Board of
Trustees, which is payable to the Village of Williamsville no later than 45
days after the date of such billing. Any charges over 45 days old that remain
unpaid as of April 1 will be added to the next tax bill assessed to the
property.
§ 39-13. Severability.
If any section, sentence or part of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of this chapter.
§ 39-14. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
Chapter 47
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 47-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of landmarks and historic districts is
necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational and general
welfare of the public. Inasmuch as the identity of a people is founded
in its past and inasmuch as Williamsville has many significant historic,
(1) First violation within a twelve-month period: written warning.
(2) Second violation within a twelve-month period: fine of $50 to $100.
(3) Third violation within a twelve-month period: fine of $100 to $150.
(4) Fourth violation and more within a twelve-month period: fine of
$150 to $300.
B. Any person who aids, abets or assists in a violation of this chapter shall
also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
C. Each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 39-11 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 47-1
1:92
architectural and cultural resources which constitutes its heritage, this act
is intended to:
§ 47-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADAPTIVE REUSE — Conversion of a building originally designed for a
certain purpose to a different purpose.
ALTER — To change one (1) or more exterior architectural features of
a landmark, an improvement on a landmark site or a structure within a
historic district.
BUILDING — Any structure or part thereof having a roof supported by
columns or walls for the shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Inspector of Building of the Village of
Williamsville.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
Preservation Commission approving plans for alteration, construction,
removal or demolition of a landmark, an improvement to a landmark site or
a structure within a historic district.
CONSTRUCTION — Building an addition or making an alteration to an
existing structure or building a new principle or accessory structure.
DEMOLITION — Destruction of a building, structure or improvement.
EXTERIOR — Architectural style, design, general arrangement and
components of the outer surfaces of an improvement, building or structure
as distinguished from the interior surfaces, including but not limited to the
kind and texture of building material and the type and style of windows,
doors, signs and other such exterior fixtures.
FACADE — The exterior of a building or structure that can be viewed.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A geographically definable area so designated
pursuant to this Code.
IMPROVEMENT — Any building, structure, place, parking facility, fence,
gate, wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment or
any part thereof.
A. Protect and enhance the landmarks and historic districts which
represent distinctive elements of Williamsville's historic, architectural
and cultural heritage.
B. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
C. Protect and enhance Williamsville's attractiveness to visitors and
support and stimulate the village's economy.
D. Ensure the harmonious, orderly and efficient growth and development
of the village.
§ 47-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-2
1:93
LANDMARK — Property, object, structure or natural feature or any part
thereof so designated pursuant to this Code.
LANDMARK SITE — A significant historical or cultural site(s) where
buildings or structures no longer exist so designated pursuant to this Code.
OWNER — A person, firm or corporation which owns the fee of property
or a lessor state therein, a mortgage or vendee in possession, a receiver,
an administrator, an executor, a trustee, or any other person, firm or
corporation in control of property.
PRESERVATION — Retention of essential character of an improvement,
object, building, natural feature or structure as embodied in its existing
form, integrity and material. This term includes the retention of trees,
landscaping and vegetative cover of a site. This term may include temporary
stabilization work as well as on-going maintenance of historic building
materials.
PRESERVATION COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Historic
Preservation Commission for the Village of Williamsville established in this
chapter.
PROPERTY — Land and improvements thereon.
RECONSTRUCTION — Reproduction of the exact form and detail of a
vanished building, structure, improvement, or part thereof as it appeared at
a specific time.
REHABILITATION — Repair or alteration that enables buildings, structures
or improvements to be efficiently utilized while preserving those features of
buildings, structures or improvements that are significant to their historic,
architectural or cultural values.
RESTORATION — Recovery of the form and details of a building, structure
or improvement and its site during a particular time.
SITE — A plot or parcel of land.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent
or temporary location on the ground. This term shall include but not be
limited to buildings, walls, fences, signs, billboards, lighting fixtures, screen
enclosures and works of art.
VILLAGE — The Village of Williamsville, County of Erie, State of New York.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Williamsville, Erie
County, New York.
VILLAGE CLERK — Village of Williamsville Village Clerk.
§ 47-3. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "Village of
Williamsville Historic Preservation Commission."
B. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members. Commission
members shall serve a term of four (4) years with the exception of the
§ 47-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 47-3
1:94
initial term, in which four (4) members shall serve a term of four (4)
years and three (3) members shall serve a term of two (2) years.
C. Appointment of Commissioners shall be made by the Village Board.
D. To the extent available, the Commission should consist of the following:
(1) At least one (1) shall be an architect.
(2) At least one (1) shall be a historian.
(3) At least one (1) shall be an individual from the business community.
(4) At least one (1) shall be an archeologist.
(5) At least one (1) member shall be from the Village of Williamsville
Historical Society.
(6) At least one member shall be from the Village of Williamsville
Planning and Architectural Review Board. [Added 3-25-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-20139]
(7) All members shall have demonstrated significant interest and
commitment to the field of historic preservation.
E. The Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson shall be elected by and from
voting members of the Commission. The term of office shall be two (2)
years. If the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson cannot fulfill their term of
office, a Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall be elected by and from
the membership to fulfill the remainder of the term until the next
regular election.
F. If any commissioner resigns or otherwise cannot fulfill their term of
office, the Village Board shall appoint an interim member to serve the
remainder of the term.
G. The Chairperson shall ensure that minutes of all Commission meetings
are suitably recorded, prepared and distributed.
H. The powers of the Commission shall include:
(1) To recommend designation of historic landmarks, sites and districts
to the Village Board for their consideration.
(2) To advise and recommend to the Village Board on matters of
employment of staff and professional consultants as necessary to
carry out the duties of the Commission.
(3) To promulgate rules and regulations as necessary for the conduct
of its business.
9. Editor’s Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection D(6)
as Subsection D(7).
§ 47-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-3
1:95
§ 47-4. Designation of historical landmarks, historic sites and
historic districts.
(4) To adopt criteria for the identification of significant historic
architectural and cultural landmarks and/or for the delineation of
historic districts.
(5) To conduct surveys of significant historic, architectural and
cultural landmarks within the village.
(6) To make recommendations to the Village Board on acceptance or
donation of facade easements and development rights; the
acquisition of facade easements and development rights or other
interests in real property as necessary to carry out the purposes of
this act.
(7) To increase public awareness of the value of historic, cultural and
architectural preservation by developing and participating in
education programs.
(8) To make recommendations to the Village Board concerning the
utilization of state, federal or private funds to promote the
preservation of landmarks and historic districts within the village.
(9) To recommend acquisition of a landmark or structure by the village
where its preservation is essential to the purposes of this act and
where private preservation is not feasible.
(10) To approve or disapprove applications for certificates of
appropriateness, subject to review by the Building Inspector
pursuant to this act.
I. The Commission shall meet at least monthly if any business is pending.
Meetings may be held at any time on the written request of any two (2)
Commission members. The Commission must meet at least once
quarterly.
J. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of
the Commission members, but not less than a majority of the full
authorized membership may grant or deny a certificate of
appropriateness.
A. The Commission may recommend designation of an individual property
as a landmark, subject to Village Board approval, if it:
(1) Is associated with the lives of individuals or of people or of events
significant in the national, state or local history.
(2) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, a period or a
method of construction.
(3) Represents the work of a master architect or designer or possesses
high artistic values.
§ 47-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 47-4
1:96
(4) Represents a significant or distinguished entity whose components
may lack individual or special distinction.
(5) Because of a unique location or singular physical characteristic,
represents an established and familiar visual feature of the
neighborhood.
B. The Commission may recommend designation of a property or a group
of properties as a historic site, subject to Village Board approval, if it
contains significant historical or cultural sites where buildings or
structures no longer exist, such as a battlefield, cemetery or former
transportation facility; or sites which may yield information important
to area history or prehistory.
C. The Commission may recommend designation of a group of properties
as a historic district, subject to Village Board approval, if it:
(1) Contains properties which meet one (1) or more of the criteria for
designation as a landmark;
(2) Is an area that represents several periods or styles of architecture
typical of different areas of history;
(3) Is an area that has several buildings of the same architectural
period or style and thus constitutes unified architectural
streetscape consistency or a significant community uniformity of
style; or
(4) Is an area connected with significant events or cultural happenings
or developments involving ethnic, religious groups or other groups
of special historical interest; and
(5) By reason of possessing such qualities, it constitutes a distinct
section of the Village of Williamsville.
D. The boundaries of each proposed historic district designated
henceforth shall be specified in detail and shall be filed in writing in the
Village Clerk's office for public inspection.
E. Notice of a proposed designation shall be sent by the Village Clerk
thirty (30) days prior to a public hearing to the owner(s) of any
property(ies) proposed for historic designation. The notice shall
describe the property proposed for designation, summarize the
proposed action and announce the date, time and location of the public
hearing. A copy of the notice of proposed designation shall also be sent
to the Village Board.
F. once the Historic Preservation Commission has issued notice of a
proposed designation, no building permits shall be issued by the
Building Commissioner, except for emergency repairs, until a final
determination on the proposed designation has been reached. The
Historic Preservation Commission shall provide a copy of any notice of
proposed designation to the Building Commissioner.
§ 47-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-4
1:97
§ 47-5. Certificates of appropriateness.
No person shall carry out any exterior alteration, restoration,
reconstruction, excavation, grading, demolition, new construction or
moving of a designated landmark or property within a historic district
nor shall any person make any material change to such property, its light
fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving or other exterior elements
which affect the appearance or cohesiveness of the landmark or historic
district without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the
Historic Preservation Commission.
§ 47-6. Criteria for approval of certificates of appropriateness.
G. Notice of proposed designation shall also be sent to the Village of
Williamsville Highway Department, Village of Williamsville Planning
Board, Town of Amherst Assessors Department and any other village
department and/or county or state agency as appropriate. Each
department/agency shall be given thirty (30) days from the date of
transmission to provide comments on the proposed designation to the
Historic Preservation Commission.
H. The Commission shall hold a public hearing prior to recommending
designation of any landmark, historic site or historic district. The
Commission, property owner and any interested parties may present
testimony or documentary evidence at the hearing which will become
part of a record regarding the historic, architectural or cultural
importance of the proposed landmark, or historic district. The record
may also contain staff reports, public comments or other evidence
offered outside of the hearing. A public hearing notice must be
published by the Village Clerk in the village's designated official
newspaper at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date.
I. The Commission will recommend to the Village Board the designation of
a historic landmark, site or district. The Village Board will also conduct
a public hearing prior to acting on the recommendation.
J. The Commission shall file notice of each property designated as a
landmark and of the boundaries of each designated historic district
with the Erie County Clerk's office, the Village of Williamsville Clerk's
office, the Village of Williamsville Building Department and the Town of
Amherst Assessors Department.
K. Minutes of any business conducted by the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be placed on file in the Village of Williamsville Clerk's
office.
A. In passing upon an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider changes to the
interior of buildings.
B. The Commission's decision shall be based upon the following principles:
§ 47-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 47-6
1:98
§ 47-7. Application for certificate of appropriateness.
(1) Features which contribute to the character of the historic landmark
or district shall be retained with as little alteration as possible.
(2) Any alteration of existing features shall be compatible with its
historic character as well as with the surrounding property.
(3) New construction shall be compatible with the property in which it
is located and/or surrounding historic district.
C. In applying the principle of compatibility, the Commission shall
consider the following factors:
(1) The general design, character and appropriateness to the property
of the proposed alteration or new construction.
(2) The scale of proposed alteration or new construction in relation to
itself, surrounding properties and the neighborhood.
(3) Texture, materials and color and their relation to the property
itself, surrounding properties and the neighborhood.
(4) Visual compatibility with surrounding properties, including
proportion of the property's front facade, proportion and
arrangement of windows and other openings within the facade,
roof shape and the rhythm of spacing of properties on streets,
including setback.
(5) The importance of historic, architectural or other features to the
significance of the property.
D. Notwithstanding any provision of the Code to the contrary, review by
the Commission of any proposed work to a landmark that would
otherwise be subject to architectural review by the Planning/
Architectural Review Board pursuant to § 112-23F shall satisfy the
requirements of architectural review, and such project shall not be
subject to further architectural review by the Planning/Architectural
Review Board with respect to that work. [Added 10-15-2013 by L.L.
No. 8-2013]
A. Prior to the commencement of any work requiring a certificate of
appropriateness the owner shall file an application for such certificate
with the Historic Preservation Commission. The application shall
contain:
(1) Names, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Location and photographs of the property.
(3) Elevation drawings of proposed changes, if available.
(4) Perspective drawings, including relationship to adjacent
properties, if available.
§ 47-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-7
1:99
§ 47-8. Hardship criteria.
§ 47-9. Hardship application procedure.
(5) Samples of color and/or materials to be used.
(6) Where the proposal includes signs or lettering, a scale drawing
showing the type(s) of lettering to be used, all dimensions and
colors, a description of materials to be used, method of illumination
and a plan showing the sign's proposed location on the property.
(7) Any other information which the Commission may deem necessary
in order to visualize the proposed work.
B. No building permit shall be issued for such proposed work until a
certificate of appropriateness has first been issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission. The Commission shall act to approve or deny
a certificate of appropriateness within sixty-five (65) days of the date
upon which a completed application is filed with the Historic
Preservation Commission. If the application is not acted upon within
sixty-five (65) days, the application shall be deemed approved. The
applicant may request an extension of the decision deadline date if so
desired. The certificate of appropriateness required by this act shall be
in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be
required by any other ordinance of the Village of Williamsville.
A. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
demolition has been denied may apply for relief on the ground of
hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant
shall establish that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return regardless
of whether that return represents the most profitable return
possible.
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use permitted by the
Village of Williamsville Zoning Ordinance10 which would result in a
reasonable return.
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and
preserving it have failed.
B. An applicant whose certificate of appropriateness for a proposed
alteration has been denied may apply for relief on the grounds of
hardship. In order to prove the existence of hardship, the applicant
shall establish that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return regardless
of whether that return represents the most profitable return
possible.
10.Editor's Note: See Chapter 112, Zoning.
§ 47-7 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 47-9
1:100
§ 47-10. Maintenance and repair required.
A. After receiving written notification from the Commission of the denial of
a certificate of appropriateness, an applicant may commence the
hardship application process.
B. The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the hardship
application, at which time an opportunity will be provided for
proponents and opponents of the application to present their views.
C. The applicant shall consult in good faith with the Commission, local
preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an
alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
D. All decisions of the Commission shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent
to the applicant by registered mail and a copy shall be filed with both
the Village Clerk's Office and with the Building Department. The
Commission's decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying
the hardship application.
E. No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued while the
hardship application is pending. The Commission shall make a
determination on whether a hardship exists. Building and demolition
permits shall be issued in accordance with that determination.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance and repair of any architectural feature of a landmark or
property within a historic district which does not involve a change in
design, material, color or outward appearance.
B. No owner or person with an interest in real property designated as a
landmark or included within a historic district shall permit the property
to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration
of any architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the
Historic Preservation Commission, produce a detrimental effect upon
the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character
of the property itself. Examples of such deterioration include:
(1) Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports.
(2) Deterioration of roof or other horizontal members.
(3) Deterioration of exterior chimneys.
(4) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar.
(5) Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs or foundations,
including broken windows or doors.
(6) Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition
which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for
public safety.
§ 47-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-11
1:101
§ 47-11. Administration and enforcement.
§ 47-12. Penalties for offenses.
A. Administration. The Building Inspector shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. In connection with overseeing this
responsibility, the Building Inspector shall provide a permit procedure
coordinated with the established building permit procedure.
B. Enforcement. All work performed pursuant to this chapter shall
conform to any requirements included herein. It shall be the duty of the
Building Inspector to inspect periodically any such work to assure
compliance. In the event that work is found that is not being performed
in accordance with the certificate of appropriateness, the Building
Inspector shall issue a stop-work order and all work shall immediately
cease. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as the
stop-work order is in effect.
C. The certificate of appropriateness shall be displayed on the building in a
location conspicuously visible to the public while work pursuant to the
certificate is being done.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted hereunder is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall result
in the termination of any permits issued or any proceedings
commenced under provisions of this chapter.
C. Any person(s) who demolishes, alters, constructs or permits a landmark
to fall into a serious state of disrepair which results in a violation of this
chapter shall be required to restore the property and its site to an
appearance acceptable to the Historic Preservation Commission. Any
action to enforce this subsection shall be brought by the Village
Attorney upon authorization by the Village Board. This civil remedy
shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and
penalty.
D. The Village of Williamsville, the Williamsville Historic Preservation
Commission, their agents, servants, employees and/or boards shall not
grant, permit or license any applicant who, with the intent to avoid the
requirements of this chapter, significantly adversely affects a
designated historic property or, having the legal power to prevent it,
allows significant adverse effect to occur, unless the Historic
Preservation Commission and/or the Board of Trustees determines that
circumstances justify granting such assistance despite the adverse
effect created or permitted by the applicant. [Added 4-25-2005 by
L.L. No. 2-2005]
§ 47-11 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 47-13
1:102
§ 47-13. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Historic Preservation Commission
relating to designation, hardship or a certificate of appropriateness may,
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the decision in the Village Clerk's
office, file a written application with the Village Board for review of the
decision. The Village Board shall schedule a public hearing on the matter
without unnecessary delay. The appeal of the Commission's decision may
be based only upon the record and criteria utilized by the Commission to
render its decision. If new information becomes available subsequent to
the Commission's decision, a new application must be submitted to the
Commission. The Village Board's decision on the appeal shall be considered
final.
§ 47-14. Conflict with other provisions.
Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions than are imposed by the
provisions of any law, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. Where greater restrictions are imposed by any law, ordinance
or regulation, such greater restrictions shall apply.
§ 47-15. Compliance with provisions required.
No decision to carry out or approve an action subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall be rendered by any department, board, commission,
officer or employee of the village. This shall not prohibit environmental,
engineering, economic feasibility or other studies, preliminary planning
or budgetary processes nor the granting of an application relating only
to technical specifications and requirements, but not authorizing
commencement of action until full compliance with this chapter has been
met.
§ 47-16. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall apply to the entire corporate limits of the Village of
Williamsville.
§ 47-17. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjunction shall not effect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 47-18. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 57
§ 47-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-18
1:103
LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 11.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 72.
Trees — See Ch. 101.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 57-1. Purpose. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare through the establishment of a comprehensive
and uniform plan that establishes minimum standards for landscaping in
districts zoned MU, NMU, R-3M and M-1.
§ 57-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DECIDUOUS TREE — A tree or shrub that sheds its leaves annually.
EVERGREEN — A plant or tree that retains its verdure, leaves or needles
through all seasons.
GREENSWARD — Turf that is green with growing grass.
GROUND COVER — A planting of low plants that covers the ground, in lieu
of turf or greensward.
LANDSCAPED AREA — That area of a site plan or development not
consisting of structures or pavement. Landscaped area shall consist of those
areas on a site plan that are planted, seeded or provide similar vegetative or
landscaped cover. Landscaped area does not include man-made stormwater
retention ponds, but may include other green infrastructure.
PARKING AREA — The open area on any premises regulated herein,
designed for the short-term storage of motor vehicles.
PLANTING UNIT — The unit of measure, based upon gross building square
footage and the lot line distance along public streets, utilized to determine
the amount of plant material required for development applications in the
Mixed Use Zoning District.
SHRUB — A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several stems
from the ground or small branches near the ground, may be deciduous or
evergreen.
TREE LAWN — The area between the edge of a sidewalk and the curbline
of a street, typically within the public right-of-way.
TREE, ORNAMENTAL — A small deciduous tree (rarely, evergreen),
typically less than 35 feet in height when mature, that is utilized and valued
§ 47-18 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 57-2
1:104
for the aesthetic appearance, color and/or texture of its flowers, fruits,
foliage, bark, form or habit.
TREE, SHADE — A large deciduous tree (rarely, evergreen), typically
greater than 35 feet in height when mature, that is utilized for its broad leaf
canopy and ability to cast a shadow upon a large area.
§ 57-3. General provisions.
A. Except in the case of a one- or two-family dwelling, a building permit
issued for any new construction or any addition, alteration or
conversion of an existing building, structure or part thereof, issued in
districts zoned MU, NMU, R-3M or M-1 Districts, shall require
compliance with this chapter in the following instances: [Amended
5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
(1) Where the estimated value of the proposed improvement, as stated
in the building permit application, is $35,000 or more.
(2) Where the combined total value of proposed improvements for any
one premises, as stated in any series of building permit
applications in any twelve-month period, is $35,000 or more.
B. Any application for a building permit subject to review under this
chapter shall be accompanied by three copies of a proposed landscape
plan, drawn to scale. The plan shall be reviewed by the Environmental
Advisory Committee, and its recommendations shall be forwarded to
the Planning/Architectural Review Board for final approval before the
issuance of a building permit.
C. The drawings of any proposed landscape plan shall include the
following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and of the project and of the
individual who prepared the plan.
(2) Estimated cost of proposed completed landscaping.
(3) North direction point, scale of drawing and date.
(4) Existing and proposed streets, public or private sidewalks and curb
cuts immediately adjoining and within the proposed site, including
the names of all streets.
(5) Current survey or plot plan.
(6) Locations, dimensions and proposed use of any new or existing
building or structure, parking areas, loading and stacking areas
and driveways.
(7) Required greenspace and parking calculations.
(8) Location, species and caliper of existing deciduous or evergreen
trees and any other vegetation to be preserved or eliminated; and
§ 57-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-3
1:105
§ 57-4. Standards and criteria.
All properties regulated by this chapter shall conform to the following:
location, species and caliper of any new landscaping or other
amenities to be provided.
(9) Location and design of lighting, fencing, screen walls, drainage,
signs and refuse container area.
(10) A grading plan, where applicable, showing existing and finished
grade levels.
(11) Location and dimensions of all permanent signs.
A. The landscaped area shall be not less than 15% of the total lot area of
the development.
B. Landscaping shall be designed as an integral part of the entire
development, with the arrangement and spatial location of the
landscaped areas dispersed throughout the site.
C. Existing natural features and vegetation shall be preserved and
incorporated into the landscape plan, wherever possible.
D. A landscape plan shall include, wherever possible, trees as the
dominant feature. Shrubs, ornamental trees, greensward and other
vegetation shall be used as a complement to the trees, but should not
form the exclusive landscape treatment.
E. Any parking area providing for 11 to 20 vehicles shall devote not less
than 5% of the interior of the parking area to landscaping. Any parking
area providing for 20 or more vehicles shall devote not less than 10% of
the interior of the parking area to landscaping. Landscaping shall be
designed in a manner so as to minimize the unsightly and monotonous
aspect of a parking area and so as to minimize stormwater runoff rates
and volumes, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution.
F. All planted areas located within a parking area shall be contained by a
poured-in-place concrete curb to protect plant material and ensure
proper growth.
G. Where any areas regulated by this chapter abut a Residential R District,
the abutting lot line shall be screened with landscaping that shall
harmonize with the existing character of the plantings in the abutting R
District.
H. Any landscape plan proposed for premises adjacent to an historical
landmark shall be submitted to the Historical Preservation Commission
for review and recommendations before final approval by the Planning
Architectural Review Board.
I. Schedule of planting. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
§ 57-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 57-4
1:106
§ 57-5. Maintenance and performance bonds.
(1) M-1 District: One tree shall be planted for each 30 feet of street
frontage, plus one tree for every 10 parking spaces provided.
(2) R-3M District: as regulated in § 112-15E.
(3) MU District: as regulated in § 112-16E.
(4) NMU District: as regulated in § 112-17E.
J. The Planning/Architectural Review Board may grant a waiver of
compliance from any one or more of the above standards and criteria
upon a showing of impossibility of strict compliance with this chapter.
K. Trees.
(1) All deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches
measured at a point six inches above finished grade level.
(2) All evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height
measured from finished grade level to the highest point of the tree.
(3) Any other variety or variation of tree shall be a minimum eight feet
in height measured from finished grade level and a minimum
caliper of 1 3/4 inches measured at a point six inches above
finished grade level.
L. Plastic or any other types of artificial planting or vegetation are
prohibited.
M. Replacement plantings shall be of the same species and size as original
plantings.
N. Upon completion of the project and prior to the issuing of a certificate
of occupancy, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect and approve
all landscaping.
O. Upon completion of landscaping in conformance with this chapter, the
required greenspace shall not be reduced without prior approval of a
revised landscape plan by the Planning/Architectural Review Board.
P. A landscape plan shall comply with any stormwater pollution
prevention plan submitted pursuant to any provision of the Village
Code.
Q. With respect to any property zoned MU or NMU, any such landscaping
plan shall also conform to § 112-16E or 112-17E of the Code, as
applicable. In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this
chapter and either § 112-16E or 112-17E, the requirements of
§ 112-16E or 112-17E, as applicable, shall prevail. [Amended
5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
§ 57-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-5
1:107
Chapter 60
LIEN ON FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
§ 60-1. Adoption of statutory procedures.
The Village of Williamsville elects to adopt the procedures established
by Chapter 738 of the Laws of 1977, General Municipal Law § 22 and
Insurance Law § 33-a and 168-c, which authorize and empower a claim by
the village against the proceeds of a policy of fire insurance insuring the
interest of an owner and issued on real property located in the Village of
Williamsville to the extent of any lien by the village thereon.
§ 60-2. Release of proceeds.
Upon the written agreement of an insured to restore the affected premises
to the same or improved condition that it was in prior to the time that the
lien of the Village of Williamsville arose against the proceeds of insurance,
the Village Board may by resolution release or return to the insured any
amounts which the village would be entitled to claim under the provisions
of § 22 of the General Municipal Law, subject to such conditions as the
resolution may provide to guarantee the obligation of the insured to restore
the affected premises.
Chapter 67
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
A. The amount of any maintenance or performance bond or other
acceptable security shall be determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall be based upon the estimated cost of the landscaping.
B. A maintenance bond or other acceptable security, to ensure that all
plantings shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition and
that all replacement plantings shall be made within one year of the
original date of planting, shall be issued to the Village for any
landscaping estimated at $10,000 or more. The bond shall be dated on
the date that all plantings are completed and shall be for a period of one
year. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the landscaping,
including replacements, before the bond is canceled or security
returned.
C. After November 1 in any year, a performance bond or other acceptable
security shall be required to ensure that all plantings and particulars of
an approved landscape plan are completed. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall inspect the completed landscaping before the bond is
canceled or security returned.
§ 57-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 60-2
1:108
ARTICLE I
Indemnification of Officers and Employees
[Adopted 4-28-1980 as L.L. No. 5-1980]
§ 67-1. Legislative intent.11
The purpose of this Article is to provide legal and financial protection for
those individuals serving the Village of Williamsville for losses from civil
actions which may be brought against them in their individual capacity
for actions taken while in the performance of their official duties and
responsibilities. In enacting this Article, the Board of Trustees does not
intend to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or responsibility of
the village or its employees with regard to indemnification of legal defense.
It is solely the intent of this Article to provide similar coverage for local
employees as is presently provided for state employees so as to continue to
attract qualified individuals to local government service.
§ 67-2. Terminology.
As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise requires, the term
"employee" shall mean any person holding a position by election,
appointment or employment in the service of the Village of Williamsville,
whether or not compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to
participate in a municipally sponsored volunteer program, but shall not
include an independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a
former employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 67-3. Conditions for defense.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 67-5, the
village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any civil action
or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any alleged act
or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to have
occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties or which is brought to enforce a provision of
Section 1981 or 1983 of Title 42 of the United States Code. This duty to
provide for a defense shall not arise where such civil action or
proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the Village of Williamsville.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A, the employee shall
be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney; provided,
however, that the employee shall be entitled to representation by
private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial proceeding whenever
the Village Attorney determines, based upon his investigation and
review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that representation
by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate, or whenever a court of
competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or by a special
proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and that the
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.)
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-3
1:109
§ 67-4. Duties of employee.
employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his choice.
The Village Attorney shall notify the employee in writing of such
determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by
private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a
condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation,
that appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same
counsel. If the employee or group of employees is entitled to
representation by private counsel under the provisions of this section,
the Village Attorney shall so certify to the Village Board. Reasonable
attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the village to
such private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the
civil action or proceeding, subject to certification that the employee is
entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this section
by the head of the department, commission, division, office or agency
in which such employee is employed and upon the audit and warrant
of the Village Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to representation
of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount of litigation
expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be resolved by
the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 67-5, the Attorney shall take the
necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel under the
terms and conditions provided in § 67-5, on behalf of the employee to
avoid entry of a default judgment pending resolution of any question
pertaining to the obligation to provide for a defense.
A. The village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state
or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided
that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose
occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties; the duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this subsection shall not arise where the injury or
damage resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the
part of the employee.
B. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which may
be subject to indemnification by the village, and if not inconsistent with
the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall certify such settlement
and submit such settlement and certification to the Village Attorney.
The Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to form and
amount and shall give his approval if in his judgment the settlement is
in the best interest of the village. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to authorize the village to indemnify or save harmless an
employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by
the Village Attorney.
§ 67-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 67-4
1:110
§ 67-5. Cooperation of employee.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this Article
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney or his assistant,
at his office, by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five (5) days after
he is served with such document, and upon the full cooperation of the
employee in the defense of such action or proceeding and in the defense
of any action or proceeding against the state based upon the same act
or omission and in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be
deemed a request by the employee that the village provide for his defense
pursuant to this Article.
§ 67-6. Rights not affected.
The benefits of this Article shall inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this Article be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 67-7. Rights of insurers presented.
The provisions of this Article shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 67-8. Time of effect.
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
§ 67-9. Statutory provisions not affected.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Article, the provisions of
this Article shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit, modify,
abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon any unit,
entity, officer or employee of the village, or any right to defense and/or
indemnification provided for any governmental officer or employee by, in
accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail within thirty (30) days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the
Mayor; and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, such
judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such Mayor. If
the Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement
shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
§ 67-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-9
1:111

ARTICLE II
Terms of Office of Mayor and Trustees
[Adopted 3-17-1981 as L.L. No. 3-1981]
§ 67-10. Increase in terms of office.
The terms of office of the Mayor and Trustees are increased from two (2)
years to four (4) years. The dates of elections are set every two (2) years in
the odd years.
§ 67-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-10
1:113
Chapter 70
PARKS AND PUBLIC AREAS
§ 67-10 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 67-10
1:114
ARTICLE I
Regulations for Glen Park
[Adopted 5-14-1979]
§ 70-1. Public gatherings.
Any public entertainments, demonstrations, assemblies, military and other
parades are prohibited in Glen Park and/or Glen Park approaches without
the written permission of the Glen Park Joint Board and permit issued
through the office of the Village or Town Clerk.
§ 70-2. Sales and displays.
No commercial solicitation or display of any sort shall be permitted within
the confines of Glen Park without the written permission of the Glen Park
Joint Board and permit issued through the office of the Village or Town
Clerk.
§ 70-3. Sound amplification.
No sound-amplification systems shall be used within the confines of Glen
Park without written permission of the Glen Park Joint Board and permit
issued through the office of the Village or Town Clerk.
§ 70-4. Firearms and fireworks.
No person shall discharge any firearm or fireworks of any description,
throw stones or missiles, build any open fire or carry any firearm in Glen
Park.
§ 70-5. Sports and games.
Team sports or organized athletic competition of any type is forbidden in
Glen Park.
§ 70-6. Trees, shrubs and park property.
No person shall damage any plant, shrub, flower or tree, or deface, damage
or remove any park equipment, building, monument, natural object, sign or
marker, or molest wildlife.
§ 70-7. Dumping of refuse.
No person shall throw or dump any material except in containers provided.
§ 70-8. Motor vehicles.
All such vehicles as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York and, in addition thereto, minibikes, mopeds, snowmobiles and
all other motorized recreational vehicles, except for emergency vehicles
§ 70-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8
1:115
and vehicles operated by the Department of Public Works of the town and
village, are forbidden within the confines of Glen Park.
§ 70-9. Night closing. [Amended 3-13-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
Glen Park shall be closed to the public each night between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and sunrise the following morning. No unaccompanied minor
shall be in Glen Park after dusk.
§ 70-10. Swimming.
No person shall swim or wade in Glen Park.
§ 70-11. Bicycles.
Upon entering Glen Park, a cyclist shall dismount and wheel the cycle
through on foot using paths.
§ 70-12. Alcoholic beverages.
No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed in Glen Park.
§ 70-13. Dogs and horses.
Dogs and horses shall not be allowed in Glen Park.
§ 70-14. Skateboards, unicycles and roller skates.
Skateboarding, unicycling and roller-skating are not allowed in Glen Park.
§ 70-8 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 70-14
1:116
ARTICLE II
Public Parks and Recreation Areas
[Adopted 2-22-1988 by L.L. No. 5-1988]
§ 70-15. Purpose.
This Article is intended to establish enforceable procedures governing use
by individuals and/or groups of individuals of all public parks and recreation
areas within the Village of Williamsville, except Glen Park.
§ 70-16. Hours of public use. [Amended 11-27-1995 by L.L. No.
4-1995]
§ 70-17. Permits required.
§ 70-18. Swimming and wading pools.
A. All Village parks and public recreation areas shall be open to the public
each day from 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. No person shall remain in any
Village park or public recreation facility after the hour of closing. No
unaccompanied minor shall be in any park after dusk. [Amended
3-13-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
B. The Village Board may, by resolution, extend or restrict use to
accommodate the legitimate needs of any special event or program.
C. Full facilities, except wading pools, shall be available from May 20
through October 15 in all village parks and public recreation areas.
A. A use permit shall be required in order to reserve the exclusive use of
any pavilion or shelter in any village park or recreation area.
B. An alcoholic beverage permit shall be required for the consumption of
the same in any village park or recreation area.
C. Use permits or alcoholic beverage permits shall be granted only upon
written application on forms as adopted from time to time by resolution
of the Village Board.
D. A schedule of permit fees shall be established by resolution of the
Village Board.
E. Any permit application shall be accompanied by the necessary fee.
A. Daily opening and closing hours for swimming and wading pools
operated by the village shall be set annually by the Village Board.
B. Seasonal opening and closing dates for swimming and wading pools
operated by the village shall be set annually by the Village Board.
C. Any use by the public of swimming and wading pools operated by the
village during times when the same are closed is prohibited.
§ 70-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-19
1:117
§ 70-19. Pets. [Amended 5-26-2009 by L.L. No. 3-2009]
No pets shall be permitted in any Village park or recreation area, except as
follows:
§ 70-20. Vehicle and bicycle operation.
No motor vehicle shall be operated in any village park or recreation area,
except for utility, police, emergency or village purposes, without a written
permit. No bicycle shall be operated within the confines of any village park
or recreation area.
§ 70-21. Sports and games.
No organized league or sports club shall sponsor or perform in any athletic
contest in Island Park or Garrison Park.
§ 70-22. Alcoholic beverages.
§ 70-23. Refuse and litter. [Added 8-26-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
No person shall deposit any refuse, litter or garbage in any village park
or recreation area except in designated containers maintained for such
purpose.
A. Leashed dogs shall be allowed in Island Park.
B. Leashed dogs shall be allowed in South Long Park.
C. Leashed dogs shall be allowed on Lehigh Memory Trail.
A. Possession of any alcoholic beverages in any village park or recreation
area without an alcoholic beverage permit is prohibited.
B. An alcoholic beverage permit shall be granted only upon the condition
that the applicant for such permit agrees in writing to the following:
(1) To observe faithfully all laws regulating the consumption of
alcoholic beverages.
(2) To assume full responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or
property as a result of the presence or consumption of such
alcoholic beverages.
(3) To police the conduct of all persons comprising the party to which
the permit is granted so as to prevent any disorderly conduct,
drunkenness or other conduct of such a nature as to materially
impair the enjoyment of other persons legally using the park or
recreation area.
§ 70-19 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 70-24
1:118
§ 70-24. Park structures, trees, shrubs and equipment.
No person shall mar, deface, injure or destroy any structure or equipment
located in any public park or recreation area nor shall any person destroy,
damage, cut down or otherwise injure any tree or shrub so located.
§ 70-25. Sales, displays and public demonstrations.
No person or group shall conduct any public sales or exchanges or
advertisements for the same in any village park or recreation areas nor shall
any person or group conduct any demonstration, parade or assembly of any
kind or use any sound-amplifying devices or loudspeaking systems in such
areas without having first secured a written permit from the Village Clerk.
§ 70-26. Parks and Playground Committee.
A Parks and Playground Committee, whose members are to be appointed
by the Village Board, shall be charged with preparation of regulations
governing the conduct and use of all village parks and playgrounds. All such
regulations shall be effective only upon approval by resolution of the Village
Board.
§ 70-27. Smoking prohibited. [Added 10-25-2010 by L.L. No.
6-2010]
§ 70-28. Penalties for offenses. [Added 10-25-2010 by L.L. No.
6-2010]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $250.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to preserve the public health and
welfare by creating a healthier community, a cleaner environment and
offering a role model for children by prohibiting smoking in the Village's
parks and playgrounds.
B. Smoking prohibited in certain areas. Smoking is prohibited within 100
feet of any pool, wading pool, playground, play equipment or athletic
field located in any Village park or playground regulated under this
article, including, but not limited to, Garrison Park, Island Park, South
Long Park and the Lehigh Memory Trail. Smoking is also prohibited in
any Village park regulated under this article during any event
permitted or sponsored by the Village.
C. It is unlawful for any person to dispose of any smoking materials,
including, but not limited to, cigarette/cigar butts and filters, within any
Village park or playground regulated under this article in any place
other than a trash receptacle.
§ 70-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-28
1:119
Chapter 72
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 11.
Demolition of buildings; blasting — See Ch.
12.
Unsafe and unfinished buildings — See Ch.
15.
Fire prevention and building code
administration — See Ch. 28.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 39.
Landscaping — See Ch. 57.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 72-1. Adoption of standards; purpose; conflicting provisions.
All premises within the Village of Williamsville, whether improved,
unimproved or vacant, shall be maintained in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter and the Property Maintenance Code of the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code so as to assure the proper
character of the property, to maintain proper values and to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the public. Whenever the requirements
of this chapter are at variance with other applicable laws, regulations or
private agreements, the most restrictive or higher standard shall govern.
§ 72-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure which
is incidental to the main building and use and which is located on the same
premises.
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls,
or within exterior and party walls, and a roof. The word "building" shall be
construed, when used herein, as though followed by the words "or part or
parts thereof."
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING — A building or structure of a
permanent design composed of a foundation, exterior walls and roof
constructed of materials that prevent view of the contents of said building
or structure.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer and/or person
or persons designated by the Village Board of Trustees.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREA YARDS — Any open space on the premises
unoccupied and unobstructed by building structures or improvements.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food.
§ 70-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 72-2
1:120
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as herein defined and all other
waste materials which, if thrown or deposited, create a danger to public
health, safety and welfare.
LOT — A plot, tract, premises or parcel of land, with or without a building
or structures located thereon, as surveyed and apportioned for sale or other
purposes.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the premises, including but not limited
to the executor, trustee, firm, corporation, tenants or other legal entity.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including buildings or structures
thereon.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE — Caring for real estate, land, buildings,
structures and other property improvements.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste, including
garbage, rubbish, dead animals and solid market and any industrial waste.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
noncombustible waste, including but not limited to paper, cardboard, tin
cans, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, tires, plastic, metals and similar
materials, except garbage.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
§ 72-3. Exterior maintenance.
Every owner shall keep every part of the premises in a clean, sanitary and
safe condition and free from litter, garbage, refuse and rubbish.
§ 72-4. Storage within enclosed buildings required; exceptions.
Every owner shall keep or store property or possessions within a completely
enclosed building except as follows:
A. Construction material for permitted construction or repairs. Such
materials may be stored outside only so long as such permitted
construction or repairs are ongoing.
B. Material or products for sale to the public when listed as a permitted
use under Chapter 112 of the Village Code.
C. Regularly used lawn, garden and recreational equipment.
D. Storage of solid fuel for use in heating equipment in quantities not to
exceed:
(1) Wood: 10 full cords, a volume of 1,280 cubic feet, neatly piled so as
not to create a hazard.
(2) Coal: a volume of five tons when covered by an approved material.
§ 72-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-4
1:121
§ 72-5. Maintenance of buildings, structures and improvements.
Every owner shall keep all parts of buildings, structures and other
improvements in good repair so that the same shall not be a health,
accident, safety or fire hazard or otherwise represent a visual blight upon
the neighborhood.
§ 72-6. Maintenance of garbage and refuse facilities.
Every owner shall maintain facilities for the storage, handling and disposal
of garbage, refuse or rubbish, as prescribed by Chapter 39 of the Village
Code.
§ 72-7. Duty of owner upon notice of violation; failure to comply.
[Amended 8-25-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the Village of
Williamsville, within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the Village,
after direct observation and determination of an existing violation of this
chapter by the Code Enforcement Officer, to bring the premises into
compliance. Upon failure to comply, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
oversee entry upon the offending premises for the purpose of bringing the
same into compliance.
§ 72-8. Costs.
§ 72-9. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any civil charges or penalties, any offense against any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a violation as defined by the
Penal Law and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable for each offense
by a fine not to exceed $250 per day.
E. Motor vehicles, properly inspected, insured and licensed so as to be
legally used on the public highway.
A. The cost to the Village of bringing the premises into compliance,
including, if necessary, that of bringing the public right-of-way into
compliance, shall be computed, certified to the Village Administrator
and billed directly to the owner of the premises.
B. If the charge as billed is not paid within 30 days, interest at the
maximum permissible rate shall be added thereto until paid in full. If
the charge remains unpaid by the 30th day of April next, it shall be
added to the Village tax assessed against the premises.
C. Computation of the cost to the Village in bringing about compliance
shall include the cost to the Village of the labor of any Village employee
or, if required, that of an independent private contractor, together with
all administrative costs attendant upon the computation, certification
and billing to the owner of the premises.
§ 72-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 72-9
1:122
Chapter 73
PUBLIC ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 6.
Blasting — See Ch. 12.
Parks and public areas — See Ch. 70.
§ 73-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation and control
of activities inimical to the peace, quiet, good order and safety of the
inhabitants of the Village of Williamsville.
§ 73-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVE-IN SERVICE FACILITY — An establishment which includes provision
for a customer to conduct business or secure consumer goods while
remaining within a motor vehicle.[Added 3-23-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
EMERGENCY — A public calamity exposing any person or property to
imminent danger of loss or harm.
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE — A self-contained mobile food unit in which
ready-to-eat food is prepared, cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or
portioned for service, sale, or distribution.[Added 10-24-2016 by L.L. No.
7-2016]
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — The owner or owner's agent of a mobile food
vehicle.[Added 10-24-2016 by L.L. No. 7-2016]
PEDDLER/STREET VENDOR — Any person offering goods or services for
profit while traveling door to door or upon the public streets.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle (ATV), trail
bike, minibike, snowmobile or any other vehicle which is propelled by any
power other than human power and is designed for or capable of crosscountry
travel.
REFUSE-COMPACTING VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is either designed
to be used or is used to compact or transfer refuse, garbage or trash.
SPECIAL EVENT OUTDOOR SEATING — The temporary placement and use
of removable tables and chairs on any public sidewalk or other outdoor area
within the Village for the purpose of serving food or beverages in connection
with any special event requiring a permit under § 73-4. No such outdoor
seating shall be utilized for more than three consecutive days nor more
than a total of 15 days in any one calendar year. Any establishment that
§ 72-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-2
1:123
wishes to place and use such seating for more than three consecutive days
or 15 total days in any one calendar year must comply with the regulations
governing seasonal outdoor seating in § 112-16J.[Added 5-28-2013 by L.L.
No. 4-2013]
§ 73-3. Prohibited noise.
It shall be unlawful to:
A. Erect, demolish, alter or repair any building exterior or excavate any
site between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in the case of
emergency or in the interest of public safety.
B. Operate any refuse-compacting vehicle between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
C. Operate or permit the operation of a lawn mower or recreational
vehicle or a chain saw or log splitter, except for the emergency removal
of trees and limbs from any street, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
D. Use any sound-amplification device or other instrument for the purpose
of attracting attention, except in the case of an emergency or as
hereafter limited.
E. Discharge any explosive device or firearm.
F. Operate any amusement ride, outdoor show, outdoor exhibition,
entertainment or performance between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
G. Create, or permit the creation of, any loud noise which disturbs the
public peace in any way between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
[Amended 3-23-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
H. Operate a drive-in service facility, located on any lot adjoining or
located within 100 feet of any property zoned or used for residential
purposes, employing the use of microphones, speakers or other
electronic voice transmission systems between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., unless the owner or operator of such facility shall have
obtained a special permit from the Board of Trustees pursuant to
Subsection H(1) herein. [Added 3-23-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
(1) The applicant for a special permit pursuant to this section shall
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees, that the
operation of the drive-in service facility between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. will not unreasonably interfere with the use and
enjoyment of surrounding residential properties. The applicant
may make such showing through the use of physical, technological
and/or operational controls, and the Board of Trustees may
condition its grant of a special permit upon the installation and/or
adoption of such controls as it deems reasonably necessary to
§ 73-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 73-3
1:124
§ 73-4. Activities requiring permit from Mayor.
ensure that the operation of the drive-in service facility will not
adversely affect neighboring properties.
(2) Any special permit granted hereunder may be revoked at any time
by the Code Enforcement Officer in the event he finds that any
condition or conditions required under the permit have not been
installed and/or utilized or otherwise prove to be ineffective.
I. Create any loud noise or amplified sound associated with any activity
requiring a permit pursuant to § 73-4 outside the time periods
incorporated into, or otherwise in violation of, such permit. [Added
11-26-2012 by L.L. No. 11-2012]
A. The following activities when conducted by any individual or private
organization shall be permitted only upon issuance of a permit by the
Mayor:
(1) Winterfest.
(2) Foot- or bike races.
(3) Block parties.
(4) Outdoor exhibitions.
(5) Sidewalk sales.
(6) Bonfires or any other open fire.
(7) Operation of four or more coin-operated amusement devices on one
premises.
(8) Street vending or peddling,
(9) Distribution of printed matter on a public street for the purpose of
commercial solicitation.
(10) Any activity that involves a sound-amplification device.
(11) Special event outdoor seating. [Added 5-28-2013 by L.L. No.
4-2013]
(12) Mobile food vendor. [Added 10-24-2016 by L.L. No. 7-2016]
B. In issuing a Mayor's permit under Subsection A, the Mayor may limit
the hours of the permitted activity and/or otherwise impose reasonable
conditions, beyond those specified in § 73-3, so as to: [Amended
11-26-2012 by L.L. No. 11-2012]
(1) Assure the public safety.
(2) Limit the accumulation of refuse.
§ 73-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-4
1:125
§ 73-5. Street peddlers and vendors.
§ 73-6. Mobile food vendors. [Added 10-24-2016 by L.L. No.
7-201612]
(3) Maintain good order and decorum.
(4) Control noise level.
A. No person, whether on foot or in a vehicle, shall sell, peddle, hawk or
vend upon the public streets or other public areas of the Village or go
from house to house soliciting purchases unless a permit has been first
issued by the Mayor. The permit shall be produced by the peddler or
vendor upon the request of any individual solicited.
B. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable and shall expire
on the first day of June of each year.
C. No person shall engage in solicitation or peddling at any time before
9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. except upon invitation from or an
appointment with the resident.
A. No mobile food vendor shall vend on the public street unless a permit
has been first issued by the Mayor. The permit shall be produced by the
mobile food vendor upon the request of any individual solicited.
B. Permit.
(1) No mobile food vendor shall vend on the public street without a
valid permit issued pursuant to § 73-4A(12).
(2) In order to obtain such permit, the mobile food vendor shall:
(a) Present the mobile food vehicle for inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer, or provide proof of an equivalent
inspection from another municipality performed within the
previous six months;
(b) Provide proof of current and valid insurance;
(c) Provide proof of current and valid vehicle registration; and
(d) Provide proof of current and valid Erie County Health
Department inspection.
C. Mobile food vending shall not be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or after
11:00 p.m. on a residential property.
D. Mobile food vending shall not be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after
11:00 p.m. on a nonresidential property or in a right-of-way adjacent to
a nonresidential property.
12.Editor's Note: This local law also provided for the renumbering of former § 73-6 as § 73-7.
§ 73-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 73-6
1:126
E. Within nonresidential zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for a mobile
food vendor to conduct business at a single location within a public
right-of-way for a duration exceeding three hours.
F. At all times, mobile food vendors must abide by the New York State
Transportation Law and all applicable parking, vehicle and traffic laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
G. All signage associated with a mobile food vendor must be permanently
affixed to the mobile food vehicle. No accessory signage shall be placed
outside or around the mobile food vehicle.
H. All mobile food vendors must provide trash receptacles of sufficient
capacity to contain all trash and waste generated in association with
the business of the mobile food vendor. All waste and trash shall be
placed in the trash receptacles. All trash, waste, litter and debris shall
be removed from the site of the vending operation at the end of each
daily operation.
I. It shall be unlawful to discharge liquid waste, fats, oils or grease on the
land. Such discharges shall be held in appropriate containers and then
disposed of in a legally permissible manner.
J. Mobile food vendors shall not conduct operation from a site that
contains a gasoline service.
K. Each mobile food vehicle shall be inspected annually by the Building
Department for firesafety code compliance, unless proof of an
equivalent inspection performed by another municipality within the
previous six months is provided.
L. All required permits shall be posted conspicuously on the mobile food
vehicle.
M. Each mobile food vehicle shall be registered as a commercial vehicle
with the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
N. When parked on a public or private right-of-way, products shall not be
dispensed from the street side of the mobile food vehicle.
O. A mobile food vehicle shall not be operated in reverse in order to
attempt or make a sale.
P. When parked on a public or private right-of-way, a mobile food vehicle
shall not be parked within 60 feet of an intersection with another public
or private right-of-way boundary.
Q. The following fees shall be paid to the Village Clerk with an application
for a mobile food vendor permit:
(1) Mayor's permit fee as determined from time to time by the Village
Board of Trustees.
§ 73-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 73-6
1:127
§ 73-7. Offensive odors. [Added 12-12-2011 by L.L. No. 5-2011]
Chapter 74
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 39.
§ 74-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Mandatory Recycling Law of the Village
of Williamsville."
§ 74-2. Findings.
The Village of Williamsville finds that:
(2) Inspection fees, if applicable, in amounts as determined from time
to time by the Village Board of Trustees.
R. A permit granted hereunder shall not be transferable and shall expire
on the first day of June of each year.
A. It shall be unlawful to use or store any material or substance on any
property within the Village in such a manner as to cause or emit any
offensive odors of such duration or intensity so as to unreasonably
interfere with the use and comfortable enjoyment of neighboring
properties.
B. This provision shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, and
any person found to have violated this provision shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 1-11 of this Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately forward any complaint
received alleging a violation of this section to the Mayor.
A. Methods of waste management emphasizing source reduction,
recovery, conversion and recycling of wastes are essential to the longrange
preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of the public, to
the economic productivity and environmental quality of the Village of
Williamsville and to the conservation of resources.
B. The New York State Solid Waste Management Act of 1988!BFN!Editor's
Note: In regard to municipalities, see § 27-0107 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.!EFN! requires that municipalities adopt a local law
or code for the separation of waste into recyclable, reusable or other
components for which economic markets for alternate uses exist.
§ 73-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 74-3
1:128
§ 74-3. Legislative purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 74-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms or phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGRICULTURAL USES — The development and cultivation of the soil for
the planting of trees, fruits, vegetables or flowers.
APPEARANCE TICKET — A written notice issued and subscribed to by
a duly authorized person directing a designated person to appear in a
designated local criminal court at a designated future time in connection
with an alleged commission of a designated offense. A notice conforming to
such definition constitutes an "appearance ticket" regardless of whether it
is referred to in some other provision of law or by any other title.
COLLECTION — The act of picking up recyclable material from the public
right-of-way abutting homes, businesses or industrial sites.
COMPOST — Organic material which may be reduced to humus through
organic activity.
COMPOSTING — A process through which organic materials, such as grass
and leaves, are reduced to humus through organic activity.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Heavy paper items normally used for
packaging, mailing, shipping or containing goods, merchandise or other
material, but excluding plastic, foam or wax-coated or soiled contaminated
heavy paper items.
GARBAGE — All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from
meat, fish and fowl, vegetables and fruits and parts thereof (and materials
ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for such use or which, for
any reason, have been discarded), including market refuse and waste from
handling, storage or sale of produce.
GARDENING OR LANDSCAPE USES — The development and cultivation of
herbs, fruits, vegetables and flowers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — All clear (flint), green and brown (amber) colored
glass containers, excluding crystal; ceramic; light bulbs; plate, window,
laminated, wired or mirrored glass; and glass cookware.
LEAD ACID BATTERY — The type of electrical storage battery commonly
used in automobiles and trucks.
A. To preserve the long-range health, safety and welfare of the public and
the economic productivity and environmental quality of the Village of
Williamsville by conserving resources and reducing potential pollution
of the environment.
B. To establish methods of collection, reduction and separation to
encourage effective reuse of wastes.
§ 74-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-4
1:129
MAGAZINE — Any type of magazine which would be normally delivered
through the mail or purchased at a newsstand. Excluded are large gluebound
catalogs, telephone books, periodicals or hardbound printed
material.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to and known as
"newsprint" and delivered at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other
information or communication; periodicals and paper that have a shiny or
wax-coated surface.
NONRECYCLABLE REFUSE AND RUBBISH — All waste material discarded
as useless or worthless trash, including but not limited to rags, sweepings,
rubber, leather, crockery, shells, clothing, straw, dirt and ashes.
PAINT — A substance composed of solid coloring matter suspended in a
liquid medium and applied as a protective or decorative coating to various
surfaces or to canvas or other material.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
other entity, as well as an individual.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers, as
defined by the recycling regulations, including but not limited to containers
used for milk, detergent, apple cider, water, soft drinks and vegetable oil.
PORTABLE TRANSFER CONTAINERS (Dumpsters) — Any premises that
requires, on a regular basis, more than five (5) containers or bags for
its garbage and refuse shall be required to secure a "portable transfer
container" for all excess over five (5) containers. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner or occupant to contract privately for the
securing of said container service for the excess material.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land abutting a given premises between
the sidewalk and curb or the land beyond the pavement or stone of the
road, street, alley or highway as surveyed or laid out in the records of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — All material specified by the Village of
Williamsville for collection pursuant to this chapter and/or the recycling
regulations promulgated hereunder, including but not limited to cans, glass
containers, newspapers, plastic and corrugated cardboard.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — A rectangular container in which to store and
carry recyclable material to the public right-of-way for collection.
RECYCLING REGULATIONS — Rules pursuant to this chapter set forth by
the Village Board of Trustees to implement the program established and
known, pursuant to this chapter, as the "Village of Williamsville Mandatory
Recycling Law."
REFUSE OFFICER — An employee of the Village of Williamsville designated
to oversee the collection of garbage, rubbish, trash, debris and recyclables.
SILVICULTURAL USES — The development, cultivation and reproduction of
trees.
§ 74-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 74-4
1:130
SOURCE SEPARATION — The separation of recyclable materials from the
waste stream at the point of waste generation.
TIRES — Rings or bands of rubber, either solid or hollow and inflated,
placed over the rims of wheels to provide traction, resistance to wear or
other properties, limited to passenger cars and light vehicles.
USED OIL — Any motor previously used in machinery, but not including
other petroleum fluids.
WASTE — Products and materials to be discarded after use from any
premises within the Village of Williamsville.
YARD WASTE — Grass, leaves, brush, plants, weeds or dirt materials from
vegetable and flower gardens, lawns and yards; or ash from fireplaces or
wood stoves.
§ 74-5. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for separation and preparation for
the collection of waste material. The program shall be under the supervision
of the Village of Williamsville Department of Public Works, which shall make
rules and regulations for its implementation subject to the approval of the
Village Board. Such rules and regulations shall be known as the "Village of
Williamsville Mandatory Recycling Law."
§ 74-6. Preparation of recyclable material for collection.
All recyclable material placed in accordance with this chapter for collection
in a public right-of-way shall be prepared as follows:
A. Recyclable material shall be placed in recycling containers as follows:
(1) Newspapers shall be placed in recycling containers or placed in
paper bags.
(2) Corrugated cardboard shall be flattened and securely tied in
bundles weighing not more than fifty (50) pounds. All tape, staples
and strappings shall be removed, and sections shall be broken into
pieces not larger than three by three (3 x 3) feet.
(3) Cans, glass containers and plastic containers shall be rinsed of the
original contents. Caps and rings shall be removed from glass
containers.
(4) No materials other than recyclable material prepared in
accordance with this chapter shall be placed in a recycling
container.
(5) The Village Board of Trustees may, by Board resolution, change the
recycling items, based on market conditions. A complete list of
acceptable materials is available at the Village Clerk's office.
§ 74-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-6
1:131
(6) All materials placed in the green recycling box shall be secured in
such a manner as to prevent scattering of the contents.
(7) In the event that the village-provided green box is damaged or
destroyed, replacement or additional green boxes will be available
from the Village Clerk at a cost to be established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees.
(8) Recyclable materials shall not be commingled with other solid
waste during collection, transportation or storage following
collection.
(9) Collectors collecting residential, commercial and/or institutional
municipal solid waste generated within the Village of Williamsville
shall refuse to collect municipal solid waste from any person or
party who has clearly failed to source-separate the recyclable
materials and/or who has not properly prepared the recyclable
materials to the specifications of the collector. A written
explanation shall be provided to the person or party of the reason
for the refusal of collection of the materials by the collector.
(10) Recycling containers which have been distributed free of charge to
village residents remain the property of the Village of Williamsville
and are not to be removed from the premises.
B. Leaves, brush and tree parts.
(1) During the months of October, November and December, leaves
may be placed in piles not exceeding six (6) feet in diameter, at the
curb or pavement line, but shall not be placed on the paved portion
or any street. At all other times of the year, leaves and similar
material must be suitably bagged or placed in an appropriate
container.
(2) Tree logs larger than four (4) inches in diameter shall be cut to a
length not to exceed two (2) feet and placed at the curb for
collection.
(3) Tree branches not exceeding four (4) inches in diameter shall be
cut to a length not to exceed six (6) feet and placed at the curb for
collection with the butt ends of the branches facing the same
direction.
(4) Tree trimmings, shrubs or vines not exceeding one-half (1/2) inch in
diameter shall be cut and placed in suitable containers or bags and
placed at the curb for collection. In no event shall any container or
bag exceed sixty-five (65) pounds in weight.
(5) Holiday trees may be placed at the curbline or pavement line for
collection in December and January without being cut and bundled
as otherwise herein required.
§ 74-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 74-7
1:132
§ 74-7. Material restrictions.
§ 74-8. Collection of recyclable material.
§ 74-9. Private collection programs for multiresidential complexes.
A. All used oil and paint shall be disposed of properly. There will be no
discharge of any oil or paint into any waterway or drainage system.
Empty paint cans with tops removed will be collected as part of the
regular trash pickup.
B. Lead acid batteries shall not be placed in any waste or recycling
container.
C. No material of any nature which could be or is considered to be
hazardous, infectious, toxic, radioactive, harmful or a pollutant will be
collected by the recycling collectors.
D. Tires may not be deposited at curbside for collection. These must be
delivered to the Department of Public Works garage, and the resident
will be charged a fee consistent with the village's cost of disposal.
A. The Village of Williamsville shall be under no obligation to collect
recyclable material not separated and prepared pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and the recycling regulations of the
Department of Public Works or recyclable material generated outside
the village.
B. The fact that recyclable material is in a public right-of-way shall be
rebuttal prima facie evidence that such material was placed there by
the owner of the property abutting that public right-of-way.
A. The owner, manager or superintendent of every multiresidential
complex using portable transfer containers shall provide and maintain,
in a neat and sanitary condition, recycling collection areas to receive
newspapers and other designated recyclables included in the curbside
collection programs, which are generated by residents of the complex.
In cases where a condominium, cooperative, homeowners' or similar
association exists, the association shall be responsible for provision and
maintenance of the recycling collection areas. Said recycling collection
areas shall be established by January 1, 1993, to include all recyclables
presently collected in the residential portion of the Village of
Williamsville.
B. The owner, manager or superintendent of each multiresidential
complex above shall arrange for the collection of recyclables from the
recycling collection areas.
C. The number and design of the collection areas required by this section
for each complex shall be consistent with the guidelines provided by the
Department of Public Works.
§ 74-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-10
1:133
§ 74-10. Commercial, industrial and institutional source-separation
programs.
§ 74-11. Ownership of recyclables placed for collection.
Any recyclable material within a public right-of-way for collection by the
village shall become the property of the village. No person, unless acting
under authority of the village or its authorized agent, shall collect, pickup
or remove or cause to be collected, picked up or removed any recyclable
material so placed for collection; each such unauthorized collection pickup
or removal shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter; provided,
however, that where the village has refused to collect recyclable material
because it has not been placed or prepared according to the provisions of
this chapter, the person responsible for initially placing that material shall
remove it from the public right-of-way.
§ 74-12. Removal of uncollected recyclables.
Where the village has not collected recycled material because it was not
placed or prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the
person in control of the premises whereon the recycled material was
generated shall remove such material as soon as possible after the village or
designated contractor has refused collection and, in any event, by 7:00 p.m.
of the designated collection day. The failure to remove any such material by
7:00 p.m. of the designated collection day shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 74-13. Vehicles to be designed to prevent spillage.
Every person who shall engage in the business of collecting recyclable
material within the village shall use for that purpose a vehicle so
constructed as to prevent the escape of any such recycled material. Such a
vehicle shall, at all times, when not necessarily opened for the purpose of
depositing the material collected therein, be kept securely covered.
A. All commercial, industrial and institutional establishments within the
village which use portable transfer containers shall source-separate
and arrange for the collection of recyclable material.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables for disposition
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of a
commercial, industrial or institutional establishment at which the
recyclables are generated ("the generator") or of the person
contractually obligated to the generator to arrange for collection and
disposal of its solid waste. Said arrangements may include, without
limitation, direct marketing of recyclables, contracts with permitted
solid waste collectors/haulers for separate collection of any or all
designated recyclables, contracts with other persons for separate
collection of any or all designated recyclables or direct delivery to a
designated processing facility.
§ 74-10 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 74-14
1:134
§ 74-14. License required for collectors.
A. No recyclables shall be collected within the village without first having
secured from the village, with the approval of the Village Board of said
village, a license to be issued under the following terms and conditions:
(1) Authorized collectors must first obtain a solid waste collection
license from the village. The fee for such license shall be set by the
Village Board, and all licenses shall be issued for the calendar year
or such portion thereof. There shall be no reduction in the fee for a
license issued after the beginning of any calendar year.
(2) An authorized collection sticker shall be prominently displayed on
each vehicle operated by or on behalf of the authorized collector on
the left front fender.
(3) Authorized collector applications may be denied if the applicant or
licensee has been adjudged or administratively determined to have
committed one (1) or more violations of this chapter during the
preceding calendar year.
(4) All authorized collectors licensed by the village shall indemnify and
hold harmless the village from any pending, threatened or actual
claims, liability or expenses arising from the disposal of recyclables
by the authorized collector.
(5) Authorized collectors shall offer collection services for all
recyclable materials to all commercial, industrial and institutional
customers and residential customers with dumpsters from whom
they provide waste collection services at the same times and on the
same days as services are provided to their customers for solid
waste collection.
(6) An application for a license under this section shall state the
manner of collection and the place and method of disposal of the
municipal waste material and recyclable materials from its
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional customers.
Each collector shall maintain separate monthly records of solid
waste and recyclable materials collected, transported or disposed
of by the authorized collector, which shall include the following
information:
(a) The municipality or geographical area and number of units in
which the solid waste or recyclable material was generated.
(b) The quantity, by ton, of solid waste and of each type of
recyclable material collected.
(c) The quantity, by ton, of recycled material delivered to a
recycling facility(ies) and the location of the recycling
facility(ies).
(d) The quantity, by ton, of solid waste delivered to each facility.
§ 74-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-14
1:135
§ 74-15. Reporting violations.
All employees or agents of the village, including those under contract to
collect waste, are hereby authorized to report each and every violation of
this chapter to the Department of Public Works.
§ 74-16. Approval, denial, suspension or revocation of license.
When a designated public official determines that a failure to comply with
this chapter may have occurred, she or he shall recommend to the Mayor
that the authorized collector's application or the license be denied,
suspended or revoked or its holder be subjected to a reprimand or fine or
that the generator or originator of the solid waste or recyclable materials
be subject to sanctions, fines or penalties as described herein. Notice and
an opportunity to be heard shall be provided prior to denial, suspension
or revocation of a solid waste license or authorized collector permit or the
issuance of a sanction, fine or penalty.
B. Reports containing the information required as stated above shall be
compiled and delivered to the Village Clerk or other designated
individual for each reporting period, as designated by the regulations
but which shall be no more frequently than quarterly.
C. Authorized collectors shall not accept for collection municipal solid
waste which has not been source-separated in conformity with this
chapter.
A. Notice.
(1) The Mayor shall notify the affected generator, applicant or licensee
of the alleged failure, in writing. The notice shall include the
following:
(a) A statement of the condition allegedly violated, referring to the
pertinent ordinance, law, rule or regulation.
(b) A short and plain statement of the alleged misconduct.
(c) A statement of the time and place of the hearing.
(2) The notice shall be personally served or sent, by registered mail, to
the generator's; applicant's or licensee's last known address, at
least ten (10) days before the hearing date, with a copy to the
administrator.
B. Hearing.
(1) Any hearing shall be conducted by the Village Mayor within a
reasonable period which shall be at least ten (10) days after the
service of notice.
§ 74-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 74-16
1:136
§ 74-17. Enforcement.
§ 74-18. Penalties for offenses.
(2) The generator, applicant or licensee may be represented by counsel
at the hearing and may offer evidence and cross-examine
witnesses.
(3) Within twenty (20) days after the close of the hearing, the Mayor
shall:
(a) Determine whether the alleged failure to comply with this
chapter has occurred; and
(b) If the Mayor determines that such a failure has occurred,
decide whether the generator or applicant shall be subject to a
fine or penalty, whether the applicant shall be denied or
whether existing solid waste license or authorized collector
status shall be suspended or revoked or its holder subjected to
a reprimand and shall issue an order carrying out this decision.
C. Determination, decisions and orders.
(1) Disposition may be made by stipulation, agreed settlements,
consent order, default or other informal method.
(2) The Mayor shall promptly notify the applicant or licensee, in
writing, of a final determination, decision or order.
A. The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the Department of Public
Works and all other persons or agencies as may be designated by
resolution of the Village Board.
B. To assure compliance with this chapter, all portions of vehicles and
containers used to haul, transport or dispose of recyclable materials,
including such containers placed outside residences, shall be subject to
inspection by the Refuse Officer, Code Enforcement Officer and any
other public official designated by the village.
C. The Superintendent of Public Works, the Refuse Officer and the Code
Enforcement Officer may issue appearance tickets for any violations of
this chapter.
A. Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) a day or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days, or both.
B. Any person who aids, abets or assists in a violation of this chapter shall
also be subject to the penalties provided herein.
C. Each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 74-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-19
1:137
§ 74-19. Severability.
If any section, sentence or part of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of this chapter.
§ 74-20. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
Chapter 75
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 11.
Fire prevention and building code
administration — See Ch. 28.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 39.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 72.
Recycling — See Ch. 74.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 74-19 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 74-20
1:138
ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 4-22-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
§ 75-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a registry of all rental property
as herein defined in the Village of Williamsville thereby enabling the
identification of those responsible for the care and management of such
property and ensuring the enforcement of state, federal and local laws and
regulations.
§ 75-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
BUILDING — As defined in § 112-2 (Zoning) of this Code.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date that this article is filed with the Secretary of
State.
OWNER — Any natural person or persons, partnership or corporation,
limited liability company, or any similar type of business association or
proprietary interest, whether for profit or otherwise, in whose name title to
a building is vested.
RENTAL PROPERTY — Any building containing one or more residential
dwelling units (as defined in § 112-2 of this Code) or a mixed commercial/
residential use which is either rented, leased, let or hired out, at least in
part, for residential purposes.
§ 75-3. Registration of rental property.
A. Every owner of rental property shall register such property with the
Building Department by completing a form, known as a "landlord
registration statement," with respect to each rental property owned.
With respect to rental property existing as of the effective date, such
landlord registration statement shall be filed within 60 days of the
effective date. For any property that is constructed, converted to or
otherwise proposed for use as a rental property after the effective date,
such landlord registration statement shall be filed before such use as a
rental property is commenced.
B. Every owner of a rental property shall immediately notify the Building
Department whenever the information provided in a landlord
registration statement that is on file is no longer accurate.
C. A new landlord registration statement shall be filed whenever there is a
change of ownership of the rental property. It is the responsibility of the
new owner to file such statement within 30 days of the closing of title. If
the building is no longer to be used for rental property, the new owner
shall notify the Building Department accordingly.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:139
§ 75-4. Landlord registration statement.
§ 75-5. Penalties for offenses.
D. Any rental property owner who does not file the landlord registration
statement within the time periods defined above shall be subject to a
late fee of $100.
A. The form for the landlord registration statement shall require the
following information:
(1) The property address, the section, block and lot number as stated
on the Tax Map of the County of Erie.
(2) The number of residential dwelling units in the building.
(3) The name, address and telephone number(s) of the owner.
(4) The e-mail address and cell phone number of the owner.
(5) If the owner is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership
or other similar business entity, the name, address (post office box
is not acceptable) and telephone number(s) of a person who shall
be authorized to accept notices and legal process on its behalf.
(6) If the owner does not occupy the rental property, the name, address
(post office box address is not acceptable) and telephone number(s)
of a responsible person or managing agent of the age of 21 years or
older, actually residing or doing business in Erie County, who is
responsible for the care and management of such property and is
authorized by said owner to accept notices and legal process on
behalf of the owner.
B. The landlord registration statement shall be signed by the owner and
witnessed by a notary public and shall contain the following
declaration: "I certify that all information contained in this statement is
true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand
that the willful making of any false statement of material fact herein will
subject me to the provision of law relevant to the making and filing of
false instruments and shall constitute a violation of this article."
A. No rental property shall be occupied by anyone without compliance
with the provisions of this article, and the owner's failure to comply
shall constitute a violation of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article
shall also constitute a violation of this article and be punishable by
criminal fine or subject to civil penalty in an amount not less than $250
nor greater than $1,000. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
§ 75-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 75-5
1:140
Chapter 78
SEWER RENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 81.
§ 78-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish and impose sanitary sewer rents,
pursuant to Article 14-F of the General Municipal Law of the State of New
York, on all properties located within 150 feet of a sanitary sewer and all
properties outside the Village where the Village has contracted to provide
sanitary sewer services.
§ 78-2. Rents established.
§ 78-3. Collection. [Amended 5-23-2016 by L.L. No. 4-2016]
A. The sanitary sewer rents for properties located within the Village
corporate limits shall be established annually by resolution of the Board
of Trustees after a public hearing.
B. Properties located outside the Village corporate limits, which are
connected to the Village sanitary sewer system, shall pay an annual
sewer rent as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees after a
public hearing.
C. Properties shown on the Village Tax Map as unimproved land shall pay
a sewer rent based on an annual rate per $1,000 of assessed value.
D. For all other properties in the Village subject to the payment of sanitary
sewer rents, a scale of charges shall be established by resolution of the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the following:
(1) That part of the total cost attributed to capital costs shall be based
upon the total assessed value of the premises connected with and
served by the sewer system. That part of the total cost attributed to
operation and maintenance costs shall be based upon the volume of
water consumed.
(2) Residential, industrial, institutional or commercial property whose
water supply is not exclusively provided by the Village water
system but which is connected to the sewer system may, at the
discretion of the Village, be required to install and maintain a
meter or other suitable device, at the expense of the owner, subject
to the approval of the Village, for the purpose of measuring the
amount of sewage discharged into the Village sanitary sewer
system.
§ 75-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-3
1:141
§ 78-4. Conflict with other provisions.
In the case of any possible preexisting agreements which address the
reservation of capacity in the local treatment plant or the charges to be
collected by the Village in providing wastewater treatment services,
transporting services or reserving capacity, the system outlined herein
for the establishment and collection of sanitary sewer rents shall take
precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts
between the grantee and users, including users, special districts, other
municipalities, federal agencies or installations, which are inconsistent with
the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(A) of the Clean Water Act of 1977 and
the rules and regulations contained in 40 CFR Part 35, Subpart E (Grants
for Construction of Treatment Works, Clean Water Act).
Chapter 81
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer rents — See Ch. 78.
A. The part of the total cost attributed to capital costs shall be due and
payable at the same time and in the same manner as general Village
taxes and shall be included therein. The part of the total cost attributed
to operation and maintenance shall be due and payable at the same
time and in the same manner as general Village taxes and shall be
included therein.
B. Sanitary sewer rents attributed to capital costs and not paid when due,
plus penalties and interest, shall become a lien on the real property to
which the unpaid rents were charged and shall be added to the next
succeeding county property tax bill. Sanitary sewer rents attributed to
operation and maintenance costs and not paid when due, plus penalties
and interest, shall become a lien on the real property to which the
unpaid rents were charged and shall be added to the next succeeding
county property tax bill.
C. Interest and penalties on the part of the sanitary sewer rent attributed
to capital costs shall be levied in the same manner as interest and
penalties on the Village taxes. Interest and penalties on the part of the
sanitary sewer rent attributed to operation and maintenance costs shall
be levied in the same manner as interest and penalties on the Village
taxes.
D. The Board of Trustees may direct that an action be brought in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the collection of sanitary sewer rents,
penalties and interest.
§ 78-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 78-4
1:142
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 81-1. Purpose and policy.
This chapter sets forth requirements for users of the Sanitary Sewer
Facilities of the Village of Williamsville and enables the Village to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act
(United States Code 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 403). It is further the
explicit purpose of this chapter to achieve the following:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Sanitary Sewer
Facilities that will interfere with its operation.
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Sanitary Sewer
Facilities that will pass through the Sanitary Sewer Facilities
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the Sanitary Sewer Facilities.
C. To protect Sanitary Sewer Facilities personnel who may be affected by
wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the
general public.
D. To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the Sanitary Sewer Facilities.
E. To establish fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance, treatment and improvement of the Sanitary Sewer
Facilities.
F. To enable the Village of Williamsville to comply with all contractual,
environmental and legal discharge elimination system conditions, and
any other federal or state laws to which the Sanitary Sewer Facilities
are subject.
G. To eliminate the discharge of unpolluted waters into the Sanitary Sewer
Facilities.
H. To meet the requirements of the SPDES general permit for stormwater
discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised.
[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
I. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes. [Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
J. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4.
[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
K. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, water
containing pollutants, grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-1
1:143
§ 81-2. Application and interpretation of provisions; administration.
[Amended 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
§ 81-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
EDU — Equivalent Dwelling Unit.
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
gpd — Gallons per day.
IU — Industrial user.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NYSDEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
OSHA — Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment and other
pollutants into the MS4. [Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
A. This chapter shall apply to all direct and indirect dischargers of wastes
into the facilities of the Village of Williamsville and to all water entering
the MS4 generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless
explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. This chapter
also authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides
for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and
provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
B. The engineer of record, or his designee, shall administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The engineer of record, or
his designee, shall supervise the operation of the sanitary sewer
facilities and the pretreatment program. The SMO(s) shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of Article XVI, Storm Sewers, of
this chapter. Such powers granted or duties imposed upon the SMO
may be delegated, in writing, by the SMO as may be authorized by the
Village.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with
the definitions set forth in § 81-4 hereof.
§ 81-1 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-3
1:144
SPDES — State pollutant discharge elimination system.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
ug/l — Micrograms per liter.
USC — United States Code.
§ 81-4. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ABNORMAL-STRENGTH SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER — Sewage which,
when analyzed, shows, by concentration, a daily average greater than the
following; which may be acceptable into a sanitary sewer under terms of
this chapter:
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director of the State of New York
Pretreatment Program or the Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
A. Biological oxygen demand (BOD5): 200 mg/l.
B. Total suspended solids (TSS): 250 mg/l.
C. Total phosphorous (P): 4.4 mg/l.
D. Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN): 21.7 mg/l.
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in
second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.
(2)
A.
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
B.
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or his/her
designee.
C.
The individuals described in Subsection A through C above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
D.
§ 81-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:145
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.[Added
12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
BOD5 — The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C.,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING COMBINED DRAIN — A building drain which conveys both
sewage and storm water.
BUILDING COMBINED SEWER — A building sewer which conveys both
sewage and stormwater. The building storm sewer terminates at the public
sewer.
BUILDING (HOUSE) DRAIN — That part of the lowest piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge of soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys such discharges to the building
sewer.
BUILDING (HOUSE) SEWER — That part of the drainage system which
extends from the end of the building drain and conveys its discharges to
a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system or other
approved point of disposal.
BUILDING SANITARY DRAIN — A building drain which conveys sewage but
does not convey stormwater.
BUILDING SANITARY SEWER — A building sewer which conveys sewage
but does not convey stormwater. The building storm sewer terminates at the
public sewer.
BUILDING STORM DRAIN — A building drain which conveys stormwater,
but does not convey sewage, to an access point or conduit that drains
directly downstream without going through sanitary sewers or wastewater
treatment.[Amended 6-27-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
BUILDING STORM SEWER — A building sewer which conveys stormwater
but does not convey sewage. The building storm sewer terminates at the
public sewer.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
the Village.
§ 81-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-4
1:146
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which
appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.[Added
12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Private establishments such as
restaurants, hotels, stores, automotive service stations, laundromats or
recreational facilities and all other nonresidential occupancies. Private
nonprofit entities such as churches, schools, hospitals or charitable
organizations are considered to be "commercial establishments."
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A combination of individual grab samples of a
wastestream collected within a twenty-four-hour period. For all pollutants
subject to composite sampling requirements, twenty-four-hour flow
proportional composite samples shall be obtained when feasible. If twentyfour-
hour flow proportional composite samples are not feasible, the
engineer of record may allow the collection of time proportional composite
samples. In no case may a composite sample be composed from fewer
than four grab samples. In all cases the individual grab samples must be
adequately spaced so as to ensure a sample that is representative of the
user's daily operations.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Any activity requiring authorization under
the SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
GP-02-01, as amended or revised, including construction projects resulting
in land disturbance of one or more acres. Construction activities include
but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and
demolition.[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS — The standard list of materials,
specifications and standard details of construction as provided by the
Village of Williamsville engineer of record and approved by the Village
Board.
DISTRICT — A service area within or outside the boundaries of the Village
of Williamsville which is tributary to the Village's sanitary sewer facilities.
ENGINEER OF RECORD — The engineer of record of the Village of
Williamsville or his designee.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — A unit of measurement of sewer usage
which is assumed to be equivalent to the usage of an average dwelling unit,
based on water consumption and strength of sewage of a single dwelling
unit, by which all users of the sanitary sewers may be measured. (See Table
at § 81-71.)
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:147
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of
proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to
such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307 of the Act.
FLOW VOLUME — The quantity of wastewater or liquid over a specified
period of time.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a wastestream without
regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
GROUNDWATER — All subsurface water, that part which is in the zone of
saturation.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.[Added 12-17-2007 by
L.L. No. 5-2007]
HIS — The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular
shall include the plural unless indicated otherwise.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface
or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including
but not limited to:[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge
to the MS4, except as exempted in § 81-81A of this article.[Added
12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the sanitary sewer facilities from any nondomestic source regulated
under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Clean Water Act.
Any conveyance which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including
treated or untreated sewage, process water containing pollutants, and
wash water to enter the MS4 and any connection to the storm sewer
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 81-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-4
1:148
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities, GP-0-06-002, as amended or
revised.[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The solid and liquid wastes from industrial
processes, as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastewaters.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURCHARGE — A financial charge levied on
industrial users of the wastewater system for the additional cost of treating
abnormal-strength wastewater.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the sanitary
sewer facilities, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of any
Village permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or
permits issued thereunder or any more stringent state or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II,
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA);" any state regulations contained in any state sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the
Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection,
Research and Sanctuaries Act.
MAY — Is permissive.
MEDICAL WASTE — Any red-bag wastes, including but not limited to
isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products,
pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical
wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.[Added 12-17-2007 by
L.L. No. 5-2007]
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
sewers):[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
NATURAL OUTLET — An outlet that is present in and produced by nature.
NEW SOURCE —
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Williamsville;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
A.
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:149
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
under Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(3)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a "new source" if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces
or adds to existing process or production equipment.
B.
Construction of a "new source," as defined herein, has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do
not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
(2)
C.
§ 81-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-4
1:150
NYSUFPBC — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge which exits the sanitary sewer facilities
into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone
or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of any Village permit, including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in moles per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, or industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste or ballast discharged into water, any of which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of water quality standards.[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the sanitary sewer facilities. This reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes;
or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in § 81-6 of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from preparation, cooking
and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any
dimension.
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:151
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which the Village controls.
RECEIVING WATERS — A natural watercourse or body of water into which
treated or untreated wastewater is discharged.
RECOMMENDED STANDARDS FOR SEWAGE WORKS — The
recommended design, review and approval standards for wastewater
collection and treatment facilities, as published by the Great Lakes - Upper
Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries wastewater and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY SEWER FACILITIES — A treatment works, as defined by Section
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the Village. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment
plant.
SEPTAGE — The contents of a septic tank, cesspool or other nonpublic
wastewater treatment facility which receives sanitary sewage or waste.
SERVICE AREA — Any area contributing wastewater to the Village of
Williamsville sanitary sewer facilities.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater or drainage water.
SEWER DISTRICT — A specific area of the Village, so designated by an
action of the Village Board, in accordance with Village Law, created for the
purpose of the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage.
SHALL — Is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
A. A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
A user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the sanitary sewer facilities (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(1)
Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more
of the average dry-weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the
sanitary sewer facilities treatment plant; or
(2)
Is designated as such by the Village on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sanitary sewer
facilities operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(3)
B.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection B(2)
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sanitary sewer
facilities operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
C.
§ 81-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-4
1:152
SLUG — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 81-6 of this chapter.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS — [Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
SPILL POTENTIAL USER — Any user who uses or stores substances that
may inadvertently be spilled into the Village of Williamsville sewer system
and which potentially have an adverse impact on the sewer system and/or
the Town of Amherst wastewater facilities.
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued by NYSDEC that authorizes the discharge
of pollutants to waters of the state.[Amended 12-17-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes wastewater and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling waters.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, municipal
engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Board of Trustees
to enforce Article XVI. The SMO also accepts and reviews stormwater
requirement, the Village may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not
be considered a "significant industrial user."
DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE WITH WATER QUALITY STANDARDS —
The condition that applies where the Village has been notified that the
discharge of stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have
caused or has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the
violation of an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition,
the Village must take all necessary actions to ensure future discharges
do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality standards.
A.
LISTED WATERS — TERS — The condition in the Village’s MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD (TMDL) STRATEGY —
The condition in the Village's MS4 permit where a TMDL, including
requirements for control of stormwater discharges, has been
approved by EPA for a water body or watershed into which the MS4
discharges.
(1)
The condition in the Village's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL is
approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed into
which an MS4 discharges.
(2)
C.
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:153
pollution prevention plans (SWPPPs), forwards the plans to such agency,
committee, commission, employee, or board of the Village of Williamsville
which may be reviewing any application for a construction activity requiring
submission of a SWPPP, and inspects stormwater management practices.
The Board of Trustees shall appoint such employee, municipal engineer, or
other public official to act as SMO by resolution.[Added 12-17-2007 by
L.L. No. 5-2007]
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and such solids are removable
by laboratory filtration.
TAMPER — To interfere with or bring about an improper situation or
condition, which includes, without limitation, covering or concealing a
sanitary manhole cover, or any other practice which hinders access to the
same.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by NYSDEC as required
by § 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. The 303(d) listed waters are estuaries,
lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality standards
and are not expected to improve within the next two years.[Added
12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.[Added 12-17-2007
by L.L. No. 5-2007]
TOWN — The Town of Amherst.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in any regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency.
UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE — Shall include but not be limited to, drainage
from any catch basin, lake, swamp, pond, swimming pool, outlet for surface
runoff or groundwater, which contain no wastes or wastewaters.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
VILLAGE — The Village of Williamsville.[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Williamsville and
shall include the members of the Village Board acting in their capacities as
Commissioners of the sewer districts.
WASTE — Any liquid, solid or gaseous substance that might be discharged
or discarded into a public sewer.
§ 81-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-4
1:154
WASTEWATER — A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and
stormwaters that may be present.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit to discharge industrial
waste into any sanitary sewer under jurisdiction of the Village or, in a
contracted service area, under the jurisdiction of the Village and the
contracted service area.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
that collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
disposes of the waste residuals.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludge.
WATER CONTAINING POLLUTANTS — Water that is not stormwater, is
contaminated with pollutants and has been or will be discarded.[Added
12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:155

ARTICLE II
General Sewer Use Requirements
§ 81-5. Public sewers.
A. Use of public sewers required.
(1) It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Village of Williamsville any sewage or polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, and except where an appropriate New
York State pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) permit
has been applied for and been received. A valid copy of such a
permit and any modifications thereof must be filed with the
engineer of record.
(2) The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated
within the Village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way
in which there is now located or may in the future be located a
public sanitary sewer of the Village, is hereby required at his
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein as specified in the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after
date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is
within 150 feet of the premises on which the building is located,
measured along a street in the case of one- or two-family dwellings
and within 500 feet for premises containing any other occupancies,
and provided that a connection may be made lawfully thereto.
(3) Buildings, constructed in areas of the Village without public
sewers, that can be readily connected to the public sewer when
available shall have the plumbing so arranged. In the meantime,
septic tanks, disposal fields or other private disposal facilities,
which meet the requirements of the New York State Health
Department and the Erie County Health Department, shall be
installed.
(4) Owners of buildings constructed under these provisions shall,
when making application for a building permit, sign an agreement
to immediately connect to a public sewer when available. Such
agreement is to run with the land.
B. Installation of sanitary drains.
(1) The main sanitary drain for any building shall be hung below the
first floor and exit through the foundation wall to allow six inches
between the basement floor and the pipe invert. All devices
producing wastewater and installed in cellars shall discharge into
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:157
the main sanitary drain at a point within the building above the
level of the exterior finished grade.
(2) All buildings having cellars shall have an adequate sump and sump
pump to which any interior or exterior perimeter drain tile and
floor drains shall discharge. The sump pumps shall discharge into a
storm sewer. Weepers located above cellar floor level and through
the cellar walls are not permitted.
(3) All buildings shall have adequate roof gutters and downspouts
connected to storm drains, which also receive the discharge from
sump pumps and from courts, yards and paved areas on the
property. Such storm drains shall discharge into an existing
stormwater sewer, otherwise it may discharge into an existing road
or ditch or other general drainage ditch if approved by the Village.
Where such points of discharge are not available, the engineer of
record will decide the manner in which the stormwater shall be
collected and disposed.
(4) The building sewer shall not be connected to the building drain
until all foundation wall backfill has been made and the roof
construction of the building completed.
(5) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the Village of Williamsville from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
(6) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for
every building except where special permission is received from
the engineer of record.
(7) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the engineer
of record, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(8) Septic or holding tanks, which are abandoned, shall be required to
be removed or filled with select fill, concrete or other material
approved by the engineer of record. Commercial and industrial
facilities may need to be sampled and tested prior to abandonment,
in accordance with New York State or Erie County regulations.
(9) The following items and/or operations shall comply with the
provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, Village specifications and/or recommended
standards for sewage works:
(a) Building and sewer materials.
(b) Slope of building sewers.
(c) Angle, grade and bedding for building sewers.
§ 81-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-5
1:158
(d) Pipe laying and backfilling.
(e) Connection of the building sewer to the sanitary sewer.
(10)No footing drains, roof drains or other drains carrying surface or
groundwater shall be connected to the building or sanitary sewer. A
sump pump shall be provided wherever required to carry ground
and surface water to a natural outlet or storm sewer.
(11) The use of a main house trap to buildings shall be required. The
main trap must be provided with a fresh-air inlet to ventilate the
system in which plumbing fixtures are to be placed. The main trap
may be placed either within the cellar or outside of the building. If
an outside trap is used, a wye with a cleanout must be provided
inside the building. A fresh-air pipe must be carried to gradeline
and provided with a suitable vent cap. If an inside trap is used, the
fresh-air vent must connect to the top of the trap with a wye and
one-eighth bend and must run to the outside of the building above
grade. The fresh-air vent shall be at least four inches in diameter.
The fresh-air vent on a trap shall not be placed within 10 feet of an
openable window or door. Traps must be placed at a minimum
depth of 36 inches, or frost protection must be provided.
(12) Saddle-type connections to the main sewers shall be made in a
smooth, round hole, machine drilled. The fitting used shall be made
to ensure that it will not protrude into the main sewer. The fitting
shall fit the contour of the inside of the main sewer and be designed
for the size of pipe into which construction is being made. Oneeighth-
inch clearance shall be provided between the fitting and the
hole and between the shoulder of the fitting and face of the main
pipe. These spaces shall be completely filled with waterproof joint
material capable of withstanding any stress or strain likely to be
encountered in normal sanitary sewer construction or
maintenance. The fitting shall be manufactured of either cast
aluminum alloy, vitrified clay pipe or other material acceptable to
the engineer of record and shall be capable of receiving all types of
pipe normally used for house service connections.
(13) All excavations for building or sanitary sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a
manner satisfactory to the engineer of record. Ditches and culvert
pipes for storm and surface water or other utilities disturbed
during the installation of sewers shall be replaced to their original
condition. All driveways and parking areas shall be backfilled with
select fill.
(14) Before commencing work in a highway right-of-way, the
appropriate highway department shall be notified and a permit
taken out. Utility companies as appropriate shall also be notified.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:159
§ 81-6. Prohibited discharge standards; inspection of sump pump
and footing drains.
(15)No connection of sanitary sewer extensions shall be permitted to a
main sewer of the district until infiltration, deflection or other tests
and final inspections have been made and approved by the
engineer of record, in writing. The allowable rate of infiltration
shall not exceed 200 gallons per inch of pipe diameter per mile of
sewer per day. Sewers may be connected to the main sewer system
when they are found upon examination and test to comply with
Village specifications.
(16) Whenever pipe laying is not in progress, the end of the pipe shall be
securely closed with a tight-fitting cover or plug. Any earth or other
material entering the main sewer due to operations of the plumber,
contractor or building owner shall be removed at his expense. All
trenches must be protected by sufficient sheeting and bracing or
other acceptable methods as required by the Village specifications.
(17)Within the highway right-of-way, backfilling and restoration of the
surface shall be in accordance with requirements of the highway
agency having jurisdiction.
(18) An earthen dam made of suitable clay material shall be installed in
the trench of the building sewer per Village specifications. The dam
shall be 24 inches in length and located midway between the main
sewer and the house trap. The purpose of this dam is to prevent the
conduction of the groundwater through the stone trench of the
building sewer. Additional dams as ordered by the Building
Inspector may be required where poor ground conditions or high
groundwater elevations exist.
A. General prohibitions.
(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage or uncontaminated cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
(2) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged
to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to
other approved drainage facilities. Industrial noncontact cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the engineer of record, to a storm sewer or other
drainage facilities. It must be strictly understood that where
approval is given for discharge, a New York State SPDES permit
may be required.
(3) No user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, either directly
or indirectly to any public sewers, any substance or wastewater
which causes pass through or interferes with the operation or
performance of the town's wastewater facilities. In addition, no
§ 81-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-6
1:160
user shall discharge any substance which will cause the town to
violate its SPDES permit, receiving water quality standards, or
contaminate the town's sewage sludge to an extent which restricts
sludge disposal options. These general prohibitions also apply to
all nondomestic users of the town's facilities whether or not the
user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment requirements.
(4) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4
any materials other than stormwater except as provided in § 81-81
of this chapter. [Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
B. Specific prohibitions. The following substances and wastewater are
specifically prohibited from discharge into the town's facilities:
(1) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.5,
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel involved with the
town's sanitary sewer facilities.
(2) Any liquid or vapor containing heat in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity in the wastewater treatment facility and cause
interference with the treatment process, but in no case shall heat
be in such quantities that the temperature at the town's
wastewater treatment works influent exceeds 40° C. 104° F.).
(3) Any water or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at 0° C. 32° F.); also,
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
(4) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
(5) Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the sanitary sewer facilities in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(6) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the sanitary
sewer facilities, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a
closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. 60° C.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(7) Solid or viscous substances in quantities, or of such size, capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in the sanitary sewer facilities
resulting in interference, but in no case solids greater than 1/2 inch
in any dimension.
(8) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
§ 81-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-6
1:161
the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the town's SPDES
permit.
(9) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the sanitary sewer
facilities.
(10) Volumes of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs.
(11) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the engineer of record in accordance with § 81-15 of
this chapter.
(12) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
(13) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the engineer
of record in a wastewater discharge permit.
(14)Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(15) Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the sanitary sewer facilities.
(16) At the point of discharge into the sanitary sewer facilities,
wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter of
more than 10% or any single reading over 20% of the lower
explosive limit of the meter.
(17) Limits for prohibiting certain Bioaccumulative and Durable
Substances are to be the same as those contained in the Town of
Amherst Mass Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual approved
by the Town Board for the Town of Amherst. For purposes of this
item the Village of Williamsville adopts the limits contained in the
referenced Town of Amherst documents.
C. Inspection of sump pump and footing drains upon transfers of property.
[Added 6-27-2016 by L.L. No. 5-2016]
(1) No person shall transfer title to another person nor accept from any
other person the transfer of title to any structure or parcel of land
upon which a structure is located unless and until the Code
Enforcement Officer or other authorized agent of the Village shall
have inspected the sump pump system, footing drains, yard drains
and downspouts on the structure or parcel of land and issued a
certificate of compliance stating that the same are found to be in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Said certificate shall
be valid for a two-year period from the date of issuance.
§ 81-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-6
1:162
§ 81-7. National categorical pretreatment standards.
(2) The sump pump system shall not be determined to be in compliance
unless it is connected to an operational underground bubbler
system properly connected to the storm drain or a French drain,
and in compliance with all other applicable state and local laws,
ordinances and regulations.
(3) This section shall not apply to transfers of property pursuant to the
Federal Bankruptcy Act13, transfers in connection with a partition,
transfers in trust in connection with estate planning where a
beneficiary of the trust continues to reside in the structure,
transfers of remainder interests only where the transferor retains a
life estate, or transfers to a mortgagee or other lienholder pursuant
to a foreclosure.
D. Waiver of certificate of compliance for inspection of sump pump and
footing drains upon transfer of property. [Added 6-27-2016 by L.L.
No. 5-2016]
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized agent of the
Village of Williamsville may temporarily waive the requirement of a
certificate of compliance as a prerequisite to transfer of title, as
specified in § 81-6C, provided that the purchaser:
(a) Shall have filed with the Building Department a written
guaranty to correct any deficiencies to the sump pump system,
footing drains, yard drains and downspouts within a period of
time to be specified by the Code Enforcement Officer or other
authorized agents of the Village; and
(b) Shall have provided a sum, in an amount to be determined on
an annual basis by resolution of the Board of Trustees, which
shall be held in escrow, and which sum shall be returned to the
purchaser if the corrections are completed within the time
specified in the guaranty, but which sum shall be forfeited to
the Village of Williamsville if needed corrections are not
completed within the time specified by the written guaranty.
(2) In the event that the needed corrections are not completed within
the time specified in the written guaranty, the temporary waiver
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized agent
of the Village shall immediately expire and such funds in escrow
shall be forfeited to the Village.
A. Any promulgated national categorical pretreatment standard shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter if
more stringent than these limitations for sources in a particular
13.Editor's Note: See 11 U.S.C. § 101 et seq.
§ 81-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-7
1:163
§ 81-8. State pretreatment standards.
(Reserved)
§ 81-9. Local limits.
Local limits in the Village of Williamsville shall be the same as the limits
set in the Town of Amherst Mass Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual.
Mass-based local limits shall be included in all wastewater discharge
permits, for all users required to be permitted. Discharges which exceed
mass-based local limits, are prohibited. In addition any user which
discharges a pollutant greater than the unallocated reserve for that
pollutant, shall be considered to be in violation of this chapter. Further,
concentration based local limits based on worker health and safety for the
Village of Williamsville shall be the same as the limits contained in the
Town of Amherst Mass Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual and shall
be included in all Wastewater Discharge Permits for all users required
to be permitted. In addition, concentration-based local limits applicable
to unpermitted industrial users are contained in this manual. Discharges,
which exceed concentration-based local limits, are prohibited. The Town
of Amherst Mass Allocation and Pollutant Control Manual and any limits
industrial category. The engineer of record shall notify all affected users
of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
B. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, are hereby incorporated. As new
categorical pretreatment standards are promulgated or existing
categorical standards modified, the engineer of record, within 30 days
of publication in the Federal Register, shall seek Village Board approval
for incorporation into this chapter.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the engineer of record may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
engineer of record shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered
by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment
standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
§ 81-7 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-9
1:164
developed through the use of such manual are duly enforceable by this
chapter.
§ 81-10. Right of revision.
The Village reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to its wastewater facilities if deemed necessary
to comply with the objectives set forth above.
§ 81-11. Dilution.
A. No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement.
B. The Village may impose mass discharge limits on users who are using
dilution to meet any requirement of this chapter or in other cases where
the imposition of mass limits is appropriate.
§ 81-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-11
1:165

ARTICLE III
Pretreatment of Wastewater
§ 81-12. Pretreatment facilities.
The user shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, any applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standards, and all other applicable federal, state
and local pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified
by the applicable pretreatment standards, whichever is more stringent. All
facilities required to pretreat wastewater to an applicable level acceptable
to the town shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Village Board for review and shall
be approved by the engineer of record, subject to the requirements of
applicable codes, ordinances and laws, prior to construction of the facility.
The approval of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this
chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and approved by the engineer of record prior
to the user's initiation of the changes.
§ 81-13. Additional pretreatment measures.
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the engineer of record may require users
to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate
and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams
from industrial wastestreams and such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the sanitary sewer facilities and determine the
user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. The engineer of record may require any person discharging into the
sanitary sewer facilities to install and maintain, on his/her property and
at his/her expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided, replaced and
maintained by industrial or commercial users as required by the
engineer of record and shall service all discharges containing sand,
fats, grease or oils. All interceptors shall be sized in accordance with
the specific sizing criteria established by the manufacturer, based on
calculated loads. The installation of the unit must be installed in
accordance with the applicable plumbing codes and standards. All
required units must be approved by the Village, and, where applicable,
Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI) certified units shall be used. A
food waste grinder is not permitted to discharge into a grease
interceptor unless the interceptor has been designed or rated for such
§ 81-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-13
1:167
§ 81-14. Accidental discharge/slug plans.
At least once every two years, the engineer of record shall evaluate whether
each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control
plan. The engineer of record may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the engineer of record
may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control
plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
§ 81-15. Hauled wastewater.
No hauled waste shall be introduced into the Village of Williamsville
sanitary sewer facilities.
an application, or unless a solids interceptor has also been installed
upstream. The units shall be so located to be easily accessible for
cleaning, inspection and sampling. Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, by the user at his/her
expense, to the satisfaction of the Village. If, in the opinion of the
engineer of record, any existing interceptor units are undersized,
inadequate or in need of repair, the engineer of record can order the
industrial or commercial user to replace that existing unit with a new
interceptor meeting the Village's requirements.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges.
B. Description of stored chemicals.
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the engineer of record of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 81-36 of this chapter.
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include but are not limited to inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
§ 81-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-15
1:168
ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
§ 81-16. Wastewater analysis.
When requested by the engineer of record, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the
request. The engineer of record is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.
§ 81-17. Wastewater discharge and sewer connection permit
requirements.
A. Building sewer connection permits. No unauthorized person shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Village. The owner or his agent
shall make application on a special form furnished by the Village,
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the town. Such plans are
required for single, multiple dwellings, commercial, industrial or public
buildings. The application becomes a permit when signed by the Village
Board or its designated representative. Application is to be made by the
contractor, who must show authorization from the owner. The
contractor must show coverage with such insurance as may be required
by the Village Board. All work performed shall be by a plumber licensed
by the Village.
B. Wastewater discharge permits.
(1) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
sanitary sewer facilities without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the engineer of record, except that a
significant industrial user that has filed a timely application
pursuant to § 81-18 of this chapter may continue to discharge for
the time period specified therein.
(2) The engineer of record may require other users to obtain
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles
X through XII of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or
with any other requirements of federal, state and local law.
§ 81-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-18
1:169
§ 81-18. Existing connections.
All existing users connected to or contributing to the Village's wastewater
facilities shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days
after notification by the engineer of record. After review and evaluation
of the industrial user's application, the Village may issue that user a
wastewater discharge permit. At a minimum, all significant industrial users.
and spill potential users shall be issued permits.
§ 81-19. New connections.
All new industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the
Village's wastewater facilities shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
before connecting to or contributing to these facilities.
§ 81-20. Application contents.
§ 81-21. Application signatories and certification.
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of
my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
§ 81-22. Approval or denial of application.
The engineer of record will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. Within 14 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the engineer of record will
determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The
A. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. The engineer of record may require all users to
submit, as part of an application, the following information:
(1) All information required by this chapter; and
(2) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the engineer
of record to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
§ 81-18 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-22
1:170
engineer of record may deny any application for a wastewater discharge
permit. Any denial or approval will be given in writing to the applicant.
§ 81-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-22
1:171

ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
§ 81-23. Duration of permit.
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three
years. A permit may not be issued for a period less than one year. The user
shall apply to renew his permit a minimum of 180 days prior to expiration
of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may
be subject to modification by the Village during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions
in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, as
determined by the engineer of record.
§ 81-24. Permit contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the engineer of record to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the sanitary
sewer facilities.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed three years.
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable in accordance with § 81-27 of this chapter.
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards.
(4) Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and
local law.
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or
local law.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain but need not be limited to
the following conditions:
§ 81-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-24
1:173
§ 81-25. Permit appeals; effect of other regulations.
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization.
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the treatment works.
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices, necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or nonroutine discharges.
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the sanitary sewer
facilities.
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer
facilities.
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the engineer of record
to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.
A. An industrial user may petition the engineer of record to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 14 days of notice of its
issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the industrial user must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
§ 81-24 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-25
1:174
§ 81-26. Permit modification.
The engineer of record may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including but not limited to the following reasons:
§ 81-27. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation.
§ 81-28. Permit suspension or revocation.
(4) If the engineer of record fails to act within 14 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater
discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances,
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Village.
A. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance.
C. A change in the sanitary sewer facilities that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized
discharge.
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the Village's sanitary sewer facilities, Village personnel or the receiving
waters.
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting.
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit.
A. Suspension.
§ 81-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-28
1:175
(1) The engineer of record shall suspend a wastewater discharge
permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop a
discharge which violates any provision of this chapter or causes the
town to violate any condition of its SPDES permit. This suspension
will normally be given in writing; however, in an emergency, the
suspension shall be verbal.
(2) Any discharger notified of a suspension of his permit shall
immediately stop such discharge. In the event of a failure of the
discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
engineer of record shall take all steps necessary to ensure
compliance.
(3) The Village may reinstate the permit upon written proof of
satisfactory compliance with all discharge requirements of this
chapter.
B. Revocation.
(1) Any user who violates any of the following conditions of this
chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having his permit revoked.
(2) The engineer of record may revoke a wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including but not limited to the following reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the engineer of record of significant changes
to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge.
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the engineer of record of
changed conditions pursuant to § 81-35 of this chapter.
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application.
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(f) Refusing to allow the engineer of record timely access to the
facility premises and records.
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(h) Failure to pay fines.
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility.
§ 81-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-28
1:176
§ 81-29. Permit reissuance.
§ 81-30. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
(3) Wastewater discharge permits shall be deemed null and void upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All
wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void
upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that
user. The Village may reinstate the permit upon written proof of
satisfactory compliance with this chapter.
A. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application within a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration
of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
B. The Village may deny or condition any new or increased discharge to its
system or discharges which have changed with respect to their physical
or chemical character if, in the opinion of the Village, such discharge
would not be in compliance with applicable federal or state or local
pretreatment standards and requirements or where such discharge
would cause the Village to violate its SPDES permit, inhibit or interfere
with the operation and maintenance of the Village's collection and
treatment facilities or concentrate in the sludge and interfere with its
disposal by approved methods.
C. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file an application with the engineer of record.
A. If another municipality contributes wastewater to the sanitary sewer
facilities, the Village Board shall enter into an intermunicipal
agreement with the contributing municipality.
B. Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection A above,
the Village Board shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the sanitary sewer facilities by the contributing municipality.
(2) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the sanitary sewer facilities.
(3) Such other information as the Village Board may deem necessary.
C. An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection A above, shall
contain the following conditions:
(1) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and
§ 81-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-30
1:177
local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 81-9
of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance
and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to
the Village's local law or local limits.
(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis.
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling and enforcement, will be conducted by the
contributing municipality; which of these activities will be
conducted by the engineer of record; and which of these activities
will be conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the
engineer of record.
(4) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
engineer of record with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment
activities.
(5) Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
sanitary sewer facilities.
(6) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge.
(7) A provision ensuring the engineer of record access to the facilities
of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling
and any other duties deemed necessary by the engineer of record.
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement.
§ 81-30 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-30
1:178
ARTICLE VI
Reporting Requirements
§ 81-31. Baseline monitoring reports.
A. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the sanitary sewer facilities shall submit to the engineer of
record a report which contains the information listed in Subsection B
below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new
sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
engineer of record a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection B below. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards.
A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
(1) Identifying information: the name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental permits: a list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations: a brief description of the nature, average
rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the sanitary sewer facilities from the regulated
processes.
(4) Flow measurement: information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the sanitary
sewer facilities from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set
out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants:
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the engineer of record, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily
maximum and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
§ 81-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-31
1:179
§ 81-32. Compliance schedules and compliance schedule progress
reports.
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 81-40 of this chapter.
(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in §§ 81-40 through 81-43 of this chapter.
(6) Certification: a statement, reviewed and signed by the user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to
meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule: if additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant
to this section must meet the requirements set out in § 81-32 of this
chapter.
(8) Signature and certification: all baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 81-21 of this chapter.
A. Compliance schedules. If any industrial user is required to install and
operate a pretreatment or control system for any requirement of this
chapter, the industrial user shall develop and submit a compliance
schedule in accordance with the compliance schedule requirements in
Article VI, § 81-32.
B. Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to compliance schedules required by Article VI, § 81-31B(7) of
this chapter:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. (Such
events include but are not limited to hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction and
beginning and conducting routine operation.)
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the engineer of record
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
§ 81-31 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-32
1:180
§ 81-33. Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
sanitary sewer facilities, any user subject to such pretreatment standards
and/or requirements shall submit to the engineer of record a report
containing the information required by § 81-31B(1) through (6) of this
chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit
of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 81-21
of this chapter.
§ 81-34. Periodic compliance reports.
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to
the established schedule.
(4) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the engineer of record.
A. All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the
engineer of record but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 81-21 of this chapter.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
C. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the engineer of record,
using the procedures prescribed in §§ 81-40 through 81-43 of this
chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
§ 81-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-35
1:181
§ 81-35. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the engineer of record of any planned significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
§ 81-36. Reports of potential problems.
§ 81-37. Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the engineer of record as the engineer of record may
require.
§ 81-38. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the engineer of record within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results
of the repeat analysis to the engineer of record within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the
engineer of record monitors at the user's facility at least once a month or
A. The engineer of record may require the user to submit such information
as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application.
B. The engineer of record may issue a wastewater discharge permit or
modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed
conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include but are
not limited to flow increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
A. In the case of an accidental discharge or slug discharge, it is the
responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the
engineer of record. The notification shall include location of discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions being
taken. Within five days following an accidental/slug discharge, the user
shall submit to the engineer of record a written report describing the
cause of discharge and the measures which will be taken by the user to
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
B. Compliance with this section of this chapter shall not relieve the user of
other liability or expense for damage to the Village of Williamsville
facilities or other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this Article or other applicable law. For
facilities with multiple outfalls to the sewer, the slug restriction applies
to each individual outfall.
§ 81-35 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-38
1:182
if the engineer of record samples between the user's initial sampling and
when the user receives the results of this sampling.
§ 81-39. Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
A. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the engineer of record, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any
discharge into the sanitary sewer facilities of a substance which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.
Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set
forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more
than 100 kilograms (220 pounds) of such waste per calendar month to
the sanitary sewer facilities, the notification also shall contain the
following information to the extent that such information is known and
readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged
during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the
following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this
subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of other changed conditions must
also be submitted under § 81-35 of this chapter. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
the self-monitoring requirements of §§ 81-31, 81-33 and 81-34 of this
chapter.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection A above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms (33 pounds) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms (33 pounds) of nonacute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do
not require additional notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the engineer of
record, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director
and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
§ 81-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-39
1:183
§ 81-40. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. All analysis must be done by a laboratory certified by the New
York State Department of Health for the specific parameters analyzed.
If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
§ 81-41. Sample collection.
§ 81-42. Monitoring facilities.
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.
A. Except as indicated in Subsection B below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event that flow proportional sampling is infeasible,
the engineer of record may authorize the use of time proportional
sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to
show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides
and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
A. The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes or wastes from commercial establishments shall, if
required by the engineer of record, install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessible and safely located and
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the engineer of
record. The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense, and
shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
B. If the source of a discharge in violation of this chapter cannot be
differentiated due to limited sampling locations, it shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to provide adequate sampling
location(s), as designated by the engineer of record, in order to
§ 81-39 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-42
1:184
§ 81-43. Sampling.
All sampling shall be performed at the control manhole provided. In the
event that no special manhole is available, the engineer of record may
consider the control manhole to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
The engineer of record must approve this sample point in writing. All
measurements, tests and analysis shall be performed by a town-approved
laboratory at the expense of the user.
§ 81-44. Timing.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 81-45. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter
and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling
and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques
or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the Village, or where the engineer of record has specifically notified
the user of a longer retention period.
determine the source of the violation. The associated expenses shall be
the burden of the property owner.
§ 81-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-45
1:185

ARTICLE VII
Compliance Monitoring
§ 81-46. Right of entry for inspection and sampling.
Authorized representatives of the Village of Williamsville and
representatives from the USEPA and NYSDEC bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and review and copying
of records, analytical data and charts related to wastewater discharge
monitoring in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 81-47. Search warrants.
If the engineer of record has been refused access to a building, structure
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the Village of Williamsville designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
engineer of record may seek issuance of an order or warrant from a court
of appropriate jurisdiction.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the engineer of record will
be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing
specific responsibilities.
B. The engineer of record shall have the right to set up on the user's
property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
C. The engineer of record may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to
measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a minimum
of once per year to ensure their accuracy.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the engineer of record and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne
by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the engineer of record access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 81-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-47
1:187

ARTICLE VIII
Confidential Information
§ 81-48. Availability of information to public; restrictions.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs and from the engineer of record's inspection and
sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the engineer of record, that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state or federal law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or
data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report
that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the
SPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not
be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
§ 81-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-48
1:189

ARTICLE IX
Significant Noncompliance
§ 81-49. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
A. The engineer of record shall publish annually, in the largest daily
newspaper delivered in the municipality where the sanitary sewer
facilities is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.
B. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or
average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds
the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit
multiplied by the applicable criteria [1.4 for BOD, TSS (unless
approved as surchargeable by the engineer of record), fats, oils and
grease and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH];
(3) Any other discharge violation that the engineer of record believes
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of
sanitary sewer facilities personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the engineer of record's exercise of his emergency authority to
halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s) which the engineer of record determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
§ 81-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-49
1:191

ARTICLE X
Administrative Enforcement Remedies
§ 81-50. Notification of violation.
When the engineer of record finds that a user has violated, or continues
to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the engineer of record may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof,
to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the
engineer of record. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the engineer
of record to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
§ 81-51. Consent orders.
The engineer of record may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include
specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within
a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as any other administrative orders issued pursuant to
§§ 81-53 and 81-54 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable.
§ 81-52. Show-cause hearings.
The engineer of record may order a user which has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
to appear before the Village Board and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user or its
representative or representatives show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 20 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user. A show-cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
§ 81-53. Compliance orders.
When the engineer of record finds that a user has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
§ 81-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-53
1:193
the engineer of record may issue an order, to the user responsible for the
discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided,
sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated.
Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 81-54. Cease-and-desist orders.
When the engineer of record finds that a user has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the engineer of record
may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the user to immediately comply with all
requirements and take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of
a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
§ 81-55. Administrative fines.
A. When the engineer of record finds that a user has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the engineer of record may fine such user in an amount
not to exceed $10,000. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation,
per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period
of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 15 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 9% per month. A lien against
the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and
penalties.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the
engineer of record to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the
fine amount within 15 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request
has merit, the engineer of record may convene a hearing on the matter.
In the event that the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together
§ 81-53 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-55
1:194
§ 81-56. Emergency suspensions.
with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The
engineer of record may add the costs of preparing administrative
enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
E. In determining the amount of the above fines, the engineer of record
may consider factors such as, but not limited to, the nature of the
violations; the magnitude of impact on human health, the environment
and/or the Village's collection and treatment operations caused by the
violation; the user's past violation record; and other relevant factors.
F. Each day on which a violation is found to occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense. A day shall consist of a twentyfour-
hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending the following
12:01 a.m.
A. The engineer of record may immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after oral, telephone or other notice to the user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The engineer of
record may also immediately suspend a user's discharge that threatens
to interfere with the operation of the sanitary sewer facilities or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of an immediate suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the engineer of record may take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, at no cost to the Village, to prevent or minimize
damage to the sanitary sewer facilities or its receiving stream or
endangerment to any individuals. The engineer of record may allow
the user to recommence its discharge when the user has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the engineer of record that the
period of endangerment has passed and payment is made for all
damages resulting from the discharge.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
engineer of record prior to the date of any show-cause hearing.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
§ 81-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-57
1:195
§ 81-57. Termination of discharge.
A. In addition to the provisions in § 81-28 of this chapter, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article II of this chapter.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause, under § 81-52 of this
chapter, why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the engineer of record shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
§ 81-57 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-57
1:196
ARTICLE XI
Judicial Enforcement Remedies
§ 81-58. Injunctive relief.
When the engineer of record finds that a user has violated or continues
to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the engineer of record may commence an action in a court of appropriate
jurisdiction through the Village Attorney for the issuance of a temporary
or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The engineer
of record may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/
or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 81-59. Civil penalties.
§ 81-60. Criminal prosecution.
Any person who shall maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is part of the Sanitary Sewer facilities shall be subject to prosecution
and a penalty not to exceed $1,000 per day of violation or imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both, in addition to civil damages incurred with
such acts.
A. A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the
Village for a civil penalty of up to $10,000 per day of violation. In the
case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties
shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
B. The engineer of record may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the Village.
C. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and
any other factor as justice requires.
D. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 81-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-61
1:197
§ 81-61. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. Enforcement
of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Village's
enforcement response plan. The engineer of record may take any, all or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user.
§ 81-61 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-61
1:198
ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Enforcement Action
§ 81-62. Performance bonds.
The engineer of record may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision
of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such
user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the Village of Williamsville,
in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the engineer of record to be
necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
§ 81-63. Liability insurance.
The engineer of record may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater
discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision
of this chapter, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the
user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient
to restore or repair damage to the sanitary sewer facilities caused by its
discharge.
§ 81-64. Public nuisances.
A violation of any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected
or abated as directed by the engineer of record. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be liable to the Village of Williamsville for any costs
incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
§ 81-65. Contractor listing.
Users, which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, are not eligible to receive a contractual award
for the sale of goods or services to the Village. Existing contracts for the
sale of goods or services to the Village held by a user found to be in
significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements
may be terminated at the discretion of the engineer of record.
§ 81-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-65
1:199

ARTICLE XIII
Affirmative Action to Discharge Violations
§ 81-66. Upsets.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection C, below, are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence, that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset.
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures.
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the engineer of
record within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days.
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue.
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
§ 81-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-66
1:201
§ 81-67. Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 81-6A of this
chapter or the specific prohibitions in § 81-6B of this chapter if it can prove
that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through
or interference and that either:
§ 81-68. Bypass.
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or
fails.
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass
through or interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the town
was regularly in compliance with its SPDES permit and, in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
A. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion
of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence
of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C and D of this
section.
C. Notice to engineer of record.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the engineer of record, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the engineer of record of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
§ 81-66 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-68
1:202
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The
written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its
cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time
it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The engineer of
record may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the
oral report has been received within 24 hours.
D. Conditions for bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited and the engineer of record may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
(2) The engineer of record may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the engineer of record
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in
Subsection D(1) of this section.
§ 81-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-68
1:203

ARTICLE XIV
Wastewater Treatment Rates
§ 81-69. Manual of charges and fees.
The Village Board may adopt a manual of service, tap-in and pretreatment
charges and fees from time to time by resolution. These charges and fees
shall be collected at the time of tap-in, or in accordance with a schedule
determined by the engineer of record.
§ 81-70. (Reserved).
§ 81-71. (Reserved).
§ 81-72. Pretreatment charges and fees.
The Village may adopt charges and fees, which may include:
§ 81-73. Industrial agreements.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Village and any industrial
concern whereby abnormal industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the Village for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial user. However, in no event will a waiver be
granted which could result in a violation of any federal, general or
categorical standard or prohibition.
§ 81-74. Deleterious or surchargeable waste.
If any water or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain abnormal-strength sewage or which,
in the judgment of the engineer of record, may have a deleterious effect
upon the wastewater facilities or receiving waters, or which may otherwise
A. Fees for reimbursement of costs for establishing, operating and
maintaining the Village's pretreatment program.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures.
C. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
D. Fees for filing appeals.
E. Fees for consistent removal (by the Village) of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards.
F. Fees for industrial wastewater discharge permits.
G. Fees for the acceptance of trucked-in waste.
H. Other fees as the Village may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
§ 81-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-74
1:205
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Village Board
may:
A. Reject the wastes;
B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
D. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges. BOD, TKN, TSS
and phosphorous may be considered as surchargeable parameters, if
prior approval is given by the engineer of record. When the engineer of
record determines the volume and character of such wastes to
otherwise be in compliance with all pertinent federal, state and local
regulations and all other provisions of this chapter, and not to cause
overloading of the town's facilities, then approval for such discharge
may be granted subject to payment of a surcharge determined by the
engineer of record.
§ 81-74 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-74
1:206
ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 81-75. Liability to district.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the district for any expense, loss or damage occurred by the district
due to such violation.
§ 81-76. Excessive sewer maintenance expense.
Sewer or sewerage maintenance expenses, which result from a user
violation of any of the prohibited or limited discharge requirements in
this chapter, will be charged to the user in violation. Such maintenance
may include but shall not be limited to stoppage, plugging, breakage, any
reduction in sewer capacity or any other damage to sewers or sewerage
facilities of the Village. The costs charged to the user in violation may
include the costs and expenses for complete restoration of the impaired
facilities to a functional condition.
§ 81-77. Unpaid sewer charges.
Unpaid sewer charges, including fines, shall become a lien upon the real
property upon which or in connection with which sewer services were
provided as of and from the first day fixed for payment of such charges.
Interest shall be due and payable in the same manner as other county taxes.
§ 81-78. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 81-79. Conflicts with other regulations.
In the event of a conflict between any portion of this chapter and any other
Village regulation or local law now in effect, the more restrictive portion
shall apply.
§ 81-80. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
§ 81-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-80
1:207

ARTICLE XVI
Storm Sewers
[Added 12-17-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
§ 81-81. Discharge prohibitions; exemptions.
Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except as
provided below. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows:
§ 81-82. Illicit connections prohibited.
A. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless NYSDEC or the Village has
determined them to be substantial contributors of pollutants: water line
flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn
watering, existing diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm sewers,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains,
crawl space or basement sump pumps, air-conditioning condensate,
irrigation water, springs, water from individual residential car washing,
natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool
discharges, residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting
activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such
exempt discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate
plan for reducing pollutants.
B. Discharges approved, in writing, by the SMO to protect life or property
from imminent harm or damage, provided that such approval shall not
be construed to constitute compliance with other applicable laws and
requirements, and further provided that such discharges may be
permitted for a specified time period and under such conditions as the
SMO may deem appropriate to protect such life and property while
reasonably maintaining the purpose and intent of this article.
C. Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge with a verbal notification to the SMO prior to the
time of the test.
D. The prohibition of illegal discharges shall not apply to any discharge
permitted under a SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of
NYSDEC, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws
and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted
for any discharge to the MS4.
A. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
§ 81-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-82
1:209
§ 81-83. Activities contaminating stormwater prohibited.
§ 81-84. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater pollutants
by use of best management practices.
Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges
or an activity contaminating stormwater, as defined in § 81-83 of this article,
the Village may require implementation of BMPs to control those illicit
discharges and activities.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of connection.
C. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the Village's MS4 SPDES
stormwater discharge permit; or
(2) Cause or contribute to the Village being subject to the special
conditions.
B. Such activities include improper management of pet waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the Village's MS4
SPDES stormwater discharge permit authorization.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES
stormwater discharge permit authorization, that person shall take all
reasonable actions to correct such activities such that he or she no
longer causes or contributes to violations of the Village's MS4 SPDES
stormwater discharge permit authorization.
A. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
B. Any person responsible for a property or premises which is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge or an activity contaminating
stormwater, as defined in § 81-83 of this article, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to
the MS4.
§ 81-82 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-84
1:210
§ 81-85. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the Village prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
§ 81-86. Suspension of access to MS4.
§ 81-87. Access to facilities; monitoring of discharges.
C. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of people, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter, in-writing, of the reasons for the suspension. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to people.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have his or her
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator, in writing, of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor. The
violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines, writing, that
the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to reoccur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to the premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
§ 81-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-87
1:211
§ 81-88. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the Village, in person or by telephone
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The Village shall have the right to set up on any facility subject to
this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the SMO
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater
discharge.
(4) The Village has the right to require the facilities subject to this
article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably necessary
to determine compliance with this article. The facility's sampling
and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own
expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality
shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) An unreasonable delay in allowing the SMO access to a facility
subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person who is
the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an offense if
the person denies the SMO reasonable access to the facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 81-87 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-88
1:212
or facsimile, no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or
by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the Village within three business days of the telephone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 81-89. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Notice of violation. When the SMO finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, he or she may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) That the Village will seek civil remedies or criminal penalties,
including the imposition of a criminal fine, as provided in
Subsection B; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction of a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
§ 81-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-89
1:213
§ 81-90. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the SMO to the Board of Trustees within 15 days of its issuance, which shall
hear the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, and within five
days of making its decision, file its decision in the office of the Municipal
Clerk and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to the discharger.
§ 81-91. Corrective measures after appeal.
§ 81-92. Injunctive relief.
If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article,
the SMO may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining
the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 81-93. Alternative remedies.
misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
C. In the event that the Village incurs cost and expense in the enforcement
of this article or in the remediation of any violation hereof, the party
found to be in violation shall reimburse the Village for such costs and
expenses. Failure to promptly reimburse may subject the party in
violation to a money judgement. Further, any unpaid costs and expenses
may be relevied against the real property tax bill of the property in
question.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may be
given alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
§ 81-89 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 81-93
1:214
§ 81-94. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 81-95. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law, and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
recommendation of the Municipal Attorney and concurrence of the
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional;
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this chapter;
(3) Environmental damage was minimal;
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy the violation; and/or
(5) The violator cooperated in the investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops;
(2) Storm sewer stenciling or storm sewer marking; and/or
(3) River, stream, or creek cleanup activities.
§ 81-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-95
1:215
Chapter 84
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic preservation — See Ch. 47. Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 84-1. Purpose and applicability.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to permit the use of signage
within the Village of Williamsville, while also promoting and protecting
the health, welfare, and safety of the public. The intent of this chapter is
to achieve the following objectives:
(1) Ensure right to free speech as protected under the United States
Constitution;
(2) Establish a clear and impartial process for those seeking to install
signs;
(3) Protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate, and protect the physical appearance of the
community;
(4) Provide structures and uses with effective means of identification
while reducing visual clutter through the prevention of excessive
and confusing sign displays;
(5) Reduce traffic conflicts or hazards by minimizing visual distractions
or obstacles in or visible from the public rights-of-way;
(6) Reduce the adverse effects of signage on the desirable aesthetic of
the Village and on the general environment of the community; and
(7) Enforce and encourage the objectives and goals of the Village
Community Plan.
B. Applicability.
(1) The regulations of this chapter shall govern and control the
erection, enlargement, expansion, renovation, operation,
maintenance, relocation and removal of all signs within the Village
visible from any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or public
space.
(2) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to safety signs, road
signs, historical markers, highway directional signs, or signs
erected by governmental agencies.
§ 81-95 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-1
1:216
§ 84-2. Definitions.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision within this chapter to the
contrary, any sign proposed on local historic landmarks or within
historic districts as designated by Chapter 47 of the Village Code
shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Commission, and is
not subject to review under this chapter. Following the application
procedures of this chapter, the Commission may approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the sign based on the design criteria
of this chapter. It is also tasked with guiding the designs to fit with
the landmark or district where the signs are proposed.
(4) This chapter shall in no event be construed or employed in any
manner to prohibit the customary decoration of premises in any
district during religious, patriotic or holiday seasons.
A. Boards and officers. For the purposes of this chapter, the following
references to agents or officers of the Village shall be interpreted as
noted below.
PLANNING BOARD — The Village of Williamsville Planning and
Architectural Review Board as provided for by Chapter 112 of the
Village Code.
SIGN OFFICER — The administrator and enforcer of this chapter as
appointed by the Village of Williamsville Board of Trustees, and/or its
designee.
B. Terms defined. The following terms and definitions shall apply to this
chapter for the purposes of administration and enforcement.
A-FRAME SIGN — A freestanding sign that is comprised of two sign
faces diverging at an angle of no more than 45° from their adjoined
edge.
A-Frame Sign Example
ALTERATION — Any construction or physical change to a sign or the
supporting members of a sign.
AWNING — An architectural fabric or canvas projection that provides
weather protection, identity or decoration and is wholly supported
by the building to which it is attached, generally comprised of a
lightweight frame structure over which a cover is attached.
AWNING SIGN — A sign that is part of or attached to an awning.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:217
BANNER — A length of fabric or similar material, temporarily strung
between two points, upon which a message is imprinted.
CHANNEL LETTER — A fabricated or formed three-dimensional letter
into which a light source, such as a neon tube, may be placed.
CHANNEL LETTER, REVERSE — A channel letter than has a face and
sides, but no back, and is pinned out from a background surface so as
to produce a halo effect around the letter when illuminated.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any message where the primary purpose
of which is the commercial advertisement or promotion of a commercial
product, event, or service (including content on an internet website
operated for a commercial purpose).
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A freestanding sign commonly associated with
and limited to noncommercial information and directions necessary and
convenient for persons coming on the property, including signs marking
entrances, parking areas, one-way driveways, rest rooms, pickup and
delivery areas, drive-through ATM machines, and hours of business.
Directional Sign Example
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign not attached to any building or
structure, which may be supported by columns or posts.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN — A sign erected and maintained pursuant
to and in discharge of any governmental function or required by any
general law, local law or governmental regulation.
GROUND SIGN — A type of freestanding sign that is mounted on a
base flush with the ground or supported by one or two columns or posts
provided the distance between the ground and bottommost edge of the
sign is no greater than four feet.
Ground Sign Example
ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL — Illumination by a light source located
outside of the sign structure or lettering that is directed at the sign
face.
ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL — Illumination by a light source contained
within the sign structure or lettering.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign containing no commercial message and
typically erected to identify addresses, entrances, exits, restrooms,
§ 84-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-2
1:218
hours and days of operation, public utility locations, emergency
addresses and telephone numbers, etc. These examples are not given
by way of limitation; an incidental sign can contain any noncommercial
message in accordance with this chapter.
Incidental Sign Example
INTERNAL SIGN — A sign that is not intended to be viewed from
outside the property and located so as not to be legible from any
public right-of-way or from any adjacent property, including any signs
in interior areas of shopping centers, commercial buildings and
structures, stadiums, and similar structures of a recreational nature.
LAWN SIGN — A sign constructed of materials not intended for
permanent installation that is attached to a single or multiple posts
for support and stuck into the ground. The height of a lawn sign shall
include any posts or supports. Political campaigns, garage sales, and
charitable events, for example, are often advertised with lawn signs.
Lawn Sign Example
MARQUEE SIGN — A permanent structure attached to the front of
a building and which incorporates a large message area. Typically
illuminated and often ornate in design, a marquee sign projects over the
entrance of the building and provides a canopy over at least a portion of
the sidewalk or street. Marquee signs are often used by movie theaters
and concert halls.
MONOPOLE SIGN — A type of freestanding sign that is supported by
one column or post with a distance exceeding four feet between the
ground and the bottommost edge of the sign.
Monopole Sign Example
NEON SIGN — A sign that incorporates illumination through the use of
neon-type gas.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any lawful sign existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter, or any subsequent amendments thereto, which
does not conform to the regulations of this chapter or to the regulations
of the district in which it is located.
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:219
PAINTED SIGN — A type of sign in which a commercial message,
logo, graphic, and/or other visual elements have been painted on an
approved sign material, or painted directly on a building facade.
Painted signs shall be regulated as wall signs.
PENNANT — A length of fabric, or similar material, suspended from
overhead, upon which a message is imprinted.
PILLAR SIGN — A type of freestanding sign that is supported by two
columns or posts with a distance exceeding four feet between the
ground and the bottommost edge of the sign.
Pillar Sign Example
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is wholly dependent upon a building
for support and which projects more than six inches from such building.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected upon the roof of a building, or sign
where any portion thereof extends above the roofline of the building.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors or adhered to, or located within three feet of an
exterior window that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including
but not limited to words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures,
colors, illumination or project images. "Signs" shall also include all sign
structures. A sign for the purposes of this chapter does not include the
following:
SIGN BOARD AREA — A horizontal band extending the full width of
the building facade and located between the highest first-floor windows
and the cornice, or if there is more than one story, the highest first-floor
windows and the bottom of the second-floor windows.
A flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state or
city, or any fraternal, religious or civic organization;
(1)
Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services
incorporated in a window display;
(2)
Official notices issued by any court or public office or officer in the
performance of a public or official duty;
(3)
Traffic control signs as defined in the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law; and
(4)
Works of art, including murals, which do not contain any
commercial message, logo, graphic, business name or trademark.
(5)
§ 84-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-2
1:220
§ 84-3. Sign permits.
Sign Board Area Example
SIGN TYPE — The design and/or structure of a sign, including ground
signs, wall signs, projecting signs, suspended signs, awning signs, and
window signs.
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign attached to and supported by the
underside of a horizontal plane.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not intended to be used for a
period of time exceeding 30 days and is not attached to a building,
structure, or ground in a permanent manner. Such signs usually being
constructed of poster board, cardboard, masonite, plywood, or plastic
material and mounted to wood, metal, wire or rope frames or supports.
USE — Any business, commercial tenant, event, or other such activity
occurring on any given lot and/or within any building or structure.
VALANCE — A projection of fabric below the main frame of an awning
to create a decorative edge.
WALL SIGN — A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in
such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or
forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project
outward more than six inches from such building or structure.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign visible from a sidewalk, street or other public
place, painted or affixed on glass or other window material, or located
inside within three feet of the window, but shall not include graphics in
connection with customary window display of products.
A. Permit required. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall erect,
alter, construct, relocate or cause to be erected, altered, constructed or
relocated any sign without first having obtained a sign permit.
B. Permit exceptions. The following situations shall not require the
issuance of a sign permit provided such maintenance, changes, or
alterations do not in any way alter the physical size, design, or nature of
the sign.
(1) Repainting, repairing, changing of parts, or ordinary maintenance
of signs, sign area, or sign supports.
(2) Changing the message of a sign using changeable letter sets as
previously approved.
C. Any sign for which a permit has been issued shall not be modified,
relocated, altered, or replaced, unless an amended or new sign permit
§ 84-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-3
1:221
§ 84-4. Application requirements.
is obtained from the Sign Officer. Alterations include new faces, new
vinyl lettering and/or logos, awning recovers etc.
D. Expiration. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit
has been issued is not fully constructed within 180 days from the date of
issuance of the sign permit.
E. Revocation. The Sign Officer or designee may, at any time for a violation
of this regulation, issue a notice of violation. A written notice of the
violation including all reasons for the violation shall be mailed to the
property, building, and/or sign owner. Said violation must be corrected
within 30 days of the date of notice, otherwise the sign permit shall be
revoked and the sign in question shall be required to be removed.
A. Application submittal.
(1) Sign applications shall not be processed until all required materials
have been submitted to the Sign Officer, within the time frames
established by the Sign Officer.
(2) Incomplete applications will not be processed. The Sign Officer
shall provide written or electronic notice of application deficiencies
to applicants. If such deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days
of said notice, the application will be considered withdrawn.
B. Application requirements. The following information shall be provided
in all applications for a sign permit. The Sign Officer may require
application materials to be prepared by a licensed engineer or sign
professional if deemed necessary for adequate review of the proposed
sign.
(1) Name, address, contact information, and signature of the
applicant.
(2) Name, address, and signature of the building and/or property
owner (if not the applicant), and a statement of consent for the
applicant to seek such sign permit.
(3) All application fees as determined by the Village Board.
(4) Site plan and elevations indicating the size, shape, construct,
materials, layout, and proposed location of the proposed sign(s)
drawn to scale.
(5) Photos of the site or building upon which the sign is to be located.
(6) Color illustrations and/or photos of the proposed sign and sign
area.
(7) Proposed illumination system, if any, and the type of lighting to be
used.
§ 84-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-4
1:222
§ 84-5. Review procedures.
(8) Samples of signage materials shall be required when requested by
the Sign Officer or Planning Board.
(9) Any additional information as requested by the Sign Officer or
Planning Board that is deemed necessary for the adequate review
of the proposed sign.
A. Review by sign type.
(1) All sign permit applications for new construction shall be made in
the form of a complete signage package subject to architectural
review by the Planning Board as part of a comprehensive
development application.
(2) All sign permit applications on existing buildings shall require
either administrative review by the Sign Officer and/or Planning
Board review, depending upon the sign type and its design. The
table below indicates the required level of review by sign type.
Table 84-5: Required Review by Sign Type
Sign Officer Planning Board
A-frame sign •
Awning sign •
Externally illuminated sign •
Ground sign •
Marquee sign •
Painted sign •
Projecting sign •
Suspended sign •
Temporary sign •
Wall sign
Area 16 square feet or
less
•
Area over 16 square feet •
Window signs •
(3) All sign permit applications on historically designated properties
shall be subject to the Historic Preservation Committee's review in
the form of an application for a certificate of appropriateness.
(4) Applications for signs that are consistent with a sign plan or
program previously approved by the Planning Board for a project
§ 84-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-5
1:223
or building may also be administratively reviewed, regardless of
sign type.
(a) Exception: No sign plans or programs shall be eligible for
administrative review on historically designated properties
unless a comprehensive signage package was specifically
agreed upon as part of the original certificate of
appropriateness review by the Historic Preservation
Committee.
B. Administrative review procedures.
(1) The Sign Officer may approve, approve with modifications, or deny
a sign application for any signs listed on Table 84-5 as not requiring
a Planning Board review, or any nonstructural or nondimensional
modifications of a sign previously approved under this chapter
(e.g., sign face changes, awning recoverings, etc.). The Sign Officer
shall issue a sign permit only if the sign conforms to all the
applicable standards and requirements of this chapter as well as
any previous requirements of the Planning Board.
(2) The Sign Officer may, at his or her discretion, refer any sign
application back to the Planning Board for review and/or
determination.
(3) Any sign application decision made by the Sign Officer may be
appealed to the Planning Board by any aggrieved person within 30
days of the date of the permit determination by the Sign Officer.
This appeal should be filed with the Building Department.
C. Planning Board review.
(1) The Planning Board shall review and decide upon all sign
applications received from the Sign Officer, or an appeal to the
Planning Board regarding an application. Such review may occur at
any regularly or specially scheduled Planning Board meeting.
(2) The Planning Board may approve, approve with modifications, or
deny a sign permit application. The Sign Officer shall issue a sign
permit within 30 days of approval by the Planning Board.
(3) Development applications subject to review and approval by the
Planning Board may have proposed signage reviewed and approved
as part of the site plan or architectural review process. In the event
of such review, all required sign permit application materials shall
be provided to the Planning Board as part of the site plan or
architectural review application.
(4) With respect to any sign application subject to its review (including
appeals from a determination by the Sign Officer) the Planning
Board may waive any requirements of this chapter upon a showing
by the applicant that unique characteristics of his or her property
§ 84-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-5
1:224
§ 84-6. Measurement.
render strict application with such requirement(s) impractical and
that such waiver is consistent with the overall intent of this chapter.
(5) Any decision by the Planning Board on a sign application is subject
to judicial review as provided by New York Village Law § 7-740.
D. Review criteria. The review of sign permit applications by the Sign
Officer and Planning Board shall be based upon the following criteria:
(1) The scale, color, texture and materials of the sign will be
compatible with the style, color, texture and materials of the
building on which it is located, but also allow for the keeping of
logo integrity such as a trademark logo design and/or color;
(2) The sign is neither confusing or distracting, nor will it create a
traffic hazard or otherwise adversely impact public safety;
(3) The sign follows the design guidelines outlined in § 84-16 to the
greatest extent practicable; and is otherwise compliant with this
chapter.
A. Sign area.
(1) Single sign face. The area of a sign shall be computed by means of
the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or geometric
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem, graphic, and/or other display,
together with any material, backdrop, or structure on which it is
placed. See Figures 1 and 2.
Figure 1: Single Sign Face Area
Figure 2: Individual Letter Sign Area
(2) Multi-faced signs. In the case of a multi-faced sign only one side of
the sign is considered in determining sign area if the sides of the
sign are back-to-back or diverge at an angle of 45° or less.
B. Sign height.
(1) Freestanding sign. The height of a freestanding sign shall be
calculated by measuring the vertical distance between the top part
of such sign or its structure, whichever is highest, to the elevation
of the ground directly beneath the center of the sign. See Figure 3.
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-6
1:225
§ 84-7. Safety provisions for all signs.
§ 84-8. Construction.
Figure 3: Freestanding Sign Height
(2) Other signs. The height of an awning, projecting, suspended, wall,
or window sign shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance between the top part of the sign face or structure,
whichever is highest, to the bottommost edge of the sign face.
A. No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct free egress
from a window, door or fire escape or to become a menace to life, health
or property.
B. No sign shall be erected at or near any intersection of streets, alleys, or
railways in a manner that obstructs free and clear vision for
pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists.
C. No sign shall be of a shape or color that may be confused with any
authorized traffic control device.
D. No rotating beam, beacon, or flashing illumination resembling an
emergency light shall be used with any sign display.
E. The erection of any sign and its supports, including any wiring and/or
electrical components utilized therein, shall be consistent with
generally accepted standards and requirements of the New York State
Building Code.
F. The erection of any sign, its supports, wiring, or other structural and/or
electrical elements may be subject to inspection and approval by the
Sign Officer.
A. All signs shall be constructed of permanent, weather resistant, and
durable materials, except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and
window signs otherwise in conformance with this chapter.
B. Where applicable, signs shall be supported by sign structures that are
designed to resist wind pressures, dead loads, and lateral loads in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of the New York State
Building Code. All sign supports shall be reviewed as part of the sign
design.
C. All sign lettering shall be permanently affixed to the sign. Manual
changeable copy signs shall be enclosed and locked.
D. No sign may be constructed of untreated, unfinished, or unpainted
wood, or other unfinished materials. All wood components of signs must
§ 84-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-8
1:226
§ 84-9. Illumination.
§ 84-10. Location.
§ 84-11. Visibility at intersections.
No freestanding sign or any part thereof exceeding three feet in height,
other than a supporting pole or brace no greater than 18 inches in width
or diameter, shall be located within the designated clear sight triangle of
any intersecting streets. The clear sight triangle shall be defined by the
triangle formed by the curblines of the intersecting streets measured 15
be sealed and protected from the elements. Raw metal signage, such
as sandblasted metal signs, are allowed at the discretion of the Sign
Officer or Planning Board, provided that the mounting methods comply
with this chapter.
A. In no event shall any illuminated sign or lighting device be placed so as
to permit the beams and illumination therefrom to be directed upon a
public street, highway, sidewalk or adjacent premises so as to cause
glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
B. All lighting fixtures shall be dark sky compliant and directed so as not to
cast an illumination of more than two footcandles on adjacent
nonresidential properties or more than 0.1 footcandle on adjacent
residential properties.
C. All illumination shall be a steady, continuous burning of bulbs or lights.
The flashing, blinking, oscillating, rotating or intermittent turning on
and off of any illuminating device is prohibited.
D. Overhead wires or exposed wires on a sign or its supporting members
are prohibited.
E. Permitted lighting fixtures include lanterns, goosenecks, and shielded,
architectural-grade spotlights (See § 112-161 of the Village Code).
Single bar fluorescent tube fixtures are prohibited.
F. Channel lettering and reverse channel lettering may be utilized in
districts where illumination is permitted.
A. No sign shall obscure, alter, or cover the architectural features of any
building.
B. Off-premises signs are prohibited. All signs shall be located on the site
of the use being promoted, identified, or advertised.
C. All freestanding signs, unless otherwise noted within this chapter, shall
be no closer than five feet from the outer edge of the public sidewalk or
15 feet from the curb edge, or pavement edge of the public roadway,
whichever is greater.
§ 84-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-11
1:227
feet outward from the point of intersection of said curblines along such
curblines. This shall apply to all street corners. See Figure 4.
Figure 4: Clear Sight Triangle
§ 84-12. Maintenance and repair.
All signs shall be maintained in safe and good structural condition, in
compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes, and in
conformance with this chapter at all times. Such maintenance includes
replacement of all defective bulbs, parts, materials, painting, repainting,
cleaning, replacement of copy, and other acts required for maintenance of
such sign. If any sign does not comply with these standards, the Sign Officer
may require its removal.
§ 84-13. Removal of signs.
A. Any sign that becomes obsolete, meaning the business, product,
service, event, or other such topic to which it relates ceases operation
or is no longer applicable, must be removed within 60 days of such
termination. An extension may be granted by the Sign Officer upon
written request by the sign owner.
B. The removal of signs shall be the sole responsibility of the sign owner
and/or sign permit holder. If said sign is not removed within 30 days of
the date of written notice by the Sign Officer, the Sign Officer is
authorized to effect its removal.
C. The removal of signs shall include the removal of all sign elements and
related structural supports, returning the building, site, or structure to
its original state.
D. The Sign Officer may remove any sign that is found to be in violation of
this chapter. The property and/or sign owner shall subsequently be
given written notice of such sign removal. If the sign is not claimed
within 10 days of the written notice, the Sign Officer may dispose of
said sign.
E. Any costs incurred for the removal of a sign shall be fully reimbursed to
the Village of Williamsville by the sign owner and/or sign permit holder.
All expenses incurred by the Village in removing such sign shall be a
charge against the property and shall be added to the next taxes
assessed against the property if not paid within 30 days after notice of
said charge is delivered to the owner by certified mail or equivalent
means.
§ 84-11 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-14
1:228
§ 84-14. Signs authorized without permit.
The following types of signs may be erected in the Village without obtaining
a sign permit. Although permits are not required for these signs, they shall
conform to all other requirements of this chapter or may be subject to
removal by the Sign Officer in accordance with § 84-13.
A. Directional signs: Nonilluminated direction signs do not require a
permit provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Directional signs shall be located entirely on the property to which
they pertain and shall not contain a commercial message (e.g.,
business name).
(2) The total of directional signs on any one property shall not exceed
an area of six square feet in a residential district, or 16 square feet
in a nonresidential district.
(3) Directional signs shall not exceed three feet in height.
(4) Directional signs may not extend above the first floor of any given
structure or project beyond property lines.
B. Gasoline or vehicle charging station signs: Signs attached to a gasoline
pump or vehicle charging station shall not require a permit provided
they do not exceed six square feet in area.
C. Governmental signs: Any official sign, public notice, or warning sign
authorized by federal, state or local law, including but not limited to
signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any
government functions. (Example: New York State inspection station or
authorized repair shop identification.)
D. House numbers and nameplates: Address and name of occupant of
premises for a residential structure, not including designations as to
employment or home occupation, are to be limited in size to four square
feet per dwelling unit.
E. Incidental signs: Incidental signs shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) No sign may be illuminated.
(2) No sign may exceed three feet in height and four feet in area.
(3) The cumulative area of all signs shall not exceed 12 square feet.
F. Internal signs: signs within a building not legible from the public rightof-
way or adjacent lots, or any sign within an enclosed outdoor space,
such as an athletic field, where such sign is not legible beyond the
property lines.
G. Lawn signs: Lawn signs shall be in conformance with the regulations
below.
§ 84-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-14
1:229
§ 84-15. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited:
(1) No sign exceeds four square feet in area, and the cumulative area
of all signs on the lot does not exceed 12 square feet.
(2) Business signage placed after a project is completed must be
removed 10 days after the issuance of a CO or job completion,
whichever is shorter.
(3) No sign is illuminated.
H. Neon signs: Neon signs located within a window area shall not require a
sign permit provided they conform to the following:
(1) The neon sign is located within a nonresidential district.
(2) No more than one neon sign per window, covering no more than
10% of the window area.
(3) No more than two neon signs per use.
A. Any sign for which no sign permit was issued, for which a sign permit
was revoked, or any other sign not explicitly authorized herein.
B. Any sign that may be confused with a traffic control sign, signal or
device or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle or any
sign which hides from public view any traffic or street sign, signal, or
device.
C. Any sign that flashes, blinks, rotates, or revolves, or utilizes unshielded
lighting devices, mirrors, or reflectors to outline or provide the
background of a sign.
D. Any derivation of digital or electronic signage which displays animated
or illuminated content.
E. Any sign employing vertical louvered blinds, mechanically changing, or
movable materials.
F. Any sign that is not properly maintained, considered structurally
unsound, hazardous, or otherwise unsafe.
G. Any sign that contains words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic
nature.
H. Any sign that emits audible sounds, odor, or visible matter.
I. Any sign prohibited within a residential district that is located in an
adjacent nonresidential district and is not set back at least 10 feet from
the adjacent residential district property line.
J. Any sign that is located off-premises from the use and/or structure to
which it serves, unless otherwise permitted by this chapter.
§ 84-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-15
1:230
§ 84-16. Sign design guidelines.
The following sign design guidelines are intended to provide applicants,
the Sign Officer, and the Planning Board with guidance for best practices
in addressing issues related to sign compatibility, legibility, placement, and
color. Please refer to the Village of Williamsville Sign Design Preferences
Gallery14 for visual depictions of these guidelines.
K. Any sign that is obsolete or abandoned, advertising an activity,
business, product or service no longer conducted or available on the
premises on which the sign is located.
L. Any sign placed on a curb, sidewalk, hydrant, utility pole, tree or other
object located on or over any public street unless otherwise permitted
by this chapter.
M. Any monopole sign.
N. Any sign that is mounted on wheels or mounted on any structure on
wheels.
O. Any banner, poster, pennant, ribbon, streamer, spinner, or balloon,
unless otherwise authorized by this chapter.
A. Compatibility.
(1) Signs should be constructed of high quality materials that are
compatible with the building form and the desired character of the
area in which they are located.
(2) Signs should be appropriately scaled for the building or site upon
which they are located, so as not to dominate the facade or
streetscape.
(3) Signs on buildings that have a monolithic or plain facade should be
used to create visual interest through appropriate sign design
features, scale, and proportions.
(4) Signs should be designed to include relief in the lettering or sign
face to create shadows and provide depth and visual interest.
B. Legibility.
(1) Hard to read, intricate typefaces should be avoided. The number of
lettering styles on a single sign should be limited to two for small
signs and three for larger signs.
(2) Letters and words should not be spaced too closely together.
Generally, letters should not occupy more than 75% of the sign
area.
14.Editor's Note: The Sign Design Preference Gallery is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 84-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-16
1:231
§ 84-17. Permitted signs by zoning district.
(3) Large areas of blank spaces should be avoided. Generally, 50% or
more blank area should be avoided for boxed sign areas or framed
signs.
(4) Strangely shaped or unnecessarily narrow signs should be avoided.
If an unusual shape is not symbolic it is more likely to be confusing.
C. Placement.
(1) Signs should be so located to respect and complement a building's
facade, utilizing logical signage areas created by existing
architectural details or ornamentation.
(2) Signs should be placed at or near the public entrance to a building
to indicate the most direct access.
(3) Signs located on a building facade should be located in the sign
board area.
D. Color.
(1) Signs should feature substantial contrast between the color and
material of the background and text or symbols.
(2) Sign colors should complement the materials and colors of adjacent
buildings, including accent and trim colors, where applicable.
(3) Use of color and color combinations utilized for signs should be
limited. Generally, a sign should not utilize more than three colors,
including accent colors.
(4) DayGlo™ or flourescent colors should be avoided.
A. Sign types. The following table indicates the sign types permitted
within the Village's zoning districts, as established in Chapter 112 of
the Village of Williamsville Code.
(1) A "•" indicates that the sign type is permitted and may be
illuminated.
(2) A "?" indicates that the sign type is permitted but may not be
illuminated.
(3) A "-" indicates that the sign type is not permitted.
§ 84-16 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-17
1:232
Table 84-17A: Sign Types Permitted by Zoning District.
Zoning Districts
Sign Type R-1, R-2, R-3 R-3M NMU, MU M-1 Requirements
Max number of
signs
1 sign per use 1 sign per use 2 sign per use 2 sign per use As permitted
A-Frame1 - ? ? ? § 84-18A
Awning - - ? ? § 84-18B
Ground ? ? • • § 84-18C
Marquee - - • - Determined by
Planning Board
Painted - - • • § 84-18H
Pole - - • • § 84-18D
Projecting - ? • • § 84-18E
Suspended - - ? - § 84-18F
Temporary1 ? ? ? ? § 84-18G
Wall ? ? • • § 84-18H
Window1 - ? ? ? § 84-18I
NOTES:
1 A-frame, window, and temporary signs shall not be included in the count of total allotted signage
for any one use.
B. Additional signage for developments. Due to the unique identification
needs of residential and multitenant commercial developments,
additional signage may be permitted in accordance with Table 84-17B
below. All signs must be in conformance with § 84-18, where applicable.
Table 84-17B: Additional Development Signage
Number Type
Residential
development
1 per entrance1 Ground sign, max height
4 feet and max area 24
square feet
Multitenant
commercial
development
Per tenant 2 As permitted
Per lot 1 Ground sign, max height
10 feet and max area 32
square feet
§ 84-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-17
1:233
§ 84-18. Regulations by sign type.
Table 84-17B: Additional Development Signage
Number Type
Multistory, multitenant
commercial or mixeduse
building
First floor 1 per tenant As permitted
Upper floor 1 building
identification sign
Special Planning Board
approval required
Corner buildings 1 additional As permitted, must be
identical to signage on
primary facade
NOTES:
1 Shall only apply to entrance points from public streets.
2 Freestanding signs may not be duplicated. Additional signage
must be located on facade.
A. A-frame sign. A freestanding sign that is comprised of two sign faces
diverging at an angle of no more than 45° from their adjoined edge.
(1) Requirements by district.
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
— 1 per use 1 per use 1 per use
Maximum
area
— 6 square feet 6 square feet 6 square feet
Minimum
height
— 3 feet 3 feet 3 feet
Maximum
height
— 4 feet 4 feet 4 feet
Illumination — — — —
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) The sign must be brought in each day at the close of business.
§ 84-17 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-18
1:234
(b) An A-frame sign may be placed within the Village public rightof-
way provided it does not impede pedestrian traffic and does
not block snow storage areas in winter months.
B. Awning sign. A sign that is part of or attached to an awning.
(1) Requirements by district.
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
— — 1 per awning 1 per awning
Maximum area — — 4 square feet 4 square feet
Maximum
height
— — 2 feet 2 feet
Minimum
clearance1
— — 9 feet 9 feet
Illumination — — — —
NOTES:
1 Measured from the elevation of the ground directly beneath the center
of the awning to the bottommost edge of the awning.
Awning Sign Example
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) Awning signs shall be permitted on first-floor awnings only.
(b) A single use may utilize no more than two awnings for signage.
Where a single use has more than one awning, each awning
shall match in color and style.
(c) Where an awning relates to more than one use, each use shall
be entitled to one sign on such awning provided the color and
style of the signs are the same.
(d) Awnings upon which a sign is to be placed shall be comprised
of high-quality, weather-resistant materials designed for
exterior use.
C. Ground sign. A type of freestanding sign that is mounted on a base flush
with the ground or supported by one or two columns or posts provided
§ 84-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-18
1:235
the distance between the ground and bottommost edge of the sign is no
greater than four feet.
(1) Requirements by district.
R-1, R-2,
R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
1 per lot 1 per lot 1 per lot 1 per lot
Maximum area 6 square feet 16 square feet 20 square
feet
30 square feet
Maximum
height
3 feet 3 feet 4 feet 6 feet
Minimum
setback
10 feet 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet
Illumination — — Internal or
external
Internal or
external
NOTES:
1 For residential and multitenant commercial development ground sign
requirements, see Table 84-17B.
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) All ground signs shall have a landscaped area at the base of the
sign. The landscaping shall fully surround the sign and utilize
appropriate plantings so as not to obscure the visibility of the
sign.
(b) All plantings shall be properly manicured and maintained as
the season may require. Dead or decaying plant material shall
be replaced by the sign owner within 30 days of written notice
by the Sign Officer.
(c) Segmental block and/or nonmortared stone is permitted for
sign base materials only if like materials are in use throughout
the principal structure. Landscape timbers are not permitted
sign base materials.
(d) External lighting fixtures may be mounted on the ground or on
the sign. Lighting fixtures mounted on the ground shall be
shielded and directed so as to illuminate only the sign face.
§ 84-18 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-18
1:236
(e) The use of neon tubes may be permitted with Planning Board
review and approval.
D. Pole sign. A type of freestanding sign that is supported by two columns
or posts with a distance exceeding four feet between the ground and
the bottommost edge of the sign.
(1) Requirements by district.
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
— — 1 per lot 1 per lot
Maximum area — — 64 square
feet1
64 square
feet1
Maximum
height
— — 12 feet 12 feet
Minimum
setback
— — 10 feet 10 feet
Illumination — — Internal Internal
NOTES:
1 For every foot over four feet that the sign face is elevated, the
maximum area allowable shall decrease by two square feet.
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) All pole signs shall have a landscaped area at the base of the
sign. The landscaping shall fully surround the sign and utilize
appropriate plantings so as not to obscure the visibility of the
sign.
(b) All plantings shall be properly manicured and maintained as
the season may require. Dead or decaying plant material shall
be replaced by the sign owner within 30 days of written notice
by the Sign Officer.
E. Projecting sign. A sign which is wholly dependent upon a building for
support and which projects more than six inches from such building.
(1) Requirements by districts.
§ 84-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-18
1:237
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
— 1 per use 1 per use 1 per use
Maximum area — 4 square feet 6 square feet 8 square feet
Maximum
height
— 2 feet 2 feet 3 feet
Minimum
clearance1
— 9 feet 9 feet 9 feet
Illumination — — External only External only
NOTES:
1 Measured from the elevation of the ground directly beneath the center
of the sign to the bottommost edge of the sign.
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) Signs shall be located in the sign board area, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Board.
(b) The use of neon tubes may be permitted with Planning Board
review and approval.
F. Suspended sign. A sign attached to and supported by the underside of a
horizontal plane.
(1) Regulations by district.
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
— 1 per use 1 per use —
Maximum area — 6 square feet 6 square feet —
Maximum
height
— 2 feet 2 feet —
Minimum
clearance1
— 9 feet 9 feet —
Illumination — — — —
§ 84-18 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-18
1:238
NOTES:
1 Measured from the elevation of the ground directly beneath the center
of the sign to the bottommost edge of the sign.
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) Signs shall be located in the sign board area, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Board.
G. Temporary sign. A sign which is not intended to be used for a period of
time exceeding 30 days and is not attached to a building, structure, or
ground in a permanent manner.
(1) Regulations by district.
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
1 per use 1 per use 1 per use 1 per use
Maximum
area
6 square feet 12 square feet 24 square feet 24 square feet
Maximum
height
3 feet 3 feet 6 feet 6 feet
Illumination — — — —
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) No sign shall be displayed for more than 30 days in a ninetyday
period.
(b) The display of a sign may be extended for up to two additional
thirty-day periods upon written request to the Sign Officer
setting forth the special circumstances requiring such
extension.
(c) No sign shall project above the first floor of any given building
or beyond property lines.
(d) Incidental banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
spinners, or balloons may be permitted in conjunction with
temporary signage at the discretion of the Sign Officer and/or
Planning Board, provided they are in conformance with this
section.
H. Wall sign. A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in such a
manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or forms the
background surface of the sign and which does not project outward
more than six inches from such building or structure.
(1) Regulations by district.
§ 84-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-18
1:239
§ 84-19. Nonconforming signs.
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
1 per
structure
1 per
structure
1 per facade1 1 per facade1
Maximum area 4 square feet 8 square feet 20% of facade
or 50 square
feet,
whichever is
less
20% of facade
or 50 square
feet,
whichever is
less
Maximum
height
2 feet 2 feet 4 feet 6 feet
Illumination Not permitted Not
permitted
External only Internal or
external
NOTES:
1 All wall signs on any given facade shall be considered as one collective
sign provided the cumulative area of signage does not exceed the
maximum area allowable.
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) Signs shall be located in the sign board area, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Board.
I. Window sign. A sign meant to be visible from a sidewalk, street or other
public place, painted or affixed on glass or other window material, or
located inside within three feet of the window, but shall not include
graphics in connection with customary window product displays.
(1) Regulations by district.
R-1, R-2, R-3
Districts
R-3M
District
NMU, MU
Districts M-1 District
Maximum
number
— — None None
Maximum
area
— — 25% of
window area
50% of
window area
Illumination — — — —
(2) Additional regulations.
(a) Window signs shall not be counted towards the total allotted
signage for any use.
§ 84-18 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 84-19
1:240
Chapter 89
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103.
§ 89-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a local law regulating the
use of public streets and sidewalks of the village and the construction,
maintenance, repair and replacement thereof and to establish orderly
A. Any sign that does not comply with this chapter is eligible for
characterization as a legal nonconforming sign if the sign complied with
all requirements in effect at the time it was erected.
B. Nonconforming signs must be brought into compliance with this
chapter under the following conditions:
(1) The sign is altered in any way, such as size, design, structure, or
type of illumination (except for normal maintenance).
(2) The sign is relocated or replaced.
(3) The property or business to which the sign relates changes
ownership or primary use.
C. Any nonconforming sign that is removed from its position or siting and
not replaced in-kind within 60 days shall be presumed to be abandoned
and discontinued, and therefore may not be restored or re-erected
except in compliance with this chapter.
D. No nonconforming sign may be altered in any way that would increase
its nonconformity with the regulations of this chapter, including but not
limited to area, height, setback, and illumination.
E. A nonconforming sign shall not be repaired, reconstructed or replaced,
except in conformity with all the provisions of this chapter if it is
damaged to an extent that the cost of repairing the sign to its former
condition or replacing it with an equivalent sign equals or exceeds 50%
of the replacement value of the sign so damaged, including labor.
F. Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of a
nonconforming sign or owner of the property on which the
nonconforming sign is located from complying with the provisions of
this chapter regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs. Any
repainting, cleaning, or routine maintenance or repair of the sign or
sign structure shall not be deemed to modify the sign in any way.
§ 84-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-1
1:241
procedures regulating the laying out, construction, reconstruction and
alteration of village streets, sidewalks and alleys and for the periodic
inspection of such streets and sidewalks to the end that the public streets
and sidewalks may provide secure transit for all persons and vehicles
lawfully using them.
§ 89-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A narrow supplementary public thoroughfare for the use of
vehicles or pedestrians, affording access to abutting properties.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street which is open at one end only, the closed end
containing a paved turning area which has a minimum radius of 18
feet.[Added 11-14-1994 by L.L. No. 7-1994]
DRIVEWAY — Any entrance or exit used by vehicular traffic to or from lands
or buildings abutting a street or alley.
PRECAST BRICK PAVER — A brick with minimal water-absorbing qualities,
either regularly or irregularly shaped to create a uniformly paved surface.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated for the construction or
maintenance of a public street or alley. For the purpose of this chapter,
the area between the curbline or outer pavement edge and the edge of the
public sidewalk most distant from the center line of the street shall be the
"public right-of-way," and where no curb and/or sidewalk exists, the area
within eight feet of the outer pavement edge shall be included within the
"public right-of-way," unless a survey of abutting premises shows otherwise.
SIDEWALK — A paved pedestrian way usually located in the public right-ofway.
SNOWPLOW — Any vehicle to which is attached a device to facilitate the
removal and/or displacement of snow accumulations from one location to
another.
STREET — A public thoroughfare, other than a driveway, designed for
vehicular use.
§ 89-3. General provisions.
A. Every owner or occupant of premises fronting on any public street,
alley or grounds shall keep the public sidewalk fronting thereon in good
order and repair and free and clear of snow, ice, dirt and any other
obstruction.
B. (Reserved)15
15.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding removal of snow and ice, was repealed
11-9-2015 by L.L. No. 15-2015. See now § 89-13, Snow and ice removal.
§ 89-1 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 89-3
1:242
§ 89-4. Construction; permits.
C. No person shall brush, sweep, shovel, plow or heap any accumulation of
refuse or any other material into a public street or alley.
D. No person shall plow, sweep, shovel, heap or otherwise deposit snow
onto any public street or alley from any private driveway or approach or
any off-street parking area or cause accumulations of snow on one (1)
property to be deposited upon the public right-of-way in front of any
adjoining property without consent of the owner or occupant or, under
any circumstance, cause snow to be deposited onto or against property
on the opposite side of the street.
E. Plowing of snow shall be in such a manner as to protect free access to
any fire hydrant and to keep the same free and clear of any snow
accumulation.
F. No vault, hatchway or chute under or through a public street or
sidewalk shall be constructed without having first obtained the consent
of the Board of Trustees.
G. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the use of any public
sidewalk, street or alley without having first obtained a permit from the
Mayor, unless under the direction or supervision of a police officer or
fire official.
H. No person shall conduct any exhibition, theatrical or public
performance or operate a vending stand, lunch counter or stand for the
sale of food or drinks or place goods, wares or merchandise for sale on a
public sidewalk or street without having first obtained a permit from
the Mayor.
I. No person, except for a child under 12 years of age or a handicapped
individual, shall operate a motorcycle, bicycle, all-terrain vehicle or any
other motorized vehicle on a public sidewalk.
J. No person shall conduct a footrace on a public sidewalk, street or alley
without having first obtained a permit from the Mayor.
A. The owner of real property fronting or abutting on any public street,
other than a cul-de-sac, shall install, at the owner's expense and
pursuant to specification as established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees, concrete public sidewalks adjacent to the property owned.
Owners of real property fronting on a cul-de-sac shall not be required to
install concrete public sidewalks unless a petition, in favor of
installation of sidewalks on said cul-de-sac, is presented to the Village
Board. Said petition shall be signed by a minimum of 50% of the owners
of real property fronting or abutting said cul-de-sac. [Amended
11-14-1994 by L.L. No. 7-1994]
B. No public sidewalk shall be constructed in any public right-of-way by an
abutting property owner except pursuant to specifications established
§ 89-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-4
1:243
by resolution of the Board of Trustees. An abutting property owner who
constructs a sidewalk in the public right-of-way shall be responsible for
the cost thereof, except that such sidewalk may be constructed wholly
at the expense of the owner of the abutting property or partly at the
expense of the village and partly at the expense of the owner of the
abutting property. Allocation of costs for such sidewalk construction
shall be consistent with § 6-620 of the Village Law. [Amended
8-22-1994 by L.L. No. 4-1994]
C. Upon failure of an abutting property owner to pay the charge for
sidewalk construction, the Board of Trustees may direct that such
unpaid charges be added to the next village tax assessed against the
property.
D. Permits.
(1) No person shall construct, reconstruct, repair or grade a sidewalk,
street or alley nor shall any curb be altered, built or rebuilt,
constructed or reconstructed on any village street or public rightof-
way without having first obtained a written permit issued by the
Building Department. The permit shall specify the slope, grade,
width and location of any sidewalk and the type, method of
construction, location and grade of any curbing.
(2) No street or alley not previously dedicated and accepted for public
use, designed to connect or intersect with an existing public street
or alley, shall be constructed within the village limits unless the
owner of the premises upon which the construction is proposed has
first made application, in writing, to the Village Clerk. The permit
shall require approval by the Board of Trustees.
(3) The permit for such construction may be granted by the Board of
Trustees only after a public hearing. Necessary surveys, plans and
specifications detailing in full the proposed intersection of
connection shall be filed with the Village Clerk at least thirty (30)
days prior to the date scheduled for the public hearing. The
Planning/Architectural Review Board and Traffic and Safety
Committee shall review the proposal and make written
recommendations to the Board of Trustees prior to the public
hearing.
(4) No driveway or private street designed to connect to a public street
from property zoned for mixed use or multiple-family (R-3M) use or
from property subdivided to provide for more than three singlefamily
or two-family dwellings shall be constructed within the
Village unless the owner has first made application, in writing, to
the Village Clerk for a permit. The permit shall require approval by
the Board of Trustees. Before such permit may be granted, all
procedures required under Subsection D(3) of this section shall
also be complied with. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
§ 89-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 89-5
1:244
§ 89-5. Repair of unsafe sidewalks.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or General Crew Chief of the
Department of Public Works shall be charged with the duty of regular
inspection of all public sidewalks in the Village. A sidewalk shall be
deemed unsafe when the same is broken, cracked, lifted, spalled or
scaled to such an extent as to pose a hazard to pedestrian traffic.
[Amended 1-23-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
B. Upon finding that any public sidewalk is unsafe and/or a hazard to the
safe passage of pedestrian traffic, the Code Enforcement Officer or
General Crew Chief of the Department of Public Works shall notify the
owner of the adjoining premises in writing, to undertake a
reconstruction or repair of the sidewalk at the owner's expense, except
where the Village undertakes to bear part of the entire expense thereof.
[Amended 1-23-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]16
C. The Village shall undertake, at its own expense, the repair or
reconstruction of any sidewalk declared to be defective or unsafe as a
result of a tree planted or growing within the public right-of-way.
D. The Village will assume any cost exceeding that of the first 100 linear
feet of public sidewalk replaced. This provision shall be effective only
when the owner of a corner lot is directed to repair or reconstruct both
the side and front walks at the same time.
E. A person constructing, reconstructing or repairing any public sidewalk
shall be obliged to provide barricades and, during the hours of
darkness, appropriate lighting around any excavation or other area of
potential hazard resulting from such work.
F. The owner and the occupant shall be jointly and severally responsible
for compliance with the provisions hereof. Said responsibility shall
include liability for injuries that result from failure to maintain, repair
and keep said walkway in a safe condition for usage or to remove snow,
ice or other obstructions therefrom. [Amended 1-23-2017 by L.L. No.
1-201717]
G. In the case of neglect or refusal of any owner to comply with the
provisions of this section, it shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement
Officer or General Crew Chief of the Department of Public Works to see
that the provisions of this section are enforced and to employ men to do
the work and report the cost of the same to the Village Clerk. The owner
shall be notified of the charges by mail, and upon failure to pay, the
charges shall be placed on the following year's tax roll. [Amended
1-23-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
16.This local law also redesignated former Subsection A as Subsection B and Subsection B as
Subsection A.
17.This local law also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
§ 89-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-6
1:245
§ 89-6. Use of blacktop. [Amended 1-23-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
No public sidewalk shall be paved over with blacktop or blacktop sealer.
Any blacktop or blacktop sealer extending from a driveway or parking area
across a public sidewalk at the time this chapter takes effect shall be
permitted to remain intact unless declared unsafe or hazardous by applying
standards established in § 89-5 of this chapter. Whenever such existing
blacktop or blacktop sealer deteriorates or requires replacement or when
a blacktop drive or parking area abutting the public sidewalk is replaced,
the blacktop or blacktop-sealed public sidewalk area shall be replaced with
concrete.
§ 89-7. Trees planted in public right-of-way.
§ 89-8. Barricades in public right-of-way.
Where no curb exists, no rock, boulder, rod, pipe, landscape timber, railroad
tie, bumper, safeguard or any other barricade shall be placed in the public
right-of-way between the pavement edge and the public sidewalk without
prior written permission of the Board of Trustees. Where no sidewalk and/
or curb exists, any such obstruction is prohibited within eight (8) feet of the
pavement edge.
§ 89-9. Street openings.
A. The planting of a tree in the public right-of-way along any street or alley
or in any public easement or public place shall be prohibited unless
written permission therefor has been granted from the Board of
Trustees.
B. No shrub, fence, sign or other obstruction to visibility more than three
(3) feet in height above finished grade level shall be permitted within
fifteen (15) feet of any street or alley.
C. No wire, guy wire, insulator or other device for the holding of wires or
any sign, placard or other matter shall be attached to a living tree in the
public right-of-way without prior written permission from the Board of
Trustees.
A. It shall be unlawful to open or cause to be opened by cutting or digging
the surface, pavement or soil in any street, alley or public ground for
any purpose without first securing a permit from the Building
Department and paying a fee as established by resolution of the Board
of Trustees.
B. Any street opening shall thereafter be carefully backfilled with bankrun
gravel or crushed stone and well compacted. The surface of the
street shall be restored by the village after the opening has been filled
in and thereafter, if necessary, after any settlement, following the
succeeding winter, but not longer than one year after the first surfacing
has been completed.
§ 89-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 89-9
1:246
§ 89-10. Precast brick pavers.
§ 89-11. Inspection of work.
All work done pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 89-12. Snowplowing by private operators.
Permit regulations and fee shall be as follows:
C. A utility shall file a notice of intent with the Village Clerk prior to
opening the surface of any street. In case of emergency, such notice
need not be filed before opening the street surface but shall be filed
thereafter, as soon as practicable. In no case shall the filing of notice be
made more than 48 hours from the time of making the street opening.
The actual restoring of the street surface shall be borne by the utility
making the opening.
A. In a Mixed Use or Manufacturing District, precast brick pavers may be
installed in lieu of a concrete public sidewalk, in the public right-of-way
and/or between a building front and the inner edge of the sidewalk or in
lieu of a concrete public sidewalk after securing a permit. [Amended
5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
B. No precast brick paver shall be installed without first securing a permit
to be issued by the Building Department. The installation shall be in
accordance with specifications and regulations as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
C. Permit applications shall be made to the Building Department and shall
be accompanied by the following:
(1) A scaled drawing of the affected area, indicating the proposed
location of the pavers and any water and utility valves, manholes or
any other surface fixture.
(2) Written proof that all utilities located in the public right-of-way
have been notified.
(3) The manufacturer's brochure, including the color, size and shape of
the pavers.
(4) The manufacturer's recommended procedures for the
(5) A drawing indicating the finished laid pattern of
(6) The payment of a required fee, as established by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
A. A permit for a private snowplow shall be issued upon application, in
writing, to the Village Clerk. A completed application shall include the
name and address of the snowplow owner, the identification number
§ 89-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-12
1:247
§ 89-13. Snow and ice removal. [Added 11-9-2015 by L.L. No.
15-2015]
Chapter 93
and current registration number of the snowplowing vehicle and a
current certificate of insurance for the vehicle.
B. A fee, as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall be
charged and collected for each vehicle for which a permit is issued.
C. A permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of one year from
June 1 to May 31 and shall be valid for one vehicle only and shall not be
transferred to another vehicle.
D. Any permit issued hereunder shall be revoked if the Superintendent of
Public Works determines, upon inspection, that a private snowplow
operator is in violation of § 89-3D or E herein.
A. Accumulation on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any owner or
occupant of land or premises adjoining a sidewalk in the Village to
permit any snow, ice, dirt or debris to remain upon such sidewalk.
B. Accumulation on buildings adjacent to sidewalks or streets. It shall be
unlawful for any person to permit snow or ice to accumulate upon any
building where it may pose a safety hazard to persons on any street,
sidewalk, or public space in the Village, and it shall also be unlawful for
any person to permit snow, ice or water to fall from such building upon
any street or sidewalk.
C. Performance of work by Village; assessment of costs. Upon due notice,
should the owner or occupant of any building fail to remove any
hazardous snow or ice from the building within 24 hours, the Village
may remedy the abatement of such condition, and the total cost thereof
shall be assessed upon the real property on which the hazardous
condition is found. Such cost shall constitute a lien and charge on the
real property on which it is levied until paid or otherwise satisfied or
discharged and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
collection of delinquent taxes.
D. Imminent hazards to life and safety. Hazardous snow or ice conditions
which pose an imminent threat to life or safety may be removed
immediately, and the cost thereof shall be assessed and collected as
provided in § 89-13C.
E. Penalties for offenses. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$250 per day of violation, or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
15 days, or both. The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this
section shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the
remedies herein provided for penalties and civil action to enjoin or
abate a violation shall be cumulative.
§ 89-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 89-13
1:248
SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building code
administration - See Ch. 28.
Water — See Ch. 107.
Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 93-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOT TUB — A permanent structure intended for group bathing, provided
with a recirculating and/or controlled water supply and located either
within a dwelling unit or out of doors.
SWIMMING POOL — A structure intended for bathing, swimming or diving
purposes, made of impervious material and provided with a recirculating
and/or controlled water supply. For purposes of this chapter, the following
shall be deemed a "swimming pool":
§ 93-2. Permit required.
WADING POOL — Any pool having a water depth of twenty-four (24)
inches or less.
A.
ABOVEGROUND POOL — Any pool having a water depth greater than
twenty-four (24) inches, the base of which is located above finished
grade level,
B.
IN-GROUND POOL — A pool having any water depth, which is located
totally or partially below finished grade level.
C.
A. The installation of any private swimming pool or hot tub having a water
depth greater than twenty-four (24) inches and/or having a capacity
greater than three hundred (300) cubic feet of water, whether wholly or
partially above or below finished grade level, shall require a building
permit and a separate plumbing permit for all plumbing and drainage
connected therewith.
B. Permit applications shall be made to the Building Department and shall
be accompanied by the following:
(1) A current survey of the property, indicating the proposed location
of the pool or hot tub.
(2) Manufacturer's brochure and installation specifications for any
proposed aboveground pool.
(3) Two (2) sets of plans, sealed by a licensed New York State
professional engineer or architect, for any proposed inground pool
§ 89-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-2
1:249
§ 93-3. Permit fee.
Each application shall be accompanied by a permit fee as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 93-4. Permitted location.
§ 93-5. Plumbing.
§ 93-6. Electrical installations.
of capacity greater than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) cubic
feet.
(4) Two (2) sets of plans, sealed by a licensed New York State
professional engineer or architect, and a copy of manufacturer's
installation specifications for any proposed hot tub.
A. A swimming pool or outdoor hot tub is permitted only as an accessory
structure. No swimming pool or hot tub shall be constructed in a
required front yard or exterior side yard.
B. No pool or hot tub, including aboveground decking, shall be located
closer than four (4) feet to any property line nor within ten (10) feet of
any structure or part thereof, nor cover more than ten percent (10%) of
the total lot area.
C. No pool or hot tub shall be located within a horizontal distance of ten
(10) feet from an overhead service-drop conductor or any other open
overhead wiring.
A. All plumbing and drainage connected with an in-ground pool or hot tub
shall be done by a plumber licensed by the village, shall conform to the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Cede and shall
require a plumbing permit issued by the Building Department and
inspection by the Code Enforcement Official. [Amended 8-26-1991 by
L.L. No. 7-1991]
B. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any water from
any pool or hot tub onto a public sidewalk, street or alley or onto any
adjacent properties.
C. Backwash and drain water from any pool or hot tub shall drain into the
sanitary sewer system.
D. If an outside faucet is used for pool-fill, a vacuum breaker shall be
installed on the hose thread of the faucet closest to the pool or hot tub.
A. All electrical equipment, wiring and appurtenances shall conform to the
National Electrical Code and shall, upon completion, be inspected by
the Town of Amherst Building Department, 5583 Main Street,
Williamsville, New York, as the designated electrical inspector
§ 93-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 93-6
1:250
§ 93-7. Fencing.
Chapter 97
TAXATION
performing electrical inspections in the Village of Williamsville, with
all inspection fees being paid directly to the Town of Amherst by the
applicant at the Town rate in effect at the time of inspection, or by
a certified electrical company, as designated by the Board of Trustees
at its annual reorganization meeting, or from time to time as deemed
necessary by said Board. Electrical work shall only be performed by an
electrician licensed within the Town of Amherst, as defined in Chapter
83 of the Code of the Town of Amherst. [Amended 9-8-2009 by L.L.
No. 7-2009; 12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2015]
B. Ground fault interrupters shall be required on all circuits.
A. Swimming pool.
(1) All swimming pools shall be provided with fencing which conforms
to the requirements of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention
and Building Code. [Amended 8-26-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991]
(2) In no case shall the fence exceed six (6) feet in height.
(3) All fencing shall completely surround the pool and shall be not less
than three (3) feet from any pool edge.
(4) A substitute fence material which affords the same degree of
security from unauthorized entry may be used upon first securing
approval in writing from the Code Enforcement Official.
B. Hot tub. Any outdoor hot tub shall afford the same degree of security
from unauthorized entry as a swimming pool.
§ 93-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 93-7
1:251

ARTICLE I
Tax on Utilities
[Adopted 6-11-1974 by L.L No. 1-1974]
§ 97-1. Imposition of tax.
Pursuant to § 5-530 of the Village Law, there is hereby imposed upon the
furnishing of utility services in the Village of Williamsville the tax provided
for in § 186-a of the Tax Law. Such tax shall be at the rate of 1% of gross
income or of gross operating income, as the case may be.
§ 97-2. Payment of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be paid to the chief fiscal officer of the
Village at the same time and in the same manner as returns and payments
to the State Tax Commission are required to be made.
§ 97-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-2
1:253

ARTICLE II
Alternative Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 2-11-1985 by L.L. No. 2-1985]
§ 97-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant the maximum veterans exemption
allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York.
§ 97-4. Statement of maximum exemption. [Amended 1-26-1998 by
L.L. No. 1-1998]
Pursuant to the provisions of Subdivision 2(d) of § 458-a of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, as amended by Chapter 477
of the Laws of 1996, the maximum veterans exemption from real property
taxes allowable pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law is
established as follows:
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 15% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $18,000 or
the product of $18,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate
for the Village of Williamsville.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A, where the
veteran served in a combat theater or combat zone of operations as
documented by the award of a United States campaign ribbon or
service medal, qualifying residential real property also shall be exempt
from taxation to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of such
property; provided, however, that such exemption shall not exceed the
lesser of $12,000 or the product of $12,000 multiplied by the latest
state equalization rate for the Village of Williamsville.
C. In addition to the exemptions provided by Subsections A and B, where
the veteran received a compensation rating from the United States
Veterans' Administration because of a service-connected disability,
qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of the product of the assessed value of such property multiplied
by 50% of the veteran's disability rating; provided, however, that such
exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $60,000 or the product of
$60,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the Village of
Williamsville.
§ 97-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-4
1:255

ARTICLE III
Change in Assessment of Property
[Adopted 10-28-1985 by L.L No. 5-1985]
§ 97-5. Proportional increase or decrease in exemption.
If the ratio between the exemption for veterans granted under § 458 of the
Real Property Tax Law and the total assessed value of the real property
for which such exemption has been granted increases or decreases due
only to a full-value assessment in the Village of Williamsville, the amount
of the exemption heretofore or hereafter granted shall be increased or
decreased in the same proportion as the total assessed value is increased or
decreased.
§ 97-6. Property affected.
The exemption granted pursuant to this article shall be granted to real
property for which an exemption has been granted pursuant to § 458 of
the Real Property Tax Law on the assessment roll immediately preceding
the change in level of assessment, provided that property is owned by the
veteran or by another person eligible to receive such exemption.
§ 97-7. Manner of making adjustment.
The adjustment provided for in § 97-5 shall be made by the Assessor in
the manner provided in Paragraph 3 of Subdivision 1 of § 458 of the Real
Property Tax Law. No application therefor need be filed by or on behalf of
any owner of any eligible property.
§ 97-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-7
1:257

ARTICLE IV
Senior Citizen Exemption
[Adopted 12-14-1987 by L.L. No. 8-1987]
§ 97-8. Exemption stated. [Amended 8-26-1991 by L.L. No. 7-1991;
3-12-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
An exemption from taxation of a variable percent of assessed valuation
is granted to those property owners 65 years of age or over who have
owned their home more than two years and whose annual income meets the
following criteria:
Income Range
Percentage
of Exemption
$0 to $12,025 50%
$12,026 to $13,025 45%
$13,026 to $14,025 40%
$14,026 to $15,025 35%
$15,026 to $15,925 30%
$15,926 to $16,825 25%
$16,826 to $17,724 20%
§ 97-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-8
1:259

ARTICLE V
Citizens with Disability Exemption
[Adopted 7-26-1999 by L.L. No. 2-1999]
§ 97-9. Disability exemption stated.
Effective September 1, 1999, an exemption from taxation of a variable
percent of assessed valuation is granted to those property owners who meet
the criteria of disability as defined in New York State Real Property Tax Law
§ 459-c and whose annual income meets the following criteria:
Income Range
Percentage
of Exemption
$0 to $12,025 50%
$12,026 to $12,525 45%
$12,526 to $13,205 40%
$13,206 to $13,525 35%
$13,526 to $14,025 30%
$14,026 to $14,525 25%
$14,526 to $15,025 20%
§ 97-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-9
1:261

ARTICLE VI
Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board
[Adopted 8-13-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001]
§ 97-10. Establishment; members.
An Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board for the Village of
Williamsville consisting of the Mayor and four Trustees is hereby
established. The Mayor shall act as the Chairperson.
§ 97-11. Reports.
The Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board shall, within a time to
be fixed by the Village Board, present a report and plan concerning the
following:
§ 97-12. Considerations of Board.
In developing the plan and report, the Board shall consider the planning
objectives of the Village and the areas thereof within which exemptions
pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 485-b shall be offered, the necessity
of the exemption to the attraction or retention of business, the creation or
retention of permanent private sector jobs, the need to allow the exemption
to provide employment opportunities and broaden the tax base and other
factors the Board deems relevant.
A. The various types of business real property which should be granted
eligibility for exemption from taxation and specific ad valorem levies
authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
B. Limiting the applicability of the exemption to specific divisions and
major groups as delineated in the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS). [Amended 2-28-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
C. Whether the exception shall be computed in the manner specified in
Subdivision 2 or 12 of Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
D. Specific geographic areas of the Village within which the exemption
should be offered.
E. Reduction of the per centum of exemption otherwise allowed pursuant
to Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
F. The minimum value of construction, alteration, installation or
improvement required to qualify for the exemption.
G. Other actions deemed desirable to improve the economic climate within
the Village.
H. Other factors as the Village Board may direct.
§ 97-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-13
1:263
§ 97-13. (Reserved)
§ 97-14. (Reserved)
§ 97-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 97-14
1:264
ARTICLE VII
Industrial and Commercial Exemption
[Adopted 8-13-2001 by L.L. No. 4-2001]
§ 97-15. Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board report.
[Amended 2-28-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
The report and recommendation of the Industrial and Commercial Incentive
Board, dated September 2011, as commissioned, is hereby adopted.
§ 97-16. Classification categories; eligible business types.
[Amended 2-28-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 97-17. Computation of exemption. [Amended 2-28-2012 by L.L.
No. 4-2012]
The cost of construction, alteration, installation or improvement of eligible
properties must exceed $50,000 to qualify for the exemption as computed
pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 485-b of the New York State Real Property
Tax Law.
§ 97-18. Periodic program review and report.
The Village Board shall periodically reconvene an Industrial and
Commercial Incentive Board for the purpose of reviewing the impact of
the New York State Real Property Tax Law § 485-b program, including the
defined enhancement areas. The reconvened Incentive Board shall, upon
conclusion of their review, report back to the Williamsville Village Board
with recommendations.
A. Eligibility for exemption from taxation and specific ad valorem levies
authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 485-b shall be available in the
following classification categories:
(1) Enhancement areas, as shown on the maps of enhancement areas
set forth in the final report and recommendation of the ICIB dated
September 2011 which are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this article. The maps of the enhancement
areas shall be maintained on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
B. Eligibility for exemption shall be restricted to those businesses which
are found only in the designated enhancement areas and have an
eligible land use classification as delineated in the North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS).
§ 97-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 97-18
1:265
Chapter 100
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 89. Zoning — See Ch. 112.
§ 100-1. Purpose and legislative intent.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform standards for the
siting, design, permitting, maintenance, and use of wireless
telecommunications facilities in the Village of Williamsville consistent
with federal, state and local law.
B. By enacting this chapter, the Village intends to:
(1) Provide for the managed development of wireless
telecommunications facilities in a manner that enhances the
benefits of wireless communication and accommodates the needs
of Village residents, businesses and wireless carriers in accordance
with federal, state and local laws and regulations;
(2) Establish fair, nondiscriminatory and efficient processes for review
and approval of applications to deploy telecommunications
facilities on private and public property that address the
appropriate design, siting, construction, installation, maintenance
and removal of such facilities in the Village;
(3) Address and provide for new wireless technologies, including but
not limited to small wireless facilities, micro cell and distributed
antenna systems ("DAS") technologies;
(4) Encourage, to the maximum extent practicable, the co-location of
telecommunications facilities on existing structures, rather than
the construction of new support structures; and
(5) Protect Village residents and businesses from potential adverse
impacts of wireless communication facilities, to the extent
permitted under law, by providing safeguards to:
(a) Protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community
by ensuring that such facilities do not present a physical
danger to persons or property by ensuring proper locational,
engineering and operational requirements;
(b) Minimize adverse visual and aesthetic impacts of such facilities
to the maximum extent practicable through careful design,
siting, landscaping, screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
§ 97-18 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-1
1:266
§ 100-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated. Terms not specifically defined herein shall, to the extent
applicable, have the meanings defined in the Communications Act of 1934,
47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or
other applicable federal, state or local laws or regulations, as such laws and
regulations may be amended from time to time.
ACCESSORY OR ANTENNA EQUIPMENT — Any equipment serving or
being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities and
located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications
facilities, including, but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment,
power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings,
cabinets and storage sheds, shelters, buildings and similar structures and,
when co-located on a structure, is mounted or installed at the same time as
an antenna.
ANTENNA — An apparatus designed for the purpose of emitting
radiofrequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed
location pursuant to authorization from the FCC, for the provision of
personal wireless service and any commingled information services. For
purposes of this definition, the term "antenna" does not include an
unintentional radiator, mobile station, or device authorized under Part 15 of
Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
ANTENNA FACILITY — An antenna and associated antenna equipment.
APPLICATION or SITING APPLICATION — A written submission requesting
authorization for the deployment of a wireless telecommunications facility
at a specific location.
BASE STATION — A structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables
FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user
equipment and a communications network.
(c) Protect against excessive interference with the use of public
rights-of-way;
(d) Protect property values of the community;
(e) Minimize the impact of such facilities on historic resources and
residential properties and neighborhoods.
(f) Protect residents' ability to receive high-quality
communication signals without interference from other
communication providers, while not unreasonably limiting
competition among communication providers.
The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated with
wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and
public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed
wireless services such as microwave backhaul.
A.
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:267
CO-LOCATION — Consistent with the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
(NPA) for the Co-location of Wireless Antennas, means:
DEPLOY or DEPLOYMENT — The placement, construction, or modification
of a wireless telecommunications facility on any property or structure
within the Village.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS) — Network of spatially separated
antenna sites connected to a common source that provides wireless
communication service within a geographic area or structure.
EAF — The Environmental Assessment Form approved by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation and set forth in 6 NYCRR
617.20.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FACILITY or PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — An antenna
facility or a structure that is used for the provision of personal wireless
service [as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(7)(C)(i)], whether such service is
provided on a standalone basis or commingled with other wireless
communications services.
FCC or COMMISSION — The Federal Communications Commission, or its
duly designated and authorized successor agency.
The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration
(including small wireless telecommunications facilities, distributed
antenna systems and micro cell networks).
B.
The term includes any structure that supports or houses equipment
described in Subsection A through B above that has been reviewed
and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, even if the
structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing
such support, but does not include any structure that, at the time the
relevant application is filed with the Village under this chapter, does
not support or house equipment described in Subsection A to B of this
section.
C.
Mounting or installing an antenna facility on a preexisting structure;
and/or
A.
Modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an
antenna facility on that structure.
B.
With respect to wireless facility modifications, "co-location" means the
mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible
support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio
frequency signals for communications purposes.
C.
§ 100-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-2
1:268
HEIGHT — When referring to a structure, the distance measured from the
preexisting grade level to the highest point on the structure, including the
antenna and any other appurtenances.
HISTORIC PROPERTY OR RESOURCE — Any property or structure that has
been designated a landmark pursuant to Chapter 47 or that is listed, or
eligible for listing, on the National or State Register of Historic Places.
LARGE WIRELESS FACILITY — Any wireless telecommunications facility
that is not a small wireless facility.
LARGE WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT or LWFP — A permit to deploy a large
wireless facility issued pursuant to this chapter.
MICRO CELL FACILITY — Low-powered wireless base stations that function
like cells in a mobile wireless network, typically covering targeted indoor or
localized outdoor areas ranging in size from homes and offices to stadiums,
shopping malls, hospitals, and metropolitan outdoor spaces. A micro cell
facility meets both the following qualifications: i) each antenna is located
inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case
of an antenna that has exposed element, the antenna and all of its exposed
elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic
feet; and ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 17 cubic feet in volume.
MODIFICATION — The improvement, upgrade or expansion of existing
wireless communication facilities, or the improvement, upgrade or
expansion of the wireless communications facilities located within an
existing equipment compound if the improvement, upgrade, expansion or
replacement does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless communication facilities.
MONOPOLE — A wireless communication support structure which consists
of a single pole designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure,
to support wireless communication antenna and accessory equipment.
NIER — Nonionizing electromagnetic radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint
stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common
interest, or any other entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any way over which the public possesses the
right to travel, which heretofore has been duly laid out, adopted and
established by law, whether publicly owned or not. The term "road" includes
state, county and Village highways and roads, streets, squares, places,
courts, boulevards, parkways and other ways however designated to which
the public has access.
REPLACEMENT — The replacement of existing wireless communication
antenna on any existing support structure or on existing accessory
equipment for maintenance, repair or technological advancement with
equipment composed of the same wind loading and structural loading that
is substantially similar in size, weight, and height as the existing wireless
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:269
communication antenna and which does not substantially change the
physical dimensions of any existing support structure.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY — A wireless telecommunications facility,
including but not limited to DAS and micro cells, that meets each of the
following conditions:
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY PERMIT or SWFP — A permit to deploy a
small wireless facility issued pursuant to this chapter.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communication facilities which render them more visually appealing or
which serve to blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or
visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to
the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to,
architecturally screened roof-mounted facilities, building-mounted antenna
painted to match the existing structure, and facilities constructed to
resemble trees, shrubs, light poles, and the like.
STRUCTURE — A pole, tower, base station, or other building, whether or
not it has an existing antenna facility, that is used or to be used for the
provision of personal wireless service (whether on its own or commingled
with other types of services).
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification substantially changes the
physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the
following criteria:
The facilities:
Are mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height, including their
antennas [as defined in 47 CFR 1.1320(d)]; or
(1)
Are mounted on structures no more than 10% taller than other
adjacent structures; or
(2)
Do not extend existing structures on which they are located to a
height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10%, whichever is
greater; and
(3)
A.
Each antenna (excluding associated antenna equipment) is no more
than three cubic feet in volume; and
B.
All other wireless equipment associated with the facility (excluding
antennas and backup power and related backup power equipment) are
cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume; and
C.
The facility does not require antenna structure registration under 47
CFR 17.4; and
D.
The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency
radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47
CFR 1.1307(b) and 1.1310.
E.
§ 100-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-2
1:270
TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT — Equipment that facilitates transmission
for any Commission-licensed or authorized wireless communication service,
including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiberoptic
cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes
equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but
not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as
unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul.
UTILITY POLE — A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
for the purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or wires for
telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control,
signage, or a similar function regardless of ownership, including Village-
The mounting of a proposed antenna on existing towers, that would
increase the original height of the tower by more than 10%, or by the
height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other
eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by
more than 10% or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater;
A.
The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve the installation
of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for
the technology involved, not to exceed four, or more than one new
equipment shelter;
B.
The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve adding an
appurtenance to the body of an existing wireless telecommunications
support structure that would protrude from the edge of the original
support structure more than 20 feet, or more than the original width
of the support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever
is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an
appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the
edge of the structure by more than six feet, except that the mounting of
the proposed antenna may exceed the size limits herein if necessary to
shelter the antenna from inclement weather or to connect the antenna
to the support structure via cable;
C.
The mounting of the proposed antenna would involve excavation
outside the current existing structure site, defined as the current
boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the existing
structure and any access or utility easements currently related to the
site;
D.
The modification defeats concealment and/or stealth elements of the
support structure; or
E.
The modification does not comply with prior conditions of the approval
for the existing structure and/or site; provided, however, that this
limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only
in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified above.
F.
§ 100-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:271
owned poles or poles owned by other utility companies. Any utility pole in
excess of 50 feet shall be deemed a tower.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A structure, facility or
location designed or intended to be used as, or used to support, antennas,
along with any antennas located on such structure and any accessory
equipment. It includes, without limit, freestanding towers, guyed towers,
monopoles, DAS, micro cell or small wireless facilities on utility poles in
the public right-of-way or property of the Village or within the Village
and similar structures that employ stealth technology, including but not
limited to structures such as a multistory building, church steeple, silo,
water tower, sign or other similar structures intended to mitigate the visual
impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such. It includes any
structure, antennas and accessory equipment intended for transmitting
and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging, 911, personal
telecommunications services, commercial satellite services, microwave
telecommunications or other wireless or cellular communication
technologies, but excluding those used exclusively for the Village's fire,
police and other dispatch telecommunications, or exclusively for private
radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, amateur radio
and other similar telecommunications.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER — A wireless
telecommunications infrastructure provider or a wireless
telecommunications services provider.
§ 100-3. Permits for wireless telecommunications facility.
A. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, no person shall be
permitted to deploy, or prepare any site for the deployment of, a
wireless telecommunications facility without having first obtained
either a small wireless facility permit (SWPFP) for the a small wireless
facility or a large wireless facility permit (LWFP) for a large wireless
facility, as applicable.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, any
application for a wireless telecommunications facility that does not
substantially change the dimensions of a wireless telecommunications
facility shall not require a SWFP or a LWFP, but such modification may
require a building permit or other administrative approval from the
Village Code Enforcement Officer.
C. The repair and/or maintenance of an existing wireless
telecommunications facility that does not substantially change the
dimensions of such facility shall not require a SWFP or a LWFP.
D. All applications for a SWFP or a LWFP shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. However, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary herein, where appropriate, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
waive any requirements set forth in this chapter relating to an
application for, or approval of, a wireless telecommunications facility
permit, provided that it would further the purposes of this section.
§ 100-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-3
1:272
§ 100-4. Application for small wireless facility permit.
E. In addition to the requirements set forth for the issuance of a SWFP or
LWFP, any telecommunications provider seeking to deploy a wireless
telecommunications facility in the public right-of-way or on public
property shall also obtain a license for such deployment from the Board
of Trustees as provided for in § 100-13A(1) and § 100-23A(1) herein.
F. In the event any conflict exists between any applicable federal or state
laws or regulations and any provision of this chapter, the provisions of
the most recently adopted applicable federal or state laws or
regulations shall be applied and control.
A. An application for a SWFP shall be in writing and contain all of the
information required by this chapter as well as such other information
as reasonably requested by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. No application shall be accepted and no SWFP shall be issued for a
property where the Code Enforcement Officer has found, or there
exists, a violation of the Village Code and where such violation has not
been corrected.
C. An application for a SWFP shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by
the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than the
applicant, shall also sign the application. At the discretion of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, any false or misleading statement in the application
may subject the applicant to denial of the application without further
consideration or opportunity for correction.
D. The applicant must provide documentation to verify it has a legal
interest in the site, if not within the public right-of-way. Said
documentation may be in the form of a deed, contract or sale or lease
for the property, depending on whether the applicant is the property
owner, contract-vendee or lessee.
E. The applicant shall include a statement, in writing, that:
(1) The applicant's proposed small wireless facility shall be maintained
in a safe manner and in compliance with all conditions of the SWFP,
without exception, as well as all applicable and permissible federal,
state and local laws, statutes, codes, rules and regulations; and
(2) The construction of the small wireless facility is legally permissible,
including, but not limited to, the fact that the applicant is
authorized to do business in New York State.
F. If proposing a new structure for the purpose of supporting a small
wireless facility, the application shall be accompanied by a map which
shows the applicant's existing and proposed area of coverage. Such
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-4
1:273
map must locate all existing wireless telecommunications facility sites
within the Village and within 1/2 mile of the proposed small wireless
facility.
G. In addition to all other required information as stated in this section, all
applications for the construction or installation of new small wireless
facility or modification of an existing small wireless facility shall contain
the following information:
(1) A descriptive statement of the objective(s) for the new facility or
modification including and expanding on a need such as coverage
and/or capacity requirements;
(2) Documentation that demonstrates and proves the need for the
small wireless facility to provide service primarily and essentially
within the Village. Such documentation shall include, but not be
limited to:
(a) Information relating to all other wireless telecommunications
facilities or antennas associated with such wireless
telecommunications facilities that are to be deployed in the
Village in conjunction with the proposed small wireless facility;
(b) Propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining
planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites that
demonstrate a significant gap in coverage and/or if a capacity
need, including an analysis of current and projected usage;
(3) The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the
report;
(4) The name, address, and phone number of the property owner,
operator and applicant;
(5) The postal address and Tax Map parcel number of the property;
(6) The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated;
(7) The size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a survey prepared by a licensed professional
surveyor showing the location of all lot lines, if the proposed small
wireless facility is located outside the public right-of-way;
(8) The location of the nearest residential structure;
(9) The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures
on the property which is the subject of the application;
(10) The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping and fencing, if the proposed small wireless facility is
located outside the public right-of-way;
(11) The number, type and model of the antenna(s) proposed, with a
copy of the specification sheet;
§ 100-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-4
1:274
(12) The make, model, type and manufacturer of the utility pole,
monopole or other structure on which any antenna or accessory
equipment for a small wireless facility is to be located and a design
plan stating the structure's capacity to accommodate multiple
users;
(13) A site plan describing any new proposed structure and antenna(s)
and all related fixtures, accessory equipment, appurtenances and
apparatus, including but not limited to height above preexisting
grade, materials, color and lighting;
(14) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment;
(15) The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum
effective radiated power (ERP) in watts of the antenna(s);
(16) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s);
(17) Applicant's proposed maintenance and inspection procedures and
related system of records;
(18) Documentation justifying to the total height of any proposed
antenna and structure and the basis therefor. Such justification
shall be to provide service within the Village, to the extent
practicable, unless good cause is shown;
(19) Certification that NIER levels at the proposed site will be and
remain within the current threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
(20) A signed statement that the proposed installation will not cause
physical or RF interference with other telecommunications devices;
(21) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
wireless telecommunications facilities;
(22) Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and
analysis has been conducted, and that, taking into account the
subsurface and substrate, and the proposed drainage plan, the site
is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities on the proposed site, though the
certifying engineer need not be approved by the Village; and
(23) Information relating to the expected useful life of the proposed
small wireless facility.
H. The applicant shall furnish written certification that the small wireless
facility and attachments are designed and will be constructed to meet
all local, county, state and federal structural requirements for loads,
including wind and ice loads. If the wireless facility is subsequently
approved and constructed, as-built certification indicating that the
facility has been constructed in accordance with all standards shall be
§ 100-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-4
1:275
§ 100-5. Requirements for small wireless facility permit.
furnished to the Village prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy
or compliance.
I. All proposed small wireless facilities shall contain a demonstration that
the facility will be sited so as to minimize visual intrusion to the
maximum extent practicable based upon the facts and circumstances
involved with the proposed site and facility, will employ stealth
technologies as directed by the Zoning Board of Appeals, where
appropriate and feasible, and will thereby have the least adverse visual
effect on the environment, the character of the community, surrounding
properties and on the residences in the area of the wireless
telecommunications facility.
J. All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate nonrefundable
application fee, as established by the Village Board and set forth in the
Village Fee Schedule, in addition to any other fee required by applicable
law.
A. Design. All small wireless facilities shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safetyrelated
codes, including but not limited to the most recent editions of
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. All small wireless
facilities shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction personnel,
so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or any
property in the Village.
B. Wind and ice. All small wireless facilities structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as
amended).
C. Aviation safety. Small wireless facilities shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
D. Public safety communications. Small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services enjoyed
by occupants of nearby properties.
E. Radio frequency emissions. A small wireless facility shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not
limited to the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to
§ 100-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-5
1:276
§ 100-6. Location of small wireless facilities.
Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended. When a small
wireless facility is complete, as-built readings will be taken and
submitted to the Village.
F. Maintenance. To the maximum extent practicable, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) Small wireless facilities shall be fully automated and unattended on
a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the
facility in order to promote the safety and security of the Village's
residents.
(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(4) The owner or operator of a small wireless facility shall maintain
standby power generators or batteries capable of powering the
small wireless facility for at least 12 hours without additional public
utility power and indefinitely with a continuous or replenished fuel
supply, where appropriate. Such standby power shall activate
automatically upon the failure of public utility power to the site.
A. Small wireless facilities must be deployed in accordance with the
following priorities, Subsection A(1) being the highest priority and
Subsection A(8) being the lowest priority.
(1) Co-location on existing utility poles, monopoles or other wireless
telecommunications facility support structures on lands owned or
controlled by the Village, not including the public rights-of-way;
(2) Co-location on a site with existing wireless telecommunications
facilities or other wireless telecommunications facility structures in
the Village;
(3) On other lands owned or controlled by the Village including but not
limited to the Village public right-of-way;
(4) On lands owned or controlled by other municipal corporations
within the Village, to the extent permitted by such other municipal
corporation;
(5) On nonresidentially zoned properties;
(6) On residentially zoned properties;
(7) On or adjacent to any historic property or resource; and
(8) No small wireless facilities shall be permitted within Glen Park.
§ 100-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-6
1:277
§ 100-7. Height of small wireless facilities.
A small wireless facility shall be no higher than the minimum height
necessary to provide effective service. The proposed height, which may
be in excess of maximum height permitted for other structures in the
applicable zone, shall address any additional height necessary to
accommodate co-location by additional antenna arrays, but under no
circumstances is the height to be in excess of what is permitted for a small
wireless facility.
§ 100-8. Setback of small wireless facilities.
All wireless telecommunications support structures for a small wireless
facility located outside the public right-of-way shall be set back from the
property line of the lot on which it is located a distance equal to not less
than the total height of the facility, including support structure, measured
from the highest point of such support structure to the finished grade
elevation of the ground on which it is situated, plus 10% of such total height.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce such setback requirements based
upon consideration of lot size, topographic conditions, adjoining land uses,
landscaping, other forms of screening and/or structural characteristics of
the proposed support structure.
§ 100-9. Visibility of small wireless facilities.
B. If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above,
then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a
higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception
must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a
special use permit should be granted for the proposed site and the
hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not
granted for the proposed site.
C. An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site
proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall
address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the
applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning
Board of Appeals why co-location is commercially impracticable.
D. Notwithstanding the above, the Zoning Board of Appeals may approve
any site located within the Village, provided that it finds that the
proposed site will further the purposes of this section, is in the best
interest of the safety, public welfare, character and environment of the
Village and will not have a deleterious effect on the nature and
character of the community and surrounding properties.
A. All small wireless telecommunications facilities shall be sited so as to
have the least adverse visual effect on the built or natural environment
of the Village, on existing vegetation and on the residents in the area of
the wireless telecommunications facilities sites. If lighting is required,
the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as
§ 100-6 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-9
1:278
§ 100-10. Determination procedures for small wireless facilities.
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under federal,
state and local laws, statutes, codes, rules or regulations.
B. Both the small wireless telecommunications facility and any and all
accessory equipment shall maximize use of building materials, colors
and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be
affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings.
C. A small wireless telecommunications facility shall not be artificially
lighted or marked, except as required by law.
D. Electrical and land-based telephone lines extended to serve the
wireless telecommunications services facility sites shall be installed
underground.
E. Stealth technologies, consistent with design guidelines, if any, adopted
by the Village Board, shall be required to be employed in an effort to
blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
F. Landscaping shall be provided, if appropriate.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals may, at its discretion, require a public
hearing on any application for a SWFP.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant, grant with conditions or deny
the application for a SWFP within the time frames set forth herein, and
it shall render its determination, based upon substantial evidence in the
record, in writing.
C. In granting any SWFP, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such
conditions and safeguards to such permit as are, in its opinion,
necessary to ensure initial and continued conformance to all applicable
standards and requirements, including the incorporation of stealth
technologies or other measures which mitigate adverse visual impacts
and may require that such facility be designed and constructed in
accordance with design guidelines, if any, adopted by the Village Board.
D. Time frames for determination.
(1) Within 60 days of receipt of a complete application for the colocation
of a small wireless facility on a preexisting utility pole,
monopole or other existing wireless telecommunications facility
support structure, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a final
decision on whether to approve, approve with condition or deny the
application and shall notify the applicant in writing of such
decision.
(2) Within 90 days of receipt of a complete application for a small
wireless facility on a new utility pole, monopole or other new
wireless telecommunications facility support structure, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall make a final decision on whether to approve
§ 100-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-10
1:279
§ 100-11. Recertification of small wireless facility permit.
the application and shall notify the applicant in writing of such
decision.
(3) Within 10 days of receipt of an incomplete application for a small
wireless facility, the Village shall notify the applicant in writing of
any supplemental information required to complete the application.
Upon receipt of an applicant's supplemental information in
response to the initial notification of incompleteness by the Village,
the applicable shot clock will reset to zero and the Village shall
have the full 60 days or 90 days permitted by law to act on the
completed application.
(4) For any subsequent determinations of incompleteness beyond the
initial, the Village shall notify the applicant of any required
supplemental information within 10 days of receipt of the
supplemental submission and such notice shall toll the applicable
time frames until the applicant submits the required supplemental
information.
(5) Batching.
(a) If a single application seeks authorization for multiple
deployments, all of which fall within a category set forth in
either Subsection D(1) or (2) of this section, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall render its determination within the time
periods provided in the applicable subsection;
(b) If a single applicant seeks authorization for multiple
deployments, the components of which are a mix of
deployments that fall within Subsection D(1) or (2) of this
section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall render its
determination within 90 days.
(6) All time periods set forth in this section reference calendar days.
(7) The time frames set forth herein may be extended by mutual
agreement of the applicant and the Zoning Board of Appeals, or
upon a determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals, set forth in
writing and based upon substantial evidence, that, despite its best
efforts, the Zoning Board of Appeals could not complete its review
of such application consistent with all applicable requirements
within such time frames.
A. At the five-year anniversary date after the issuance of any SWFP and for
all subsequent fifth anniversaries thereafter, the holder of the SWFP
shall submit a signed written document with the following information
to the Village Code Enforcement Officer confirming the compliance of
the small wireless facility with the SWFP. Such submission shall include
the following:
§ 100-10 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-11
1:280
§ 100-12. Additional requirements relating to small facility permits.
(1) The name of the holder of the SWFP for the small wireless
telecommunications facility.
(2) The date of the original granting of the SWFP.
(3) Whether the small wireless facility has been modified since the
issuance of the SWFP and, if so, in what manner.
(4) Any requests for waivers or relief of any kind whatsoever from the
requirements of this section and any requirements for a SWFP.
(5) Certification that the small wireless facilities are in compliance
with the original SWFP and in compliance with all applicable codes,
laws, rules, regulations, federal certification requirements
including but not limited to this section.
(6) Certification that the wireless telecommunications facility support
structure, attachments and accessory equipment have been
designed and constructed (as built) and continue to meet all local,
county, state and federal structural requirements for loads,
including wind and ice loads. Such certification shall be by a
professional engineer licensed by the State of New York.
B. If the holder of a SWFP provides all of the information required under
Subsection A to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall recertify the SWFP for an additional
five-year period.
C. If the holder of a SWFP does not submit the certifications in Subsection
A within the time frame noted in Subsection A, such SWFP shall
terminate and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease to
exist on the date of the fifth anniversary of the original issuance of the
permit, or subsequent fifth anniversaries, unless the holder of the
SWFP adequately demonstrates to the Code Enforcement Officer that
extenuating circumstances prevented a timely submission of such
written certification, in which case the holder of the expired small
wireless permit may submit a late recertification request or application
for a new small wireless permit.
A. Noncommercial usage exemption. Village residents utilizing satellite
dishes, citizen and/or band radios, and antenna for the purpose of
maintaining television, phone, and/or Internet connections at their
residences shall be exempt from the regulations relating to small
wireless facilities enumerated in this section.
B. Prohibited on certain structures. No small wireless facility shall be
located on single-family detached residences, single-family attached
residences, twin homes, duplexes, or any residential accessory
structure.
§ 100-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-13
1:281
§ 100-13. Regulations applicable to SWFPs on Village-owned
property or within public rights-of-way.
A. In addition to the applicable SWFP provisions listed in this chapter, any
application to deploy a small wireless facility on Village-owned property
or within a public right-of-way owned or controlled by the Village shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) License. An applicant to deploy a small wireless facility on Villageowned
property or within a public right-of-way owned or controlled
by the Village must obtain a license from the Board of Trustees that
fairly and reasonably compensates the Village for the costs
associated with such deployment.
(a) In the case of deployments within a public right-of-way owned
or controlled by the Village, such costs shall be limited to those
costs that are objectively reasonable approximations of the
costs incurred by the Village relating to such deployment in the
right-of-way, which costs shall be adopted by the Village Board
and included in the Village's schedule of fees.
(b) Any license issued pursuant to this section shall require the
applicant, to the extent permitted by law, to at all times defend,
indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the Village
and its elected officials, officers, board members, employees,
committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants from
any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of
any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award
of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses
arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise
out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection,
modification, location, product performance, use, operation,
maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or
restoration of said facility; excepting, however, any portion of
such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of
damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional
acts or omissions of the Village or its servants or agents. With
respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced
herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and
expert witness fees are included in those costs that are
recoverable by the Village.
(2) Location. Small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way shall be
co-located on existing wireless telecommunications facilities,
whenever possible. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the
applicant shall locate its small wireless facility on existing utility
poles or other structures that do not already act as wireless
telecommunications facility support structures.
(3) Design requirements:
§ 100-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-13
1:282
(a) All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
(b) Antenna and accessory equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure and may be required to be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support
structure upon which they are mounted.
(c) The small wireless facility shall be designed to be consistent
with the design guidelines, if any, adopted by the Village.
(4) Equipment location. Small wireless facilities and any accessory
equipment in the public right-of-way shall be located so as not to
cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the public
right-of-way as determined by the Village. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted accessory equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb, or within four feet of the edge of the cartway, or within an
easement extending onto a privately owned lot.
(b) To the extent feasible, accessory equipment, exclusive of
antenna, shall be placed underground. Ground-mounted
accessory equipment that cannot be placed underground shall
be screened from surrounding views, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of landscaping or other decorative
features to the satisfaction of the Village. Ground-mounted
accessory equipment shall be screened, when possible, by
utilizing existing structures. If screening by utilizing existing
structures is not possible, ground-mounted accessory
equipment shall be made architecturally and aesthetically
compatible with the surrounding area through the use of
coatings, landscaping, and/or screening walls, enclosures or
other stealth technology to the satisfaction of the Village.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Village.
(d) Any graffiti on any small wireless facility support structure or
any accessory equipment shall be removed within 30 days
upon notification by the Village at the sole expense of the
owner.
(e) Any proposed underground vault related to small wireless
facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the Village.
(f) Accessory equipment attached to a small wireless facility
support structure shall have such vertical clearance as the
Zoning Board of Appeals may determine.
§ 100-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-13
1:283
§ 100-14. Applications for large wireless facility permit.
(5) Relocation or removal of small wireless facilities in the public rightof-
way. In addition to the removal provisions set forth in § 100-26,
within 90 days following written notice from the Village, or such
longer period as the Village determines is reasonably necessary, or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a
small wireless facility and any accessory equipment in the public
right-of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, or change the position of any small wireless
facility or accessory equipment when the Village, consistent with
its police powers and any applicable federal and/or state
regulations, shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
(a) To construct, repair, maintain or install any Village or other
public improvement located in the public right-of-way;
(b) To prevent the interference with the operations of the Village
or other governmental entity, in the public right-of-way;
(c) Abandonment of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Village Board.
A. An application for a LWFP shall be in writing and contain all of the
information required by this chapter as well as such other information
as reasonably requested by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. No application shall be accepted and no LWFP shall be issued for a
large wireless facility on a property where the Code Enforcement
Officer has found, or there exists, a violation of the Village Code and
where such violation has not been corrected.
C. An application for a LWFP shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by
the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than the
applicant, shall also sign the application. At the discretion of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, any false or misleading statement in the application
may subject the applicant to denial of the application without further
consideration or opportunity for correction.
D. The applicant must provide documentation to verify it has a legal
interest in the site where the large wireless facility is to be located. Said
documentation may be in the form of a deed, contract or sale or lease
for the property, depending on whether the applicant is the property
owner, contract-vendee or lessee.
§ 100-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-14
1:284
E. The applicant shall include a statement, in writing, that:
(1) The applicant's proposed large wireless facility shall be maintained
in a safe manner and in compliance with all conditions of the
special use permit, without exception, as well as all applicable and
permissible federal, state and local laws, statutes, codes, rules and
regulations; and
(2) The construction of a large wireless facility is legally permissible,
including, but not limited to, the fact that the applicant is
authorized to do business in New York State.
F. The application shall be accompanied by a map in graphical form and in
AutoCAD® or compatible drawing exchange file format, which shows
the applicant's existing and proposed area of coverage. Such map
should locate all existing facility sites within the Village and within one
mile of the Village in bordering communities.
G. In addition to all other required information as stated in this section, all
applications for the construction or installation of new large wireless
facilities, or any substantial change to an existing large wireless facility,
shall contain the following information:
(1) A descriptive statement of the objective(s) for the new facility or
modification including and expanding on a need such as coverage
and/or capacity requirements;
(2) Documentation that demonstrates and proves the need for the
large wireless facility to provide service primarily and essentially
within the Village. Such documentation shall include propagation
studies of the proposed site and all adjoining planned, proposed, inservice
or existing sites that demonstrate a significant gap in
coverage and/or if a capacity need, including an analysis of current
and projected usage;
(3) The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the
report;
(4) The name, address, and phone number of the property owner,
operator and applicant;
(5) The postal address and Tax Map parcel number of the property;
(6) The zoning district or designation in which the property is situated;
(7) The size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a survey prepared by a licensed professional
surveyor showing the location of all lot lines;
(8) The location of the nearest residential structure;
(9) The location, size and height of all existing and proposed structures
on the property which is the subject of the application;
§ 100-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-14
1:285
(10) The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping and fencing, if the proposed facility is located outside
the public rights-of-way;
(11) The number, type and model of the antenna(s) proposed, with a
copy of the specification sheet;
(12) The make, model, type and manufacturer of the support structure
and a design plan stating the support structure's capacity to
accommodate multiple users;
(13) A site plan describing the proposed support structure and
antenna(s) and all related accessory equipment, fixtures,
structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above
preexisting grade, materials, color and lighting;
(14) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment;
(15) The actual intended transmission power stated as the maximum
effective radiated power (ERP) in watts of the antenna(s);
(16) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s);
(17) Applicant's proposed support structure and accessory equipment
maintenance and inspection procedures and related system of
records;
(18) Documentation justifying to the total height of any wireless
telecommunications facility support structure and the basis
therefor. Such justification shall be to provide service within the
Village, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown;
(19) Certification that NIER levels at the proposed site will be and
remain within the current threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
(20) A signed statement that the proposed installation will not cause
physical or RF interference with other telecommunications devices;
(21) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
wireless telecommunications facilities;
(22) Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and
analysis has been conducted, and that, taking into account the
subsurface and substrate, and the proposed drainage plan, the site
is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities on the proposed site;
(23) Identify the proposed location of emergency power supply and the
decibel level emitted during testing and operation;
(24) Information relating to the expected useful life of the proposed
large wireless facility;
§ 100-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-14
1:286
(25) Construction details for the proposed tower, supporting structure,
and base, including specifications for the maximum height of the
tower or structure the proposed base could support; and
(26) Information relating to intended future co-locations on the large
wireless facility that may result in a further increase in the size or
height of the proposed large wireless facility.
H. In the case of a new wireless telecommunications facility support
structure for a large wireless facility, the applicant shall be required to
submit a written report demonstrating its efforts to secure shared use
of existing wireless telecommunications support structure(s) or the use
of alternative existing buildings or other structures within a one-halfmile
radius of the site proposed. Copies of written requests and
responses for shared use shall be provided to the Zoning Board of
Appeals with the application, along with any letters of rejection stating
the reason for rejection. Acceptable reasons for rejection include:
(1) The proposed antenna and accessory equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing building or other structure, and
its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(2) The proposed antenna and accessory equipment would cause radio
frequency interference with other existing equipment for that
existing building or other structure and the interference cannot be
prevented at a reasonable cost.
(3) Such existing buildings or other structures do not have adequate
location, space, access, or height to accommodate the proposed
equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.
(4) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with
the owner of such building or other structure.
I. The applicant shall furnish written certification that the wireless
telecommunications facility, structure, foundation, attachments and
accessory equipment are designed and will be constructed to meet all
local, county, state and federal structural requirements for loads,
including wind and ice loads. If the large wireless facility is
subsequently approved and constructed, as-built certification
indicating that the large wireless facility has been constructed in
accordance with all standards shall be furnished to the Village prior to
issuance of any certificate of occupancy or compliance.
J. The applicant shall submit a completed long-form EAF. Based on
circumstances of each application for a large wireless facility, the
Zoning Board of Appeals may require submission of a detailed visual
analysis.
K. All proposed large wireless facilities shall contain a demonstration that
the facility will be sited so as to minimize visual intrusion as much as
possible given the facts and circumstances involved with the proposed
§ 100-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-14
1:287
§ 100-15. Requirements for large wireless facility permit.
Large wireless facilities are permitted only in the M-1, MU and NMU Zoning
Districts and are subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed
below:
site and facility, will employ stealth technologies where appropriate,
and will thereby have the least adverse visual effect on the
environment, the character of the community, surrounding properties
and on the residences in the area of the large wireless facility.
L. The applicant shall, in writing, identify and disclose the number and
locations of any additional sites that the applicant has been, is or will be
considering, reviewing or planning for wireless telecommunications
facilities in the Village, and all municipalities adjoining the Village, for a
two-year period following the date of the application.
M. All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate nonrefundable
application fee, as established by the Village Board and set forth in the
Village Fee Schedule, in addition to any other fee required by applicable
law, and shall deposit funds, in an amount to be determined by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, into an escrow account held by the Village to
allow the Zoning Board of Appeals to retain such technical experts and
other consultants as may be necessary to review the proposal,
including, but not limited to, the review of financial and technical
aspects of the proposal and of the financial, legal and technical
practicability of alternatives which may be available to the applicant.
A. Construction and design. All large wireless facilities shall be designed,
constructed, operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in
strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including but not limited to the most recent
editions of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code,
National Electrical Safety Code, and National Electrical Code. Any
large wireless facilities shall at all times be kept and maintained in good
condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and construction
personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life of any person or
any property in the Village.
B. Wind and ice. All large wireless facilities structures shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind gusts and ice to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association, and
Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222, as
amended).
C. Aviation safety. Large wireless facilities shall comply with all federal
and state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
D. Public safety communications. Large wireless facilities shall not
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
§ 100-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-15
1:288
§ 100-16. Location of large wireless facilities.
broadband, television, radio or other communication services enjoyed
by occupants of nearby properties.
E. Radio frequency emissions. A large wireless facility shall not, by itself
or in conjunction with other WCFs, generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including but not
limited to the FCC Office of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled
"Evaluating Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to
Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended. When a small
wireless facility is complete, as-built readings will be taken and
submitted to the Village.
F. Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
(1) Large wireless facilities shall be fully automated and unattended on
a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
(2) Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of the
facility in order to promote the safety and security of the Village's
residents.
(3) All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(4) The owner or operator of a large wireless facility shall maintain
standby power generators capable of powering the wireless
telecommunications facility for at least 24 hours without additional
public utility power, and indefinitely with a continuous or
replenished fuel supply. Such standby power shall activate
automatically upon the failure of public utility power to the site.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
require standby power longer than 24 hours where circumstances
indicate sufficient space exists to accommodate longer periods of
backup power.
A. Large wireless facilities must be deployed in accordance with the
following priorities, Subsection A(1) being the highest priority and
Subsection A(5) being the lowest priority.
(1) Co-location on existing wireless telecommunications facilities on
lands owned or controlled by the Village, not including the public
right-of-way;
(2) Co-location on a site with existing wireless telecommunications
facilities or other tall structures in the Village;
(3) On other lands owned or controlled by the Village including but not
limited to the Village public right-of-way;
§ 100-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-16
1:289
§ 100-17. Height of large wireless facilities.
Wireless telecommunications facility support structures shall be no higher
than the minimum height necessary. The proposed height, which may be in
excess of maximum height permitted for other structures in the applicable
zone, shall address any additional height necessary to accommodate colocation
by additional antenna arrays, but under no circumstances is the
height to be in excess of 150 feet.
§ 100-18. Setback of large wireless facilities.
All large wireless facilities, including any support structures and accessory
equipment, located outside the public right-of-way shall be set back from
the property line of the lot on which it is located a distance equal to not less
than the total height of the facility, including support structure, measured
from the highest point of such support structure to the finished grade
elevation of the ground on which it is situated, plus 10% of such total height.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce such setback requirements based
upon consideration of lot size, topographic conditions, adjoining land uses,
landscaping, other forms of screening and/or structural characteristics of
the proposed support structure.
§ 100-19. Visibility of large wireless facilities.
(4) On lands owned or controlled by other municipal corporations
within the Village, to the extent permitted by such other municipal
corporation;
(5) On private property not zoned exclusively for residential use.
B. If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above,
then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a
higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception
must satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a
special use permit should be granted for the proposed site and the
hardship that would be incurred by the applicant if the permit were not
granted for the proposed site.
C. An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site
proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall
address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the
applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning
Board of Appeals why co-location is commercially impracticable.
A. All large wireless facilities shall be sited so as to have the least adverse
visual effect on the environment and its character, on existing
vegetation and on the residents in the area of the wireless
telecommunications facilities sites. If lighting is required, the applicant
shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and
inoffensive an effect as is permissible under federal, state and local
laws, statutes, codes, rules or regulations.
§ 100-16 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-19
1:290
§ 100-20. Determination procedures for large wireless facilities.
B. Both the large wireless facility and any and all accessory equipment
shall maximize use of building materials, colors and textures designed
to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed and/or to
harmonize with the natural surroundings.
C. A large wireless facility shall not be artificially lighted or marked,
except as required by law.
D. Wireless telecommunications facility support structures for large
wireless facilities shall be galvanized and/or painted with a rustpreventive
paint of an appropriate color as specified by the Planning
Board, to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
E. Electrical and land-based telephone lines extended to serve the large
wireless facility sites shall be installed underground.
F. To the maximum extent practicable, stealth technologies, consistent
with design guidelines, if any, adopted by the Village Board, shall be
required to be employed in an effort to blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact.
G. Landscaping shall be provided, if appropriate.
A. For any LWFP application the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on due notice within 60 days after submission of a formal
completed application, including such technical information from the
applicant as may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Notice of the public hearing shall be by publication in the official
newspaper of the Village at least five days in advance of the hearing.
The hearing notice shall indicate that the application may be examined
and further information is available from the Building Department
office during regular business hours. Copies of the publication order
shall be mailed by the applicant to the owners of property within 1,000
feet of the property which is the subject of the application, and an
affidavit of service thereof shall be filed with the Code Enforcement
Officer no later than the date of the hearing.
C. Within 62 days of the close of the public hearing, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall grant, grant with conditions or deny the application and
shall set for the reasons therefor in a written determination.
D. In granting any LWFP, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such
conditions and safeguards to such permit as are, in its opinion,
necessary to ensure initial and continued conformance to all applicable
standards and requirements, including the incorporation of stealth
technologies or other measures which mitigate adverse visual impacts
and may require that such facility be designed and constructed in
accordance with design guidelines, if any, adopted by the Village Board.
§ 100-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-20
1:291
§ 100-21. Recertification of large wireless facility permit.
E. Time frames for determination.
(1) Within 30 days of receipt of any application for a large wireless
facility, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in
writing of any supplemental information required to complete the
application. Such notification shall toll the applicable shot clock
until the applicant submits the required supplemental information.
(2) Within 90 days of receipt of an application for a co-located large
wireless facility or 150 days of receipt of an application for a new
large wireless facility with accompanying support structure,
including such technical information from the applicant as may be
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall make its final decision on the application for a LWFP.
(3) All time periods set forth in this section reference calendar days.
(4) The time frames set forth herein may be extended by mutual
agreement of the applicant and the Zoning Board of Appeals, or
upon a determination by the Zoning Board of Appeals, set forth in
writing and based upon substantial evidence, that, despite its best
efforts, the Zoning Board of Appeals could not complete its review
of such application consistent with all applicable requirements
within such time frames.
A. At any time between 12 months and six months prior to the five-year
anniversary date after the issuance of a LWFP, and all subsequent fifth
anniversaries thereafter, the holder of a LWFP shall submit a signed
written request to the Zoning Board of Appeals for recertification. In
the written request for recertification, the holder of such permit shall
note the following:
(1) The name of the holder of the LWFP for the wireless
telecommunications facility.
(2) The date of the original granting of the LWFP.
(3) Whether the large wireless facility has been modified since the
issuance of the special use permit and, if so, in what manner.
(4) Any requests for waivers or relief of any kind whatsoever from the
requirements of this section and any requirements for a LWFP.
(5) Certification that the large wireless facilities are in compliance
with the special use permit and in compliance with all applicable
codes, laws, rules, regulations and federal certification
requirements.
(6) Certification that the wireless telecommunications support
structure, base station and accessory equipment are designed and
constructed (as built) and continue to meet all local, county, state
§ 100-20 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-21
1:292
§ 100-22. Performance security for large wireless facility permits.
The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed large wireless
facility property site shall, at their cost and expense, be jointly required to
execute and file with the Village a bond, or other form of security acceptable
to the Village as to type of security and the form and manner of execution,
in an amount sufficient to ensure the proper operation, maintenance and, if
and federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and
ice loads. Such recertification shall be by a professional engineer
licensed by the State of New York.
B. If, after such review, the Zoning Board of Appeals determines the
permitted large wireless facility is in compliance with the LWFP and all
applicable statutes, laws, local laws, ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall recertify the special use
permit for the large wireless facility, which may include any new
provisions or conditions that are mutually agreed upon or required by
applicable statutes, laws, local laws, ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations.
C. If, after such review, the Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the
permitted large wireless facility is not in compliance with the LWFP and
all applicable statutes, local laws, ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations, the Zoning Board of Appeals may refuse to issue a
recertification of the special use permit for the large wireless facility,
and, in such event, such large wireless facility shall not be used after
the date that the applicant receives written notice of such decision by
the Zoning Board of Appeals unless and until any deficiencies
determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals are cured. Any such
decision shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence
contained in a written record.
D. If the applicant has submitted all of the information requested by the
Zoning Board of Appeals and required by this section, and if the Zoning
Board of Appeals does not complete its review, as noted in Subsection B
of this section, prior to the five-year anniversary date of the special use
permit, or subsequent fifth anniversaries, the applicant for the
permitted large wireless facility shall receive an extension of the
special use permit for up to six months in order for the Zoning Board of
Appeals to complete its review.
E. If the holder of a LWFP does not submit a request for recertification of
such permit within the time frame noted in Subsection A of this section,
then such LWFP and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease
to exist on the date of the fifth anniversary of the original issuance of
the LWFP, or subsequent fifth anniversaries, unless the holder of the
LWFP adequately demonstrates to the Zoning Board of Appeals that
extenuating circumstances prevented a timely recertification request,
in which case the holder of the LWFP may submit a late recertification
request or application for a new LWFP.
§ 100-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-22
1:293
necessary, removal of such large wireless facility and associated equipment
and restoration of any impacted property, as determined by the Zoning
Board of Appeals based on a written estimate from a qualified professional,
and with such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the Zoning Board of
Appeals to assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of
this section and conditions of the LWFP issued pursuant to this chapter.
The full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the LWRP and/or until any necessary site restoration
is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which
existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit.
§ 100-23. Regulations applicable to large wireless facilities on
Village-owned property or within public rights-of-way.
A. In addition to the applicable LWFP permit provisions and requirements
listed in this section, any application to deploy a large wireless facility
on Village-owned property or within a public right-of-way owned or
controlled by the Village shall be required to comply with the following
regulations:
(1) License. An applicant to deploy a large wireless facility on Villageowned
property or within a public right-of-way owned or controlled
by the Village must obtain a license from the Board of Trustees that
fairly and reasonably compensates the Village for the costs
associated with such deployment.
(a) In the case of deployments within a public right-of-way owned
or controlled by the Village, such costs shall be limited to those
costs that are objectively reasonable approximations of the
costs incurred by the Village relating to such deployment in the
right-of-way, which costs shall be adopted by the Village Board
and included in the Village's Schedule of Fees.
(b) Any license issued pursuant to this section shall require the
applicant, to the extent permitted by law, to at all times defend,
indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the Village
and its elected officials, officers, board members, employees,
committee members, attorneys, agents and consultants from
any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of
any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award
of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses
arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise
out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection,
modification, location, product performance, use, operation,
maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal, or
restoration of said facility; excepting, however, any portion of
such claims, suits, demands, causes of action or award of
damages as may be attributable to the negligent or intentional
acts or omissions of the Village or its servants or agents. With
respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced
herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and
§ 100-22 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-23
1:294
expert witness fees are included in those costs that are
recoverable by the Village.
(2) Location. Large wireless facilities in the public right-of-way shall be
co-located on existing wireless telecommunications facility
whenever possible. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the
applicant shall locate its large wireless facility on existing utility
poles, monopoles or other structures that do not already act as
wireless telecommunications facility support structures.
(3) Design requirements:
(a) All accessory equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly
intrusive equipment feasible.
(b) Antenna and accessory equipment shall be treated to match
the supporting structure and may be required to be painted, or
otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support
structure upon which they are mounted.
(c) The large wireless facility shall be designed to be consistent
with the design guidelines, if any, adopted by the Village.
(4) Equipment location. Large wireless facilities, which include
wireless telecommunications support structures and accessory
equipment in the public right-of-way, shall be located so as not to
cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or
motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the right-ofway
as determined by the Village. In addition:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted accessory equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the
curb, within four feet of the edge of the cartway, or within an
easement extending onto a privately owned lot.
(b) To the extent feasible, accessory equipment shall be placed
underground. Ground-mounted accessory equipment that
cannot be placed underground shall be screened from
surrounding views, to the fullest extent possible, through the
use of landscaping or other decorative features to the
satisfaction of the Village. Ground-mounted accessory
equipment shall be screened, when possible, by utilizing
existing structures. If screening by utilizing existing structures
is not possible, ground-mounted accessory equipment shall be
made architecturally and aesthetically compatible with the
surrounding area through the use of coatings, landscaping,
and/or screening walls, enclosures or other stealth technology
to the satisfaction of the Village.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Village.
§ 100-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-23
1:295
§ 100-24. Requirements for all wireless facilities permits.
(d) Any graffiti on any large wireless facility support structure,
base station or any accessory equipment shall be removed
within 30 days upon notification by the Village at the sole
expense of the owner.
(e) Any proposed underground vault related to large wireless
facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the Village.
(f) Accessory equipment attached to a large wireless facility
support structure shall have such vertical clearance as the
Zoning Board of Appeals may determine.
(5) Relocation or removal of large wireless facilities in the public rightof-
way. In addition to the removal provisions set forth in Section
100-26, within 90 days following written notice from the Village, or
such longer period as the Village determines is reasonably
necessary, or such shorter period in the case of an emergency, an
owner of a large wireless facility and any accessory equipment in
the right-of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, or change the position of any large
wireless facility or accessory equipment when the Village,
consistent with its police powers and any applicable Public Service
Commission regulations, shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under the
following circumstances:
(a) To construct, repair, maintain or install any Village or other
public improvement located in the right-of-way;
(b) To prevent the interference with the operations of the Village
or other governmental entity, in the right-of-way;
(c) Abandonment of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Village Board.
A. Security. All small wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas
shall be located, fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents
unauthorized access. Specifically:
(1) All antennas and other supporting structures shall be made
inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in such a
manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and
(2) Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be
installed in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to
persons authorized to operate or service them.
B. Inspections. In order to verify that the holder of a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, and any and all lessees, renters, and/or
§ 100-23 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-24
1:296
licensees of such wireless facilities, place and construct such facilities,
including supporting structures, accessory equipment and antennas,
in accordance with all applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and
zoning laws, statutes, codes, rules, regulations and other applicable
requirements, the Village may inspect at any time, upon providing
reasonable notice, all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's
or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance
of such facility, including, but not limited to, structures, antennas,
accessory equipment and electromagnetic output.
C. Insurance. An applicant for a wireless telecommunications facility
permit shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance
for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella
insurance coverage, for the duration of the permit in amounts as set
forth below:
(1) For co-location on existing wireless telecommunications facility
structure, the insurance policies shall be in the following amounts:
(a) Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death
and property damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate;
(b) Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate;
(c) Workers' compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
(2) For a wireless telecommunications facility located on a new
wireless telecommunications structure the insurance policies shall
be in the following amounts:
(a) Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death
and property damage: $5,000,000 per occurrence;
(b) Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate;
(c) Workers' compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
(3) For a wireless telecommunications facility on Village property, the
commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the Village as an additional insured.
(4) The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative
of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and
with a Best's rating of at least A.
(5) The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the Village with at least 30 days'
prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
§ 100-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-24
1:297
§ 100-25. Revocation of permits.
(6) Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered
to the Village at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance
that such policies are to renew or replace.
(7) Prior to the issuance of a permit for a small wireless facility, the
applicant shall deliver to the Village a copy of each of the policies or
certificates representing the insurance in the required amounts.
D. Annual NIER certification. The holder of any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter shall, annually, certify to the Code Enforcement Officer
that NIER levels at the site where a wireless telecommunications
facility is located are within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC. In
addition, the Village, at its own cost and expense, shall be permitted to
conduct its own certification test of the NIER levels at the site where
any wireless telecommunications facility is located, with or without
notice to the wireless telecommunications provider. Once operational,
but prior to providing service to customers, as-built readings must be
provided to the Village.
E. Granting a wireless telecommunications facility permit does not waive
the requirement for site plan and architectural review approval,
including fees, in accordance with Chapter 112, § 112-23, site plan
approval, or certificate of appropriateness, in accordance with Chapter
47, as applicable.
A. A SWFP or LWFP may be revoked under the following circumstances:
(1) The facility has been abandoned (i.e., not used as a wireless
telecommunications facility) for a period exceeding 90 consecutive
days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day period, except for periods
caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which case, repair or
removal shall commence within 90 days;
(2) The permitted facility falls into such a state of disrepair that it
creates a safety hazard;
(3) The facility has been located, constructed, or modified without first
obtaining, or in a manner not authorized by, the required permit, or
any other necessary authorization;
(4) If a permitted facility is constructed, repaired, rebuilt, placed,
moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is
inconsistent or not in compliance with the provisions of this section
or of the permit conditions or other legal requirements, or it is
determined that the applicant made materially false or misleading
statements during the application process; or
(5) The holder of the permit fails to obtain the recertification required
under § 100-11 or § 100-21, as applicable.
§ 100-24 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-25
1:298
§ 100-26. Removal.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the permit holder in writing
of any violation of Subsection A, which notice shall specify the nature of
the violation or noncompliance, and specify that the violations must be
corrected within seven days of the date of the postmark of the notice, or
of the date of personal service of the notice, whichever is earlier.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection or any
other section of this chapter, if the violation or noncompliance causes,
creates or presents an imminent danger or threat to the health or safety
of lives or property, the Code Enforcement Officer may order the
violation remedied within 24 hours.
C. If within the period set forth in Subsection B the small wireless facilities
are not brought into compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or
of the permit, or substantial steps are not taken in order to bring the
affected facility into compliance, then the Code Enforcement Officer
may issue a written recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals
that such permit be revoked and such wireless facility be removed
pursuant to § 100-26.
D. Upon the receipt of a recommendation described in Subsection C,
above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on
said recommendation as soon as practicable and, based upon evidence
adduced at such hearing, adopt such recommendation, in whole or in
part, or reject such recommendation. If the Zoning Board of Appeals
determines to revoke such permit, the owner or applicant shall remove
such wireless facility in accordance with § 100-26.
A. If the Zoning Board of Appeals revokes a permit as provided in
§ 100-25, the Code Enforcement Officer shall promptly notify the holder
of such permit and the owner of the property in writing that said
wireless facility is to be removed and any affected property
appropriately restored.
B. The holder of the permit or the owner of the property shall be required
to dismantle and remove such small wireless facility, and all accessory
equipment and associated structures, from the site and return the site
to its original condition and certify through soils or other testing that no
contamination has been created by the facility, such restoration being
completed, limited only by physical or commercial impracticability,
within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the Code Enforcement
Officer to remove such wireless facility.
C. If the wireless facility is not removed or substantial progress has not
been made to remove the wireless facilities within 90 days after the
small facility permit holder has received such written notice of removal,
the Village may remove the wireless facilities at the sole expense of the
property owner and/or permit holder.
§ 100-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-26
1:299
§ 100-27. Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations.
§ 100-28. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any other remedies in this section, a violation of any provision
of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable by a fine
not exceeding $500, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months,
or both, for conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense,
both of which were committed within a period of five year, punishable by
a fine not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and, upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $1,000 nor more than $5,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed one year, or both. Each continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
Chapter 100A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 101
D. If the Village removes or causes to be removed the wireless facility, and
the owner of the wireless telecommunications facility does not claim
and remove them to a lawful location within 10 days of being notified of
its removal, the Village may take steps to declare the facilities
abandoned and dispose of or sell them and their components and retain
the proceeds therefrom. The Village may also cause the costs
associated with the removal and disposal of the wireless facilities to be
assessed on the property in the same manner as a tax or assessment.
A. The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall adhere to
and comply with all applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to,
the FCC and the FAA. Specifically included in this requirement are any
rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and
RF emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to,
the FCC and the FAA, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, and security, are amended and/
or are modified during the duration of a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter, the holder of such a permit shall conform the permitted
wireless telecommunications facility to the applicable amended and/or
modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of
12 months after the effective date of the applicable changed and/or
modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be
required by the issuing entity.
§ 100-26 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 100-28
1:300
TREES
§ 101-1. Intent.
The Williamsville Village Board hereby finds that there is a direct and
important relationship between the existence of trees in the Village of
Williamsville and the health, safety and welfare of the community. Trees
preserve air and water quality, provide shade to people and property, and
enhance economic and aesthetic property values. Trees stabilize soil,
control air and water pollution, and provide a natural habitat for wildlife.
§ 101-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DECIDUOUS TREE — A tree that sheds its leaves annually and including
ginkgo genus.
EVERGREEN — A plant or tree that retains its verdure, leaves or needles
through all seasons and including deciduous conifers such as members of
the Larix, Pseudolarux, and taxodium genus.
PARK TREES — Trees in public parks.
STREET TREES — Trees within the right of way of all streets, avenues or
highways within the Village.
TOPPING — The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs which are larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as
to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. On smaller trees, this
topping applies to the cutting back of limbs within the tree's crown to such
a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
§ 101-3. Village Forester.
The Village Forester is appointed annually by the Village of Williamsville
Board of Trustees. The duties include inspection of all municipal trees,
maintaining the tree inventory, recommending maintenance measures,
including pruning, removal, fertilization and inspection for hazardous
conditions. The Forester will also recommend a planting and replanting
schedule each spring and fall with due regard to appropriate site location
and tree species.
§ 101-4. Village Tree Board.
A. Creation and establishment. There shall be created and established a
Village Tree Board of the Village of Williamsville, New York, which shall
consist of a total of 10 members. Seven members shall consist of a
majority of Village residents; the remaining three shall be ex officio
members comprised of the Village Forester, one Village Board member
liaison and one Department of Public Works employee. All members
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Village
§ 100-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-4
1:301
§ 101-5. Protection and planting of trees.
§ 101-6. Species, size and locations of trees.
Board. The Tree Board shall annually elect a Chairperson and advise
the Village Board of the name of such Chairperson. [Amended
5-29-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
B. Term of office. The term of the 10 persons to be appointed by the Mayor
shall be three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the
term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed by the
Mayor for the unexpired portion of the term. [Amended 5-29-2007 by
L.L. No. 3-2007]
C. Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.
D. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Tree Board shall develop and/or update annually and
administer a written Tree Risk Management Plan for the care,
preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition
of trees in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan
will be presented annually to the Village Board and, upon its
acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official
comprehensive Village Tree Management Plan for the Village of
Williamsville.
(2) The Tree Board, when requested by the Village Board, shall
consider, investigate, advise, report and recommend upon any
special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
(3) The Tree Board will strive to raise consciousness of the importance
of trees to the Village.
(4) Meetings of the Tree Board shall be called by the Chairperson.
A. Damage and/or removal. Protection of mature street and park trees
shall be a priority. Trees of desirable species and good health shall be
protected as much as possible from damage and/or removal during
construction, sidewalk repair, utility work above and below ground and
other similar activities.
B. Public tree care. The Village shall have the right to plant and maintain
trees within the right-of-way of all streets, avenues, highways and on
public grounds, as may be necessary to enhance the beauty of such
public grounds.
A. Desired tree list. The Williamsville Tree Board shall develop and
maintain a list of desirable trees for planting along streets, parks and
other public areas in two size classes based on mature height: small
(under 20 feet) and large (over 20 feet). Efforts shall be made to ensure
§ 101-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 101-6
1:302
§ 101-7. Injury to trees.
No person shall cut, mar or otherwise injure any shade tree planted or
growing in or along the streets of said Village, or hitch any horse or
other animal thereto; provided, however, that the Village of Williamsville
Department of Public Works, or a person authorized in writing by the Village
of Williamsville Department of Public Works, may cut or trim trees growing
in or along the streets of the Village of Williamsville where such trimming
or cutting is required to preserve the public health, safety and/or welfare.
§ 101-8. Topping and pruning of trees.
a sufficient diversity of tree species. A list of trees not suitable for
planting will also be maintained.
B. Size. All deciduous trees planted shall have a minimum caliper of 1 3/4
inches, measured six inches above the ground. All evergreen trees
planted shall have a minimum height of five feet above the ground.
C. Tree spacing. The spacing of trees shall be in accordance with the two
species size classes listed in this chapter, and no new trees may be
planted closer than the following: small trees 20 feet; large trees 30
feet, except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape
architect, the Planning and Architectural Review Board, or at the
discretion of the Village Tree Board in consultation with the
Department of Public Works.
D. Location of trees.
(1) No new street trees may be planted closer than two feet to any curb
or sidewalk except at the discretion of the Tree Board in
consultation with the Department of Public Works.
(2) No new street trees shall be planted that will obstruct a clear vision
on corner lots as required by the Zoning Ordinance.18
(3) No new street trees shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire
hydrant.
(4) Consideration should be given to avoid planting within 20 feet of
any underground waterline, sewer line, transmission line or other
utility.
A. Topping of trees. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or other entity
to top any street or park tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or
other causes, or trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical shall be exempt from this
section at the determination of the Department of Public Works. The
Department of Public Works will notify the Tree Board and/or Village
Forester if an exception does occur.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Zoning.
§ 101-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-8
1:303
§ 101-9. Removal of trees and stumps.
B. Pruning of trees. The Department of Public Works and utility companies
within their easements shall have the right to prune any street tree
within the right of way and village parks for the following reasons:
(1) Necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
(2) Obstructing light from street lamp(s) or obstruct the view of street
intersections, traffic control devices or sign(s), or interfere with
utility lines.
(3) To provide a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
sidewalk.
(4) To provide a clear space of 13 feet above the street surface.
A. Dangerous and infected trees. The Village shall have the right to cause
the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within
the Village, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property or
harbor insects or disease, which constitute a potential threat to other
trees within the Village. The Village will notify, in writing, the owners of
the property of any such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners
within sixty days after the date of service of notice. In the event of
failure of owners to comply with such notice or if the tree constitutes an
immediate threat or danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
community, the Village, or its authorized representative, shall have the
authority to remove such trees by resolution of the Village Board, and
charge the cost of removal on to the owners, and/or levy the same on
subsequent tax bills.
B. Obstructive trees. The Village Department of Public Works may remove
or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof on Public
property which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its
nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines
or other public improvements. Trees removed by the Department of
Public Works or by natural causes shall be replaced on a one-for-one
basis within one year. The location and species of any replacement tree
shall be determined by the Village Board of Trustees on advice of the
Village Tree Board and Department of Public Works in consultation with
the owners of the property where such trees are located.
C. Removal standards. In cutting down trees located in public and terrace
areas, the tree must be removed with the root stump grubbed out, or
ground out to a depth of at least nine inches below grade measured in a
straight line with the normal grade of sidewalk to top of curb. All wood
and debris must be removed from the street prior to the end of the each
working day, and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with
topsoil as soon as reasonably practical.
§ 101-8 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 101-9
1:304
§ 101-10. Affixing materials to trees.
No person shall fasten any sign, wire, rope, nail, lights or other material to
or around or through any street or park tree in the Village of Williamsville,
except by written Mayor's permit in consultation with the Department of
Public Works, excepting cases of emergency.
§ 101-11. Interference with Village Tree Board or Village
employees.
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with the Village Tree Board,
Village employees, or any of their agents while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any trees,
shrubs, bushes or other vegetation on private grounds as authorized in this
chapter.
§ 101-12. Review by Village Board.
The Village Board will have the right to review any decisions regarding
trees. The Village Board shall have the right to review any conduct, acts and
decisions of the Village Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling
or order of the Village Tree Board to the Village Board, which may hear the
matter and make a final decision.
§ 101-13. Tree Planting and Maintenance Fund.
Each year in its annual budget, the Village Board shall include the
establishment of a Village Tree Planting and Maintenance Fund. Such fund
shall be an annual budget appropriation and in an amount of not less than
$2 per capita of population for the Village.
§ 101-14. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished,
upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $250 for each violation. In
D. Private removal. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person, firm,
organization or corporation shall trim, remove or destroy any tree or
shrub located in or upon any public place and within their easement,
until written permission shall have been issued by the Village Board of
Trustees on the advice of the Village Tree Board. Such permission shall
be given only when the removal, trimming or cutting of the tree or
shrub is necessary, as determined by the Board, because of disease,
damage, hazardous condition, and/or location, or its location is such
that substantial detriment is done to the property abutting the same.
Such written permission shall expressly state the premises upon which
the tree stands and the location of the tree thereon. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions, any public utility may trim, remove or destroy
any tree located upon any public place after receiving verbal
permission from the Village Superintendent of Public Works. Such
verbal permission shall only be given for the reasons set forth above.
§ 101-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-14
1:305
addition, each violation of this enactment shall constitute disorderly
conduct, and each person violating the same shall be a disorderly person.
Each day that a violation of or failure to comply with any provision of
this enactment or any regulation promulgated hereunder by the Board of
Trustees occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
§ 101-15. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be administered as specified herein and enforced by the
Village Building Inspector/Code Enforcement Official and the Supervisor of
the Department of Public Works.
§ 101-16. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter shall be adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter and shall be
confined in it operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 101-17. Amendments to this chapter.
This chapter may be amended by resolution by the Village Board of
Trustees.
§ 101-18. Title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Williamsville Comprehensive Tree
Ordinance."
§ 101-19. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 102
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 39.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 72.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 89.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 103.
§ 102-1. Purpose.
The outdoor storage of abandoned vehicles within the Village, other than
within licensed junkyards, is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community. It also constitutes an attractive nuisance to
§ 101-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 102-1
1:306
children and in many ways imperils their safety; endangers persons and
property since fuel tanks containing gasoline or gasoline fumes may easily
explode; is unsightly and depreciates property values; and provides nesting
places for rats, mice and other rodents. The control of the outdoor storage
of abandoned and unlicensed motor vehicles, other than within licensed
junkyards, within the Village is therefore regulated for the preservation of
the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
§ 102-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDON(ED) — Includes abandon(ed), discard(ed) and junk(ed).
ANTIQUE MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, but not a reproduction
thereof, manufactured more than 25 years prior to the current year and
which, because of discontinued production and limited availability, is
considered to be a model or make of significant value to collectors or
exhibitors and which has been maintained in or restored to a condition
which is substantially in conformity with the manufacturer’s specifications
and appearance.
CLASSIC MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, but not a reproduction
thereof, manufactured more than 10 years prior to the current year and
which, because of discontinued production and limited availability, is
considered to be a model or make of significant value to collectors or
exhibitors and which has been maintained in or restored, or will be
maintained in or restored, to a condition which is substantially in conformity
with the manufacturer’s specifications and appearance.
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes the legal owner, contract
purchaser in possession, tenant, lessee, occupant, undertenant, receiver,
assignee or trustee of premises or property located within the Village of
Williamsville.
OWNER OF VEHICLE — Person having the property in or title to a vehicle,
including a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to
a security interest in another person and also including any lessee or bailee
of a vehicle having the use thereof under lease or otherwise.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, partnership and corporation.
VEHICLE — Every vehicle operated, driven or capable of being operated or
driven upon a public highway by any power other than muscular power.
VILLAGE — The area within the Village of Williamsville.
§ 102-3. Designation of vehicles as abandoned.
A vehicle shall be deemed to be an abandoned vehicle if left unattended:
A. With no then-valid numbered registration plates affixed thereto, for
more than six hours on any highway or in any other public place.
§ 102-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-3
1:307
§ 102-4. Abandoning vehicles prohibited; penalties for offenses.
§ 102-5. Removal of abandoned vehicles authorized.
Any vehicle abandoned in violation of this chapter may be removed and
stored by the Police Department or other agency authorized by the Village
Board.
§ 102-6. Immediate passage of title to Village for certain vehicles.
If an abandoned vehicle, as hereinbefore defined, at the time of
abandonment has no numbered plates affixed and is of a wholesale value,
taking into consideration the condition of the vehicle, of $100 or less, such
value to be established by a person to be designated by the Village Code
Enforcement Officer for such purpose, title shall immediately vest in the
Village of Williamsville.
B. For more than 24 hours on any highway or in any other public place,
except a portion of a highway or public place on which parking is legally
permitted.
C. For more than 48 hours after the parking of such vehicle shall have
become illegal, if left on a portion of a highway or public place on which
parking is legally permitted.
D. For more than seven days on property of another, if left without
permission of the owner.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be abandoned
on any highway or any other public place.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any vehicle to be abandoned
on any private property of which he is not the owner.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner of private property to cause or allow
any vehicle to be abandoned or stored or kept without valid, numbered
registration plates affixed thereto on his private property. The
provisions of the foregoing sentence shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles on private property licensed as junkyards.
(2) Vehicles kept or stored within a completely enclosed building.
(3) Vehicles kept or stored for sale without dismantling in connection
with a properly zoned motor vehicle sales business.
(4) A motor home or other vehicle designed and used primarily for
recreation purposes. This exception shall not apply to more than
one such vehicle per parcel of property.
D. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$100.
§ 102-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 102-7
1:308
§ 102-7. Search of ownership; notice; action if unclaimed.
§ 102-8. Disposition of vehicles; costs; proceeds.
§ 102-9. Antique or classic motor vehicles.
An antique or classic motor vehicle that is in the process of being restored
may be kept out of doors upon the premises of the owner of said vehicle for
a period of 12 months to allow the restoration to be completed, provided
that the vehicle is stored behind the required front yard on an adequately
A. Except for vehicles governed by § 102-6 above, the Building
Department of the Village shall make an inquiry concerning the last
registered owner of such vehicle as follows:
(1) Abandoned vehicle with numbered plates affixed, to the jurisdiction
which issued such plates.
(2) Abandoned vehicle with no numbered plates affixed, to the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
B. The Building Department shall notify the last registered owner, if any,
that the vehicle in question has been recovered as an abandoned
vehicle and that, if unclaimed, it will be sold at public auction after five
days from the date such notice was mailed. If the agency described in
Subsection A also notifies such Building Department that a lien or
mortgage exists, such notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or
mortgagee. Any person claiming such vehicle shall be required to pay
the costs of removal and storage of such.
C. Title to such abandoned vehicles, if unclaimed, shall vest in the Village
of Williamsville five days from the date such notice is mailed or, if the
last registered owner cannot be ascertained, when notice of such fact is
received.
A. Abandoned vehicles, title to which has vested in the Village of
Williamsville, shall be sold by the Code Enforcement Officer at public
auction. The time and place of auctions and rules pertaining to the
holding thereof shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
He shall publish a notice in the Village’s official newspaper of each
auction at least five days prior to the date thereof.
B. The last registered owner of an abandoned vehicle shall be presumed to
be the owner and liable to the Village of Williamsville for the costs of
removal, storage and disposition of such vehicle unless he shall present
proof of present ownership in another person.
C. Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned vehicle, less any expenses
incurred by the Village of Williamsville, shall be held by the Village,
without interest, for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle for a period
of five years. If not claimed within such five-year period, such proceeds
shall be paid into the general fund of the Village.
§ 102-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-9
1:309
maintained surface in the side or rear yard and is at least 10 feet from the
property line, and provided further that such vehicle or any component part
thereof is covered with a tarpaulin or custom cover made for vehicles or is
otherwise hidden from public view with proper screening.
Chapter 103
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 103-1. Definitions.
§ 103-2. Parking Enforcement Officer.
There is hereby created the position of Parking Enforcement Officer, whose
function shall be to enforce those sections of this chapter relating to parking
violations and to issue a summons or appearance ticket.
§ 103-3. Speed limits.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law, shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them for the purposes of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — Includes any day other than Saturday and Sunday when
the Village Clerk's office is closed for the transaction of business.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, the time standard which is in
current use in this state.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — An area or lot maintained by the Village upon
which the parking of vehicles is permitted and regulated by signs or
parking meters, or both.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated for the construction or
maintenance of a public street or alley.
A. The maximum speed at which a vehicle may proceed on or along any
street or alley within the village is hereby established at 30 miles per
hour, except as otherwise established and set out in Subsection B of this
section.
B. Speed limits other than 30 miles per hour are established as indicated
upon the following streets or parts of streets:
§ 102-9 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-3
1:310
§ 103-4. Private parking lots.
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
California Drive [Added
6-25-2018 by L.L. No.
8-2018]
25 Between Milton Street and
Los Robles Street
Glen Avenue [Added
2-27-2017 by L.L. No.
3-2017]
25 Between Mill Street and
North Cayuga Road
Glen Avenue [Added
3-12-2018 by L.L. No.
5-2018]
20 Between North Cayuga Road
and Reist Street, between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. on school days
Main Street (Route 5) 35 Within corporate limits
Milton Street [Added
5-29-2018 by L.L. No.
7-2018]
25 Between Los Robles Street
and South Long Park
Park Drive [Added
3-12-2018 by L.L. No.
4-2018]
25 Between Oakgrove Drive and
Main Street
Rock Street [Added
3-12-2018 by L.L. No.
6-2018]
25 Between East Spring Street
and Glen Avenue
South Ellicott Street
[Added 3-12-2018 by
L.L. No. 3-2018]
25 Between Main Street and
Oakgrove Drive
South Long Street
[Added 3-12-2018 by
L.L. No. 1-2018]
25 Between Main Street and
Garden Parkway
Union Road (Route 277) 40 Within corporate limits
Village Square Lane
[Added 3-12-2018 by
L.L. No. 2-2018]
25 Between Main Street and
South Long Street
Wehrle Drive 35 Within corporate limits
A. No vehicle shall be left standing on any parking area or lot without the
permission of the owner or lessee thereof.
B. Posting of signs.
§ 103-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-4
1:311
§ 103-5. Abandoned, illegally parked, disabled or unattended
vehicles.
(1) Conspicuous signs shall be posted in parking lot areas informing
the public of any parking restrictions, and any such sign shall
substantially conform to the following specifications:
PARKING RESTRICTED (six-inch letters)
EXCEPT FOR (list persons or permitted conditions only) (fourinch
letters)
ALL OTHERS KEEP OUT (six-inch letters)
UNDER PENALTY OF LAW (six-inch letters)
SECTION 103-5, CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF WILLIAMSVILLE
(two-inch letters)
POLICE ENFORCEMENT (six-inch letters)
(2) Such signs shall be at least three by four (3 x 4) feet with red
lettering on a white background. The words “Police Enforcement”
and “Under Penalty of Law” on such signs shall be construed,
among other things, as a request by the owner or lessee that the
police enforce the restrictions, and that the police are authorized to
enter upon such premises to enforce the restrictions. Persons
violating the restrictions shall be deemed to be using the premises
without the authority and consent of the owner or lessee and in
violation of this chapter.
(3) This section may be enforced by the police in the same manner as
all other traffic and parking ordinances, including the use of tags,
summonses, towing and other procedures authorized by law.
A. A vehicle pound shall be the place or places to which automobiles or
other vehicles may be removed by the Amherst Department of Police.
The Chief of Police shall designate any such place or places to be used,
without expense to the village, as a vehicle pound, and from time to
time may change any such designation. Any vehicle left unattended in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York may be removed to the vehicle
pound by the Department of Police.
B. Removal of illegally parked vehicles; redemption. Any vehicle found by
a police officer to be standing in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York may be
removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the
Department of Police, by means of towing or otherwise, to the vehicle
pound. Such removal shall be at the risk of the owner of the vehicle.
Before the owner or person in charge of the vehicle shall be permitted
to remove it from the custody of the police, he shall furnish evidence of
his identity and ownership or right to possession, shall sign a receipt of
such vehicle and shall pay to the Clerk of the Village Justice Court the
§ 103-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-5
1:312
§ 103-6. Issuance of summons.
§ 103-7. Penalties; severability and repealer.
sum of $60 for towing and the sum of $5 for each day or fraction thereof
during the time the vehicle remains in the pound.
A. A police officer or duly designated Village Parking Enforcement Officer
may serve a summons upon the owner or driver of a vehicle which is
parked or standing illegally by affixing the summons to the vehicle.
B. Each summons shall indicate the issuing authority; the date, hour and
location of the violation; the name of the issuing officer; and the license
plate number of the vehicle. The summons shall also indicate the
specific section of state or local law of which violation is charged and
shall direct the owner or operator to appear before the Clerk of the
Village Court within the time specified thereon for appropriate
proceeding. A plea of guilty, without further proceedings, will be
entered upon mailing of the summons and the appropriate fine to the
Williamsville Court, 5565 Main Street, P.O. Box 1557, Williamsville,
New York 14221.
C. If the owner of the vehicle does not appear or mail the summons and
pay the fine within the specified time, a warrant shall be issued for his
appearance before Village Court. The Court may impose a fine not to
exceed $50, upon finding or plea of guilty, in addition to the fine for the
original violation.
D. If any provision of this chapter is inconsistent with any other provision
of the Village Code, the provision of this chapter shall control, and such
other provision, to the extent of such inconsistency only, is superseded.
A. Penalties for offenses. Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for
a violation of any provision of this chapter which is not a violation of any
provision of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall,
for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than
$150 or by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction within 18 months
thereafter, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction within 18
months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $450 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 4-25-2005 by
L.L. No. 3-2005]
B. Severability. If any Article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such adjudication shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its
operation to the Article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
§ 103-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-7
1:313
§ 103-8. One-way streets.
The following-described streets or alleys or parts of streets or alleys are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicted:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Connecting street South Between Evans Street and Main
Street
East Spring Street
[Added 9-14-2015
by L.L. No. 10-2015]
North Between Main Street and a point
250 feet north of Main Street
Grove Street North Between Main Street and Glen
Avenue
Rock Street North Between Main Street and Glen
Avenue
School Street West Between Rinewalt Street and
Academy Street, 7:30 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except Saturday, Sunday
and holidays
Village Square Lane
[Amended
10-29-2013 by L.L.
No. 9-2013]
South Between Main Street and a point
412 feet south of Main Street
§ 103-9. U-turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a U-turn on Main Street within the corporate limits of
the village.
§ 103-10. Left-turn lane.
The following left lanes for the distances designated on the streets
designated shall be used for left turns only into the intersecting street
clause or provision thereof directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
C. Repealer. All prior local laws or codes, or parts thereof, of this village
regulating traffic and parking are hereby repealed, except that this
repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any local law or
code hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 103-7 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-10
1:314
Street
Direction
of Travel
Length of
Lane Reservation
Intersecting
Street
Evans Street South For 100 feet
north of north line of
Main Street
Main Street
Garrison Road North For 100 feet
south of south line of
Main Street
Main Street
§ 103-11. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
The State of New York, County of Erie and Village of Williamsville shall
install and maintain signs controlling the making of a right turn when facing
steady red signal (stop indication) within the village.
§ 103-12. Yield intersections.
The following-desscribed intersections are hereby designated as yield
intersections and yield signs shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Connecting street
[Repealed
3-13-2017 by L.L.
No. 6-2017]
Garden Parkway West Garden Parkway and South Long
Street
§ 103-13. Truck route systems.
A truck route system upon which trucks, tractors and tractor-trailer
combinations in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds may travel is
hereby established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Main Street Within corporate limits
Union Road Within corporate limits
§ 103-14. Parking prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the followingdescribed
streets or alleys or parts of streets or alleys:
§ 103-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-14
1:315
Name of Street Side Location
Alley Both Between North Ellicott Street and
Orchard Place
All streets Both Entire length for a period in excess of
24 consecutive hours
All streets Both Entire length between November 1 and
the following April 1 from 1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
All streets Both Entire length for all commercially
registered vehicles from 1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Plymouth Place
[Added 11-28-2005
by L.L. No. 4-2005]
South Between Union Road and the Village
line
Willowbrook Drive
[Added 7-28-2008
by L.L. No. 2-2008]
North Between Garrison Road and Ellicott
Creek
§ 103-15. Stop intersections.
The following-described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections and stop signs shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Academy Street North/South
South
Eagle Street Main Street
Aero Drive West Wehrle Drive
Arend Avenue North/South Edward Street
Belmont Place East East/West West Evans Street North Ellicott
Street Mill Street
Bobbie Lane South Ledgeview Terrace
Brookside Drive East West Cadman Drive Wehrle Drive
Cadman Drive North Wehrle Drive
California Drive East North
North/South
North/South [Added
6-25-2018 by L.L.
No. 9-2018]
South Cayuga Road Main
Street Milton Street Los
Robles Street
Cayuga Road, North North/South Glen Avenue
§ 103-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-15
1:316
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Chalmers Street East East/West West Evans Street Arend Avenue,
Gordon Street, North Ellicott
Street Mill Street
Castle Creek Trail
[Added
10-25-1999 by L.L.
No. 4-1999]
East Garrison Road
Columbia Drive North North/South
South
Scott Drive Oakgrove Drive,
Wehrle Drive Brookside Drive
Creek Heights South Creek Road
Creek Road West Wehrle Drive
Danbern Lane South Creek Road
Eagle Street East East/West Academy Street Evans Street,
North Ellicott Street
West Mill Street
Edward Street East/West West Arend Avenue Mill Street
Ellicott Street,
North
North/South South Belmont Street, Chalmers
Street, Eagle Street Main
Street
Ellicott Street,
South [Amended
12-9-1991 by L.L.
No. 8-1991]
North North/
South South
Main Street Park Drive
Oakgrove Drive
Evans Street North/South Eagle Street
Farber Lane South Main Street
Franklin Street East West North Ellicott Street Orchard
Place
Garden Parkway
Extension
East West South Union Road South Long
Street
Glen Avenue East/West West North Cayuga Road Reist
Street
Glen Avenue
Extension
East West Reist Street North Long
Street
Grove Street North Glen Avenue, West Spring
Street
Highland Drive North North/
South South
Main Street Oakgrove Drive,
Scott Drive Wehrle Drive
§ 103-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-15
1:317
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Hillside Drive East South Reist Street Glen Avenue
Extension
Hirschfield Drive North/South
South
Oakgrove Drive, Scott Drive
Wehrle Drive
Howard Avenue North Glen Avenue
Lakeledge Drive West Farber Lane
Long Street, North South Main Street
Long Street, South North Main Street
Los Robles Street North/South
South
Milton Street California Drive
Milton Street East East/West South Cayuga Road California
Drive, Los Robles Street
Monroe Drive North North/
South South
Scott Drive Oakgrove Drive,
Wehrle Drive Brookside Drive
Municipal parking
lot exits
North West Main Street South Cayuga
Road
Oakgrove Drive
[Added 1-12-2009
by L.L. No.
1-2009]
East West Columbia Drive
Oakgrove Drive
(through December
14, 2010) [Added
12-14-2009 by L.L.
No. 9-2009]
East West Monroe Drive
Oakgrove Drive East/West North Garrison Road, Highland
Drive Main Street
Orchard Street Park
Drive [Amended
12-9-1991 by L.L.
No. 8-1991]
South East/West
North West
Eagle Street South Ellicott
Street, Garrison Road Main
Street Oakgrove Drive
Pasadena Street North South Milton Street California Drive
Pfohl Place North South Main Street Scott Drive
Pfohl Terrace
[Added 4-11-2005
by L.L. No.
1-2005]
West Pfohl Place
§ 103-15 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-15
1:318
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Pine Acres Court South Oakgrove Drive
Plymouth Street East South Union Road
Private parking lot East South Cayuga Road
Reist Street North/South
South
Glen Avenue Main Street
Rinewalt Street South Main Street
Rock Street North Glen Avenue
School Street East West Rinewalt Street Academy
Street
Scott Drive East/West West Highland Drive, Hirschfield
Drive Garrison Road
Spring Street, East East/West
South West
Rock Street Main Street
North Cayuga Road
Spring Street, West East West Grove Street Reist Street
Stanton Street East West North Ellicott Street Mill
Street
Swan Place East West North Ellicott Street Mill
Street
Village Square Lane West South Long Street
Wellington Court East South Cayuga Road
Willowbrook Drive East Garrison Road
§ 103-16. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the following-described streets
or alleys or parts of streets or alleys:
Name of Street Side Location
Academy Street East Between School Street and a point
35 feet south of School Street
West Between Main Street and north
village line
Arend Avenue West Between Belmont Street and
Stanton Street
Belmont Place North Entire length
§ 103-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-16
1:319
Name of Street Side Location
South Between the west curbline of Evans
Street and a point 132 feet west of
the west curbline
California Drive
[Amended 4-13-1992
by L.L. No. 3-1992;
added 4-20-2015 by
L.L. No 5-2015]
North Between Main Street and Milton
Street
East Between the west curbline of South
Cayuga Road and a point 50 feet
west of South Cayuga Road
North/
South
Between Milton Street and Los
Robles Street
South Between South Cayuga Road and
Los Robles Street
West Between Main Street and a point
85 feet south of Main Street
Cayuga Road, North East Entire length
West Between Main Street and Glen
Avenue
Cayuga Road, South Both Between Main Street and south
village corporate line
Chalmers Street South Between Evans Street and North
Ellicott Street
Creek Heights East Entire length
Danbern Lane [Added
10-9-2018 by L.L. No.
12-2018]
East/West Entire length
Eagle Street
[Amended 9-14-1992
by L.L. No. 6-1992;
2-23-2004 by L.L. No.
1-2004]
North Between Evans Street and
Academy Street
North Between Evans Street and a point
65 feet west of Evans Street
South Between Mill Street and Evans
Street
South Between Evans Street and a point
80 feet east of Evans Street
§ 103-16 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-16
1:320
Name of Street Side Location
Ellicott Street, North West Between Main Street and north
village line
Ellicott Street, South
[Amended 8-23-1993
by L.L. No. 9-1993;
9-27-1993 by L.L. No.
11-1993; 12-12-1994
by L.L. No. 8-1994]
East Between Main Street and Oakgrove
Drive
Evans Street
[Amended 1-27-1992
by L.L. No. 1-1992;
1-11-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Both Connecting roadway between
Evans Street and Main Street
East Between Main Street and Eagle
Street
West Between Main Street and north
village line
Farber Lane Both Between Main Street and a point
100 feet north of Main Street
Farber Lane [Added
9-13-1999 by L.L. No.
3-1999]
West From Main Street to Lake Ledge
Drive
Franklin Street North Entire length
Garden Parkway
Extension
South Between South Long Street and
South Union Road
Glen Avenue
[Amended 7-25-1994
by L.L. No. 3-1994;
5-28-1996 by L.L. No.
2-1996; 9-14-2015 by
L.L. No. 11-2015]
North Between Mill Street and Reist
Street
South From 20 feet east of the extended
westerly pavement edge of Howard
Avenue to a point 55 feet west of
the extended westerly pavement
edge of Howard Avenue
South Between North Cayuga Street and
Mill Street
South From Reist Street to a point 100
feet east of Reist Street
South From a point 190 feet east of Reist
Street to Grove Street
§ 103-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-16
1:321
Name of Street Side Location
Glen Avenue (also
known as Glenn Avenue
Extension) [Added
4-22-2002 by L.L. No.
4-2002]
South Between Reist Street and North
Long Street
Grove Street Both Entire length
Highland Avenue
[Repealed 4-20-2015
by L.L. No. 6-2015]
Highland Drive [Added
8-11-2014 by L.L. No.
5-2014]
East Between Main Street and Scott
Drive
Hillside Drive [Added
4-20-2015 by L.L. No.
4-2015]
West/ North Between Glen Avenue Extension
and Reist Street
Hirschfield Drive East Between Main Street and Scott
Drive
Howard Avenue West Entire length
Ledgeview Terrace South Entire length
Long Street, North East Between Main Street and a point
65 feet north of Main Street
West Between Main Street and a point
500 feet north of Main Street
Long Street, South East Entire length
West Between Garden Parkway
Extension and the south village line
West Between Main Street and a point
150 feet south of Main Street
Los Robles Street East Between Main Street and a point
115 feet south of Main Street
West Between Main Street and California
Drive
Main Street [Amended
5-10-1993 by L.L. No.
3-1993; 11-25-1996
by L.L. No. 5-1996;
9-14-1998 by L.L. No.
6-1998; 7-28-2014 by
L.L. No. 4-2014;
8-14-2017 by L.L. No.
8-2017]
North Between a point 85 feet west of the
west line of the Ellicott Creek
Bridge and a point 125 feet east of
Mill Street
§ 103-16 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-16
1:322
Name of Street Side Location
North Between the westerly extension of
Evans Street and the easterly
village line
North Between Grove Street and a point
38 feet west of Grove Street
North Between North Cayuga Road and a
point 30 feet west of North Cayuga
Road
South Between a point 96 feet west of the
west end of the Ellicott Street
bridge and a point which is an
extension of the east line of Mill
Street
South Between Garrison Road and the
easterly village line
South Between a point 30 feet west of Los
Robles Street and Los Robles
Street
South Between Los Robles Street and a
point 30 feet east of Los Robles
Street
South Between a point 75 feet west of
South Cayuga Road and South
Cayuga Road
South Between South Cayuga Road and a
point 30 feet east of South Cayuga
Road
South Between the Town of Amherst
driveway and a point 12 feet east of
the driveway
South Between the Town of Amherst
driveway and a point 25 feet west
of the driveway
Mill Street East Between Main Street and Edward
Street
Milton Street
[Amended 2-22-1993
by L.L. No. 2-1993]
North Between South Cayuga Road and
the west end of the street
South Between a point 30 feet west of
Pasadena Street and a point 30 feet
east of Pasadena Street
§ 103-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-16
1:323
Name of Street Side Location
South Between South Cayuga Road and a
point 60 feet west of South Cayuga
Road
Monroe Drive Both Between Wehrle Drive and a point
75 feet north of Wehrle Drive
Orchard Place East Between Swan Place and end of
street
Park Drive [Amended
3-27-2000 by L.L. No.
1-2000]
North Between Garrison Road and
Oakgrove Drive
West/
North
Between Garrison Road and Main
Street
Pasadena Street Both Between Milton Street and a point
30 feet south of Milton Street
Pfohl Place Both Between Main Street and a point
155 feet south of Main Street
Reist Street [Amended
8-5-1991 by L.L. No.
6-1991; 9-25-1995 by
L.L. No. 1-1995;
6-25-2001 by L.L. No.
3-2001; 1-9-2012 by
L.L. No. 1-2012;
9-24-2012 by L.L. No.
9-2012]
East Between Glen Avenue and a point
187 feet north of Glen Avenue
East Between Main Street and a point
50 feet north of West Spring Street
East From the driveway of the St.
Francis Home for a distance of 45
feet north of the driveway
East From the driveway of the St.
Francis Home for a distance of 45
feet south of the driveway
West From a point 460 feet north of Glen
Avenue extension to the Village line
West Between Main Street and Glen
Avenue extension
Rinewalt Street
[Amended 8-19-2019
by L.L. No. 6-2019]
East Between Main Street and a point
45 feet north of Main Street
§ 103-16 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-16
1:324
Name of Street Side Location
West Between Main Street and the end
of the street
Rock Street West Between Main Street and East
Spring Street
School Street Both Entire length of street
Scott Drive North Entire length of street
Spring Street, East
[Amended
11-25-1996 by L.L.
No. 5-1996]
East Between Main Street and a point
25 feet north of Main Street
Spring Street, East
[Amended
11-25-1996 by L.L.
No. 5-1996]
North Between North Cayuga Road and a
point 25 feet east of North Cayuga
Road
Spring Street, East
[Repealed 9-13-2004
by L.L. No. 3-2004]
Spring Street, East
[Repealed 9-13-2004
by L.L. No. 3-2004]
Spring Street, East
[Amended
11-25-1996 by L.L.
No. 5-1996]
West Between Main Street and a point
100 feet north of Main Street
Spring Street, West Both Between Grove Street and Reist
Street
Swan Place Both Entire length of street
Union Road, South East Between Main Street and north
property line of Lifetime Service
Center
Village Square Lane Both Between Main Street and South
Long Street
§ 103-17. Time limit parking. [Amended 6-14-1993 by L.L. No.
5-1993; 9-26-1994 by L.L. No. 5-1994]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown upon any
of the following-described streets, alleys or parking lots or parts of streets
or alleys:
§ 103-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-17
1:325
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
California Drive
[Added 3-25-2002
by L.L. No. 1-2002;
amended 4-20-2015
by L.L. No 5-2015]
West 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between a point 85
feet south of Main
Street and Milton
Street
Ellicott Street, South
[Added 12-12-1994
by L.L. No. 8-1994]
West 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Main Street
and Park Drive
Farber Lane [Added
9-13-1999 by L.L.
No. 3-1999]
East 2 hours, 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Main Street to
Lake Ledge Drive
Glen Avenue (also
known as Glen
Avenue Extension)
[Added 4-22-2002
by L.L. No. 3-2002]
North 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Reist Street
and North Long
Street
Highland Drive
[Repealed 3-9-2015
by L.L. No. 3-2015]
Highland Drive
[Added 9-14-2015
by L.L. No. 9-2015;
repealed 1-11-2016
by L.L. No. 1-2016]
Hirschfield Drive
[Repealed
8-10-2009 by L.L.
No. 6-2009]
Hirschfield Drive
[Added 11-10-2014
by L.L. No. 10-2014]
West 30 minutes From a point 38 feet
south of Main Street
to a point 100 feet
south of Main Street
Main Street
[Amended
11-27-2000 by L.L.
No. 2-2000]
North 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Reist Street
and a point 85 feet
west of the west line
of the Ellicott Creek
bridge
§ 103-17 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-17
1:326
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Main Street North 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Academy
Street and the east
line of the village
Main Street North 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between a point 125
feet east of Mill
Street and the
westerly ex tension
of Evans Street
Main Street South 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Union Road
and a point 30 feet
west of Los Robles
Street
Main Street South 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Los Robles
Street and a point 75
feet west of South
Cayuga Road
Main Street South 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between South
Cayuga Road and a
point 96 feet west of
the west end of the
Ellicott Creek bridge
Main Street South 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between a point
which is an extension
of the east line of
Mill Street and
Oakgrove Avenue
Main Street South 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Oakgrove
Avenue and Garrison
Road
Main Street South 2 hours, 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between Park Place
and the east
boundary line of the
village
Municipal parking lot 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
§ 103-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-17
1:327
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Oakgrove Drive East 2 hours Between the
southerly curbline of
Main Street and a
point 197 feet south
of the southerly
curbline
Reist Street [Added
3-25-2002 by L.L.
No. 2-2002;
amended 8-26-2013
by L.L. No. 7-2013]
East 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., except
Sunday and
holidays
Between W. Spring
Street and a point 90
feet south of Glen
Avenue
Rock Street
[Amended
11-25-1996 by L.L.
No. 6-1996]
East 2 hours Between Main Street
and East Spring
Street
Spring Street, East
[Repealed
8-10-2009 by L.L.
No. 4-2009]
Spring Street, East
[Added 8-24-2009
by L.L. No. 6-2009]
East 2 hours Between a point 25
feet north of Main
Street and a point
183 feet north of
Main Street
Village Meeting
House
2 hours 5658 Main Street
§ 103-18. No parking in public right-of-way. [Amended 5-26-2015 by
L.L. No. 7-2015; 3-13-2017 by L.L. No. 6-2017]
In all nonresidentially zoned areas, no person shall stop, stand or park a
motor vehicle on that part of the public right-of-way between the curbline
and the outer edge of the public sidewalk. Where no sidewalk or curbline
exists, the public right-of-way shall be designated, for the purpose of this
section, as the area within eight feet of the outer pavement edge.
§ 103-19. Parking for handicapped.
The following parking space or spaces designated herein shall be reserved
for handicapped parking, and no person other than those authorized shall
park a vehicle in such space:
§ 103-17 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 103-19
1:328
Location of Space Parking Area
All spaces [Amended
2-24-1992 by L.L. No.
2-1992]
Off-street public parking area on south
side of Glen Avenue, east of Ellicott
Creek
Most northerly space Village Hall parking area, directly behind
building
§ 103-20. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 103-21. No parking in Village parks. [Added 11-26-2001 by L.L.
No. 5-2001]
There shall be no parking in Village parks as follows:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer, official traffic control device or a
fireman in the discharge of duty.
B. No person shall detach any trailer from its towing vehicle and allow it to
remain standing in any public street, public parking lot or other public
place.
C. No person shall deface, injure, mark or interfere with any sign
restricting or regulating traffic or parking.
D. A vehicle shall not tow more than one other vehicle on any public street.
E. Obstruction of vision. [Amended 11-23-1992 by L.L. No. 9-1992]
(1) In order to promote the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians,
no shrubs, fences, signs or other obstructions to visibility more
than three feet in height above finished grade level shall be
permitted within 15 feet of any pavement edge.
(2) No structure, sign, fence, wall, hedge, shrub planting or tree
foliage which obstructs vision at elevations between three feet and
seven feet above the street level shall be placed or maintained
within the triangular area formed by two intersecting street lines
and a line connecting points on such street lines 20 feet distant
from their point of intersection.
F. Whenever deemed necessary during fire or other emergency, for the
public safety and convenience, a police officer, fire marshal or village
employee shall have the authority to temporarily close any street, alley
or part thereof to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to vehicles of a
certain description. Any person entering the closed street in violation of
the prohibition during that time the street, alley or part thereof is
closed shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 103-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-21
1:329
Name of Street Hours/Days Location
Village Square Lane 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
South Long Street Park
Parking Lot
§ 103-22. Designation of crosswalks. [Added 3-13-2006 by L.L. No.
1-2006]
§ 103-23. Prohibited turns at intersections. [Added 3-13-2017 by
L.L. No. 7-2017]
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated below at any of the
following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Intersection Times
California
Drive
North Left Main Street Monday through
Friday 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Chapter 107
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 81.
§ 107-1. Applicability.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, this chapter shall be applicable in all
cases to the supply of potable water and the furnishing of water service.
§ 107-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPURTENANCE — Any material that belongs with or accompanies a water
service pipe, water tap or backflow prevention device.
A. The Board of Trustees hereby is authorized to designate certain
intersections on streets and roadways within the Village as crosswalk
intersections. Said designations shall be made by a resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
B. A Schedule of Designated Crosswalk Intersections shall be maintained
in the office of the Village Clerk. Said schedule may be amended by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 103-21 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-2
1:330
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — A device to prevent any
contaminated water from being siphoned into the potable water supply.
CROSS-CONNECTION — A connection between two otherwise separate
piping systems, one containing potable water and the other containing
water which may be contaminated.
CURB BOX — A vertical sleeve which provides access to a buried curb cock/
stop.
CURB COCK/CURB STOP — A control valve for the water supply of a
building, used to shut off water supply and placed usually between the
sidewalk and curb.
POTABLE WATER — Water which is approved for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes as set forth in the State Sanitary Code.
PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM — Shall include water mains, pipes,
hydrants, sprinklers, storage facilities and other facilities installed on
private premises for the purpose of private fire protection.
PUBLIC FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM — Shall include all facilities installed
in a public street or alley or public right-of-way and used for public
protection from fire.
WATER HAMMER — A loud thumping noise that results from a sudden
surge or stoppage of the flow of water through any water service pipe.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — That part of a building water main installed by or
under the jurisdiction of the Village Water Department.
WATER TAP — A connection, with its appurtenances, to a water supply
main.
§ 107-3. Village rights; liability.
§ 107-4. General provisions.
A. The Village reserves the right, at any time, without notice, to shut off
the water in mains for the purposes of making repairs or extensions or
for other purposes. The Village shall not be liable for any loss, cost or
expense arising from an interruption or failure in the supply of water or
from an increase or deficiency in water pressure or by the bursting or
breaking of any main or service pipe or any attachment to the Village
property or for any damages caused thereby.
B. The Village reserves the right to restrict, curtail or prohibit the use of
water for any purpose upon the determination by the Village Board that
such action is essential to the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare as in periods of drought or other emergency. Upon such
determination, the Village Board may, by resolution, fix the times when
water may be used for all or particular purposes and prescribe any
other measures to be taken by the Water Department or its consumers.
§ 107-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-4
1:331
§ 107-5. Connections; service; maintenance; prohibitions.
A. All work performed under this chapter shall be by the Department of
Public Works or a plumber licensed by the Village. All work shall be in
accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and New York State Health Department regulations.
B. The obligation of the Village to supply potable water to any premises
shall be upon strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
upon payment of all applicable fees.
C. All water service pipes, water taps, backflow devices, required
excavations and related appurtenances shall be subject to inspection by
the Village or its duly authorized agents.
D. The Village, through its duly authorized agents, shall have the right to
enter upon any premises where Village water is provided, for the
purposes of inspecting, reading, installing, removing or repairing
meters, turning water service on or off and enforcing this chapter.
E. No unauthorized person shall open or shut any water supply valve, gate
or water tap, operate any curb cock/stop, tamper or interfere with any
water meter or interrupt or interfere with the Village potable water
system.
F. No fire hydrant shall be opened, closed or adjusted except by those duly
authorized under this chapter or by a duly authorized member of the
Fire Department.
G. Water supplied by the Village to any premises is for use on such
premises by the owners or occupants thereof. The sale, delivery,
transmission or supplying of such water to other persons or premises is
prohibited.
A. Application for connection.
(1) Application for connection to Village water service and/or for water
service shall be made to the Village Clerk. No service or connection
shall be provided until the applicant has shown compliance with
this chapter and paid all required fees.
(2) The receipt of an application shall not obligate the Village to
provide water or perform the service requested. The Village shall
not be obligated to extend any main into any street. On approval of
the application by the Village, the owner shall be responsible for
payment of all applicable rates and charges and shall comply with
the rules and regulations relating to such service.
(3) All water accounts shall be established in the name of the owner of
the premises.
B. Connection.
§ 107-4 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-5
1:332
(1) All water tap connections shall be made only by the Village after
prior approval by the Building Department and after payment of all
applicable fees as established by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.
(2) Any required street opening in connection with a water tap shall be
made in compliance with Chapter 89, Streets and Sidewalks, of this
Code.
(3) All new or replacement service lines shall be of Type K or L copper
tubing, located not less than four feet below the established street
grade level and on a direct line into the premises. Where
compliance is determined to be impractical, the Department of
Public Works may grant approval, in writing, for an alternate
method of installation.
(4) Any water service line shall be located wholly within its own trench.
Where compliance is determined to be impracticable, the line may
be placed on a shelf within a sewer trench. In no case shall the line
be located within the same trench, at a level equal to or lower than
the sewer line.
C. Curb box/curb stop installation.
(1) A separate curb box/stop shall be installed for each premises where
the water service is to be individually metered.
(2) In a residential district, installation shall be between the sidewalk
and curb. In a commercial district, it shall be located one foot
inside the curb. The top of the box shall be set even with the
pavement and in every case flush with the surface of the sidewalk.
D. Water leaks. [Amended 7-22-1996 by L.L. No. 4-1996]
(1) The property owner shall be responsible for any repair and
replacement of a water service line at any point between the curb
stop and the water meter. The leak shall be repaired or replaced
within 48 hours of receipt by the property owner of personal or
written notice (certified mail) from the Village. [Amended
8-13-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012]
(2) If the property owner fails to comply with the notice within the
forty-eight-hour period, the Village will cause the waterline to be
repaired and all expenses for such repair shall be billed to the
property owner.
(3) All payments for repairs shall be due within 30 days of billing.
Interest for nonpayment shall be accrued on the outstanding
amounts at a rate to be set by resolution of the Village Board of
Trustees.
E. Temporary water supply.
§ 107-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-5
1:333
§ 107-6. Water taps.
(1) No temporary water supply shall be used except for construction
purposes.
(2) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building
Department until all temporary water rents are fully paid and a
permanent water meter is installed on the premises.
(3) Unmetered temporary water supply. Application shall be made to
the Village Clerk for temporary use of water during construction. A
daily rate, as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
shall be paid from the date of the water tap to the date the water
meter is installed.
F. Water service outside Village limits.
(1) The Village reserves the right to require that water service from
Village mains be by written agreement between the property owner
and the Village. Such service shall be conditioned upon strict
compliance by the property owner with all conditions and
limitations established by the Village.
(2) The fee shall be 1 1/2 the rate as established by resolution of the
Board of Trustees for properties located within the Village
boundaries.
G. Prohibitions.
(1) Cross-connections are prohibited. In addition to any penalty
imposed for violation of such prohibition, the property owner shall
be liable for any damage or expense resulting from the prohibited
cross-connection.
(2) Upon determination by the Department of Public Works of the
existence of water hammer, the Village shall notify, in writing, the
property owner responsible for the condition. The notice may
require the installation of water hammer elimination devices,
which shall be at the property owner's expense.
A. All water taps shall be installed at the expense of the property owner
only after application to the Village and shall be approved and
inspected by the Village. [Amended 8-13-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012]
B. Excavation prior to installation shall be the responsibility of the
property owner and shall have an area of at least four square feet and a
depth of not less than six inches below the main.
C. A separate water tap shall be required for each building on any
premises supplied with water. No service line shall be connected to any
other building or premises. Connecting of two or more services lines is
prohibited.
§ 107-5 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-6
1:334
§ 107-7. Water meter.
D. A water tap intended to replace an existing service line shall not be
installed unless the existing tap is disconnected and sealed at the water
main and thereafter inspected by the Department of Public Works. All
replacement expenses shall be borne by the property owner.
E. Where any existing water service line is abandoned or not used for one
year, the service line shall be disconnected and sealed at the water
main and thereafter inspected by the Department of Public Works. All
expenses shall be borne by the property owner.
F. The property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair
of all water tap connections, distribution lines and appurtenances
beyond the meter to the curb stop. All expenses shall be borne by the
property owner. [Amended 8-13-2012 by L.L. No. 7-2012]
A. Location.
(1) An individual meter shall be required for each premises and for
each separate water tap to a premises.
(2) All meters shall be set in a horizontal position and shall be
accessible for inspection and reading.
(3) In order to provide an accurate meter reading, any service line that
extends more than 100 feet from the street pavement edge to the
building line shall have its water meter set in a vault close to the
curb stop.
(4) All meters shall be protected against both freezing and hot water.
B. Initial installation. [Amended 6-13-1994 by L.L. No. 2-1994]
(1) All water meters shall be provided to the property owner at the
expense of the Village, and the meter shall be treated thereafter as
a fixed appurtenance to the premises on which it is located.
(2) The property owner shall be responsible for installation of all
necessary piping, fittings, valves and pipe couplings required to
receive the meter.
(3) The meter shall, upon inspection, be sealed by the Department of
Public Works and thereafter be under the exclusive control thereof.
No sealed meter shall be removed without written permission of
the Department of Public Works.
(4) All meters shall be connected to the water service line by a shutoff
valve on each side of the meter. No connection in any water service
line shall be made between the water main and the meter.
(5) The Village may order the installation of a device where it deems
necessary.
§ 107-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-7
1:335
§ 107-8. Water service shutoff.
C. Maintenance.
(1) The property owner shall be responsible for damage to the meter
due to freezing, hot water, tampering or other external causes.
(2) Meter repair or replacement due to ordinary wear on all meters
shall be the responsibility of the Village. [Amended 6-13-1994 by
L.L. No. 2-1994]
D. Testing.
(1) All meters shall be made accessible to the Village, at reasonable
times, for the purpose of testing.
(2) The Village reserves the right to remove and test any meter and to
substitute another meter in its place.
(3) In the case of a disputed water charge involving the accuracy of a
meter, the meter shall be tested by the Village upon payment of a
fee as established by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In the
event that the meter is proved defective, the testing fee shall be
waived and the water charge shall be adjusted at the discretion of
the Village Board. Any credit or additional charge for such
adjustment shall be applied to the owner's next water bill.
A. Water service shall be shut off by the Village for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Any misrepresentation by the applicant as to the property or
fixtures to be supplied or the purpose for which the water is to be
used.
(2) Failure to maintain connections, service lines or fixtures in proper
working order.
(3) Nonpayment of charges, rates or fees for water supplied or
services rendered by the Village.
(4) Cross-connecting pipes carrying potable water with any other
source of supply or with any apparatus which may endanger the
quality of potable water supply.
(5) Refusal of reasonable access to the property for the purpose of
reading, repairing, testing or removing meters or observing water
pipes and other fixtures.
(6) The furnishing or receiving of a supply of water from another
premises.
(7) Failure to maintain the water meter or to protect the meter from
freezing or hot water.
§ 107-7 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-8
1:336
§ 107-9. Terms of payment.
(8) Abandonment of the premises.
(9) In order to make necessary repairs, connections or maintenance.
(10) Failure to install and maintain backflow prevention devices or
water hammer devices pursuant to an order issued under this
chapter.
(11) Any other violation of this chapter.
(12) Failure to obtain or purchase a water meter and establish a water
account.
(13) For cause as established by the Board of Trustees or the Water
Department.
B. Consumer shutoff request.
(1) Any water consumer may discontinue water service by giving the
Village Clerk notice to such effect at least three business days prior
to the date on which such shutoff is intended to take place.
(2) The consumer shall provide access to the indoor meter between the
hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
C. Method of shutoff. Water service to any premises shall be shut off only
by the Village or its duly authorized agent.
D. Restoration of water service. Where water service has been shut off for
reasons other than an emergency, the Village shall renew service only
when conditions which resulted in the shutoff are corrected and only
after payment of all applicable charges and/or fees.
A. All water consumption charges shall be as established by resolution of
the Board of Trustees only after a public hearing.
B. All bills for water consumption shall be payable on the designated due
date.
C. Any water bill or other related charges required under this chapter not
paid by the due date of the bill shall incur a penalty of 10% of the
outstanding balance. If the bill remains unpaid for a period in excess of
30 days from the original due date of the bill or charge, a further
penalty, in the form of an interest payment at the rate of 18% per
annum, shall accrue daily from that date forward until the charges are
paid in full or are added to the tax bill pursuant to § 107-9D. In applying
payments on the water bill, the Village shall always apply payment first
to the oldest balance or charge, then to interest and penalties, then to
the current bill or charge. [Amended 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1-1999]
D. Failure to pay any bill, including penalty charges, for a period
exceeding 45 days or more, prior to March 1 of any particular year,
§ 107-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-9
1:337
§ 107-10. Access to water meter.
§ 107-11. Private fire protection.
shall result in the delinquent charges being added to the next taxes
assessed to the property, and the Village may, without notice, shut off
water service. [Amended 6-9-1997 by L.L. No. 3-1997]
A. All premises shall be made accessible for water meter reading between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
B. When premises are not made accessible, a meter-reading card shall be
left on the premises. It shall be the duty of the occupant to read the
meter, record the reading on the card provided and promptly return the
card to the Village.
C. Where a consumer fails to provide required access to read the meter or
fails to return the meter reading card for more than 12 months, the
Village may, without notice, shut off the water system to the premises.
A. No private fire protection shall be installed or modified without the
owner of the premises having first made prior application to the Village.
All expense thereof shall be borne by the property owner.
(1) The application shall include two copies of the plumbing schematic
or plan, showing the proposed type of private fire protection, water
service location and waterline size. The schematic or plan shall be
designed in accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code and shall be signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer or registered architect.
(2) The procedure for installation of a sprinkler system shall include
the following:
(a) Approval, in writing, from the Village Fire Department.
(b) Verification by the Department of Public Works that the
necessary water pressure will be available to the fire system
when domestic water service is being used at peak capacity.
(c) Installation of a backflow prevention device on the domestic
water system in accordance with the New York State Sanitary
Code.
(d) Approval, in writing, of the schematic or plan by the New York
State Health Department
(e) Installation by a certified sprinkler company, in combination
with a plumber licensed by the Village where applicable.
(f) At the owner's expense, the Village shall install the proper
water service connection tap and valve upon approval of the
§ 107-9 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-11
1:338
§ 107-12. Cross-connection control. [Amended 12-19-2005 by L.L.
No. 5-2005]
sprinkler system and payment of fees as established by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.
(g) Each premises with a sprinkler system shall be assessed every
June 1 an annual fee as established by resolution of the Board
of Trustees.
(h) Every sprinkler system shall be inspected annually, at the
expense of the owner, by an independent certified inspector.
Records of the inspection and any required repairs shall be
forwarded to the Village within 30 days of completion of the
inspection.
(3) The procedure for installation of a private or large fire hydrant
system shall include the following:
(a) Approval, in writing, from the Village Fire Department.
(b) Plans showing the system as installed wholly on the owner's
property.
(c) Upon completion of the installation, the system shall be
approved and inspected by the Village, which reserves the
right to approve the type of hydrant and the manner of
installation before final approval.
(d) Each premises with a private hydrant system shall be assessed
every June 1 an annual fee as established by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
B. Any use of water designated for private fire protection for any purpose
other than the private fire protection system shall be unlawful.
A. The purpose of this section is to:
(1) Protect the public drinkable water supply of the Village of
Williamsville from the possibility of contamination by isolating
within its customers' internal distribution system(s) or its
customers' private water system(s) such contaminants or
pollutants which could backf1ow in the public water supply system;
and
(2) Comply with the requirements of the New York State Sanitary Code
Subpart 5, and in particular 5-1.31, and other provisions of the New
York State Department of Health (NYSDOH).
B. Responsibility. The Williamsville Water Department (WWD) shall be
responsible for the protection of all Village of Williamsville water
distribution systems from contamination due to the backflow of the
contaminants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment
§ 107-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-12
1:339
of said Water Department, an acceptable backflow prevention device
is required at any Village water service connection to any customer's
premises, for the safety of the water system, the Water Department
or its designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer
to install such acceptable backflow prevention device at each service
connection to his or her premises. The customer shall immediately
install such approved device or devices at his own expense; and failure,
refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested
and maintained said device or devices shall immediately constitute
a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
requirements have been met.
C. Definitions.
(1) As indicated in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCEPTABLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — An
acceptable air gap, reduced pressure zone device or double check
valve assembly as used to contain potential contamination within a
facility. In order for the reduced pressure zone device or the double
check valve assembly to be acceptable, it must be listed on the
most current version of the New York State Department of Health
List of Acceptable Devices (PWS-14).
APPROVED — Accepted by the Village of Williamsville
Superintendent as meeting an applicable specification stated or
cited in this section or as suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available
to the premises other than Village of Williamsville approved public
water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from
another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural
source(s) such as a well, spring, stream, rainwater, etc., or used
waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or
they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water
source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary
control.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any connection or potential connection
which allows or potentially allows for the intermingling of water
from any auxiliary water supply or any substance from any other
unauthorized source with water from a Village of Williamsville
approved public water supply.
CUSTOMER'S WATER SYSTEM — The piping used to convey water
supplied by a Village of Williamsville water supply system
throughout a customer's facility. The system shall include all those
parts of the piping beyond the control point of the Village Water
Department. The control point is either the curb valve or the main
valve located in the public right-of-way that isolates the customer's
facilities from the Village or district distribution system.
§ 107-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-12
1:340
HAZARDOUS FACILITY — One in which substances may be present
which, if introduced into the public water system, would or may
endanger or have an adverse effect on the health of other water
customers. Typical examples: laboratories, sewage treatment
plants, chemical plants, hospitals, mortuaries and commercial
enterprises. This is a1so defined as any commercial or business
enterprise as defined by zoning or by business use permit.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — The Village of Williamsville
water supply system, including the source, treatment works,
transmission mains, distribution system and storage facilities
serving the public. This includes the distribution system up to its
connection with the customer's water system.
REDUCED PRESSURE ZONE (RPZ) DEVICE, ACCEPTABLE — A
device containing a minimum of two independently acting check
valves, together with an automatically operated pressure
differential relief valve located between the two check valves.
During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the
pressure between these two checks shall be less than the upsteam
(supply) pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure. The unit must include tightly
closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each
device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
(2) Other terms. All other terms are defined in the Department of
Health and Village of Williamsville Cross Control Manuals and
policies as now in force or as amended from time to time.
D. Requirements.
(1) The customer's water system shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the Village of
Williamsville.
(2) The Village of Williamsville shall rate a customer's water system
according to its degree of hazard to the public water system. Some
of the factors to be considered are the use and availability of
contaminants, the availability of an auxiliary water supply, and the
type of fire-fighting system in use.
(3) An acceptable backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a customer's water system at or near the
property line or immediately inside the building being served but,
in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line,
as follows:
(a) Whenever a customer's water system is rated hazardous, an
acceptable reduced pressure zone device or air gap shall be
installed.
§ 107-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-12
1:341
(b) Whenever a customer's water system is rated aesthetically
objectionable, as a minimum, an acceptable double check valve
assembly shall be installed. Unless otherwise determined by
the Water Superintendent, one- and two-family residential
water systems shall be deemed to have nonhazardous
classification.
(4) The design of the installation of an acceptable backflow prevention
device must be prepared in accordance with New York State laws
and regulations. The design must be approved by the
Superintendent and/or its agent and all agencies required by the
applicable New York State and Village of Williamsville laws and
regulations.
(5) It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises classified as
hazardous pursuant to Subsection D(3)(a) and (3)(b) above where a
reduced pressure zone device, and/or a double check valve
assembly, is required to have certified inspections and operational
tests done on every containment device, at least once a year. In
those instances where the Superintendent deems the hazard to be
great enough, he may require certified inspections at more
frequent intervals. Certified inspections and operational tests must
also be made when any reduced pressure zone device is to be
installed, repaired, overhauled or replaced, in addition to the
requirement of an annual certified inspection and operational test.
All inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the customer
and shall be performed by a New York State Department of Health
(NYSDOH) certified tester approved by the Village of Williamsville
Water Superintendent. The Village Water Department shall make
available the names, addresses and telephone numbers of those
persons who are certified as testers for such backflow prevention
devices. It shall be the responsibility of the water customer per
NYS Sanitary Code 5.1.31 a, b, and c to see that such certified
inspections and operational tests are made. The customer shall
notify the Superintendent in advance, in writing, when the tests are
to be undertaken so that he or his representative may witness the
tests if the Superintendent so desires. These devices shall be
repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer
whenever said devices are found to be defective. Records of such
tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and made available to the
Water Superintendent. Copies of all testing and maintenance
records shall be sent to the Superintendent immediately after the
work is performed. Protection of the public water supply and the
customer's water system must be in full force at all times. Note:
There is no "grace period" for noncompliance or repairs, etc. under
any section of this section. Nothing contained in this section grants
license for noncompliance.
(6) No water service connection to any customer's water system shall
be installed or maintained by the Village of Williamsville Water
§ 107-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-12
1:342
Department unless the water supply is protected as required by
state laws and regulations and this section. Service of water to
any premises shall be discontinued by the Village of Williamsville
Water Department if a backflow prevention device required by this
section is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found
that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed
or otherwise compromised. Service will not be restored until such
conditions or defects are corrected.
(7) No customer shall allow any water or other substance from an
auxiliary water supply or other source to enter any portion of the
customer's internal distribution system, which is connected
directly or indirectly to any Village of Williamsville public water
supply.
E. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the water user unless the water supply is protected
as required by this section and such other local, state and federal
laws, rules and regulations.
(2) If any facility served by a water system denies a Water Department
person access to its premises for the purpose of determining if
protection to the public water system is necessary, then the
maximum protection condition shall be imposed with the
requirement that the number of devices shall equal the number of
service lines.
(3) The following penalties shall be applicable for a violation of this
section:
(a) Failure to obtain approval for the appropriate backflow
prevention device installation within 60 days after the first
notice: fine of $250.
(b) Failure to install the appropriate backflow prevention device
within 30 days after the second notice: termination of service.
(c) Failure to at least annually test and certify that backflow device
installation meets the criteria to comply as an acceptable
containment device within 10 days of notice: $300 and/or
termination of service.
(d) Failure to correct, replace or repair a backflow prevention
device or the installation as required: $300 and/or termination
of service.
(e) Any water service terminated under this section shall be
subject to the fees of termination for nonpayment in effect at
the time of violation.
§ 107-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-12
1:343
(f) Any penalties under this subsection shall be treated as though
they are for water service and may be placed on the tax roll as
a lien if unpaid.
F. Fee schedule.
(1) Fees for plan review by the Williamsville Water Department
Engineer:
(a) Three-fourths to 1 1/2 inch pipe size: $100.
(b) Over 1 1/2 inch pipe size: $200.
(2) Fees for inspections for each device shall be required at a cost of
$75. All other inspections for determination for the need for RPZ
shall be at a cost of $75.
(3) Additional reviews and inspections. Additional reviews and
inspections may be charged to the water customer at 1/2 the
review and/or inspection fee for each additional review or
inspection as deemed appropriate by the Williamsville Water
Department.
(4) Every day that the customer is in violation of this section
represents a separate daily fine.
G. Installation and maintenance.
(1) Water meters and/or containment devices, their vaults, protective
enclosures, appurtances and other structures, to include those
installations and plumbing inside buildings: It shall be the sole
responsibility of the water customer to install and maintain said
items at an acceptable level of condition as determined by the
Williamsville Water Department, and which shall be in continuous
conformity with governing laws, ordinances, regulations and
specifications of the Williamsville Water Department and the State
of New York as now in force or amended.
(2) It shall be the policy of the Williamsville Water Department to
follow the genera1 regulations and standards regarding water
distribution systems, and especially those covering crossconnection
control as adopted by the Erie County Water Authority
and the State of New York, notwithstanding the right of the
Williamsville Water Department to amend and/or modify those
regulations and standards to be more detailed or restrictive at its
sole election.
H. Required testing and certification. The test reports (Form DOH 1013)
for each device shall be submitted to the Health Department and also
the Williamsville Water Department at least annually or more
frequently at the discretion of the water supplier. Unacceptable
completion of the test report forms submitted by a tester may result in
the Superintendent barring future testing by that particular certified
§ 107-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 107-12
1:344
§ 107-13. Fees.
tester in the Village of Williamsville at the sole discretion of the Water
Superintendent.
I. New systems. All containment device installment design plans must be
approved by both the Village of Williamsville and the New York State
Department of Health. The engineer's report must be accompanied by
the Williamsville Water Department design approval criteria as
amended from time to time.
J. Entrance to premises. For the purpose of inspection, installation,
maintenance, repair, and turning on or shutting off water, authorized
personnel of the Water Department shall have free and full access, at all
reasonable times, to all parts of any premises supplied with water from
the Williamsville Water District or upon which application has been
made to the Water Department or to which water is reasonably believed
to be supplied. Filing of an application shall, in addition to the
provisions of this section, be deemed consistent to such access.
K. Experts. The Village of Williamsville Water Department may engage the
services of an expert to manage the cross-connection control program
and transfer this cost to the customer for the review of said property.
L. Plumbing. All internal plumbing must conform to and be maintained in
continued conformity with the NYS Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and the NYS Sanitary Code or any amendments made
from time to time as well as any local codes, and may be inspected by
the WWD to qualify its conformity.
A. All fees shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
B. Water consumption fees shall be established by resolution of the Board
of Trustees only after a public hearing.
C. Any fee for work commenced under this chapter shall be doubled where
such work is begun without the appropriate permit.
D. Any fee under this chapter which remains unpaid after March 15 of any
given year shall be added to the next taxes assessed against that
property.
§ 107-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-13
1:345
Chapter 112
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 25.
Fire prevention and building code
administration — See Ch. 28.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 31.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 47.
Landscaping — See Ch. 57.
Signs — See Ch. 84.
Swimming pools and hot tubs — See Ch. 93.
Trees — See Ch. 101.
§ 112-1. Purpose.
The comprehensive zoning plan set forth in the text and maps which
constitute this chapter is adopted in order to promote and protect public
health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and other aspects of the
general welfare by providing adequate light, air and convenience of access;
preventing undue concentration of population and overcrowding of land;
preventing congestion in the streets; securing safety from fire, flood, panic
and other dangers; and facilitating adequate provision for transportation,
water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. These
regulations are made with reasonable consideration, among other things,
to the peculiar suitability of each district for particular uses, with a view to
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Village and
conserving the value of buildings and lands therein.
§ 112-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit that is self-contained,
including separate kitchen facilities, incorporated within an existing one- or
two-family dwelling.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm, including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
AIR STRUCTURE — An air-supported structure of plastic or other material
of rigid or nonrigid construction, whether or not the same is permanently
affixed or anchored to the ground or some other permanent base.
ALLEY — Narrow supplementary public thoroughfare for the use of vehicles
or pedestrians, affording access to abutting property.
§ 107-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:346
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to a building or
parking lot, other than repairs, including any change of use as defined in
the New York State Uniform Building and Fire Safety Code.19
ANIMAL, DOMESTIC — Includes dogs and cats, as well as other common
household pets, such as fish, hamsters, gerbils and birds, which are
maintained indoors.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
APPROPRIATE — The Planning/Architectural Review Board and the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall determine appropriateness based on the consistency
of the proposed action with the spirit and intent of the Zoning Code, and
substantive compliance with all relevant chapters of the Village Code.
ARTIST STUDIO — A room, building, or group of buildings where art is
produced or studied.
AWNING — A roof-like protective cover of canvas or other flexible material
over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area that projects from
the facade of a structure.
BAR — An establishment primarily engaged in the sale and service of
alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption as permitted by the New
York State Liquor Authority. The incidental sale or provision of food or
snacks shall not entitle such a use to be considered a restaurant under other
provisions of this code. Synonyms include: tavern; saloon; barroom; pub;
watering hole; drinking hole; gin mill; tap room.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — An owner-occupied residence in which rooms
are rented to transient, paying customers, for a period of four or fewer
continuous days, with no more than four guest rooms, with a maximum
occupancy of two persons per room, without cooking facilities in guestoccupied
rooms and without food service, except meals served before 12:00
p.m.
BERM — A mound of earth, artificially created as part of a landscaping
or architectural scheme, rising significantly above the surrounding natural
terrain.
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A building, other than a motel
or hotel, wherein fewer than three unrelated persons are located for
compensation, either transiently or as permanent residents.
BUFFER — A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as
vegetation, berms, fences or walls used to visually and physically separate
and screen incompatible land uses from each other and/or to protect
significant environmental features. See "screen."
BUILDING — A structure wholly or partially enclosed within exterior walls
or exterior and party walls and a roof.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Fire Prevention and Building Code Administration.
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:347
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of the main or principal building and which is located on
the same lot as the principal building.
BUILDING ADDITION — A structural expansion of the footprint or height of
an existing building.
BUILDING AREA, GROSS — The entire area contained within a building,
inclusive of nonleaseable or utility space. Essentially, the footprint of the
building on the building lot, measured in square feet.
BUILDING BASE — The area of a building directly above grade to a line
typically at or below three feet above grade. The delineation of this
interface assists in anchoring the building facade to the ground plane, and
provides an orderly transition of building components.
BUILDING CORNER, INSIDE — An inward-projecting corner where two
walls meet.
BUILDING CORNER, OUTSIDE — An outward-projecting corner where two
walls meet.
BUILDING ENTRY, PRIMARY — The primary location from which patrons,
tenants, visitors and the general public may enter or exit the building or,
in the case of multitenant buildings, each separate ground floor space that
fronts a public street. Utility and loading doors shall not be constituted as
principal entrances unless they serve a dual purpose as such.[Amended
12-12-2016 by L.L. No. 8-2016]
BUILDING ENTRY, RECESSED — A building entry primarily utilized on
commercial building storefronts which steps a portion of the building
storefront into the structure a distance typically ranging from two feet to
six feet, thereby creating a small and noticeable void along the building
frontage and a pronounced and well-defined space outside of the principal
building entry.
BUILDING ENTRY, SECONDARY — Any entry point with restricted access
and not utilized as a primary means to access habitable or leasable space
within a building.
BUILDING ENTRY, SHARED — An entrance utilized by multiple building
tenants or occupants to access common areas and internal corridors within
the building.
BUILDING FACADE, PRIMARY — Any building frontage:
BUILDING FACADE, SECONDARY — All other building frontages not
defined as a primary building facade.
Facing public streets and/or any drive, parking lot, public or semipublic
space, with or without a primary building entry;
A.
B. Greater than three feet from any adjacent structure in side yards; or
C. Within 50 feet of any rear property boundary.
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:348
BUILDING FRONTAGE — That portion of a building facing a property
boundary. The terms "frontage," "fronting," and "façade" shall be
considered synonymous.
BUILDING GLAZING — Glass windows that provide transparency into the
building or structure.
BUILDING, MIXED-USE — Any building in which more than one use
classification is incorporated.
BUILDING OVERHANG — A permanent component of the building facade
which extends beyond the plane of the building, typically to provide shelter
for entrances, dining areas, or windows. A building overhang differs from an
awning (defined herein), in that overhangs are typically clad in solid surface
materials.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or structure designed primarily to
accommodate a principal use. An attached garage shall be considered part
of the principal building.
BUILDING, PUBLIC — Any building or structure used for municipal, civic,
community, ecclesiastical, recreational or other public purposes not
associated with for-profit commercial enterprise.
BUILDING REHABILITATION — The investment in and the physical
upgrading of a structure to improve its appearance or usefulness.
BUILDING RENOVATION — A change in the interior layout, exterior
appearance, or footprint of any structure.
BUILDING STOREFRONT — The area of commercial building facades
between grade level and the lowest portion of the second story for
multistory buildings, or the area of commercial building facades between
grade level and the lowest portion of the roof structure for single-story
buildings.
BUILDING TRANSPARENCY — The ability to see into or out of a structure
through glazings.
CANOPY — A roof-like covering of metal or other rigid material over a
door, entrance or outdoor service area that projects from the facade of a
structure.
CERTIFIED ARBORIST — A professional having achieved and holding a
certification from the International Society of Arborculture as an ISA
Certified Arborist.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse, with a definite bed and
banks, that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CHICKEN COOP — A structure where hens are kept for noncommercial
purposes as an accessory use to a single-family, two-family or multifamily
dwelling.[Added 6-25-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:349
CLUB, MEMBERSHIP — An organization catering to members and their
guests for recreational, athletic or social purposes.
CLUB, PRIVATE — A nonprofit social organization whose premises are
restricted to its members and their guests.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person designated pursuant to
§ 28-3 of this Code.
COMMERCIAL RESIDENCE — A building where lodging for three or more
unrelated persons is provided for compensation, whether transient or
permanent occupancy.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A commercially licensed vehicle used primarily
for purposes other than passenger transportation or designed, used or
maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
COMMUNICATING SIDEWALK — A sidewalk which connects primary
building entrances, public or semipublic spaces with an Americans-With-
Disabilities-Act-compliant accessible route or accessible parking spaces.
Communicating sidewalks must be six feet or greater in width.
COMMUNITY PLAN — The Community Plan as adopted by the Village
Board in accordance with § 7-722 of the Village Law, and all amendments
thereto.
CORNICE — The uppermost section of moldings along the top of a wall or
just below a roof.
CULTURAL USE FACILITY or MUSEUM — Any building, room or area
with a minimum area designed or utilized primarily for the presentation to
the general public of live theater, dance performances, musical concerts,
cinema, lectures, exhibits of various art forms or exhibits of cultural,
historic, academic or scientific material.
DARK-SKY COMPLIANT — Fixtures, appurtenances and design and
installation practices that adhere to the International Dark-Sky
Associations' Model Lighting Ordinance recommendations for Type 2
lighting zones.
DAY-CARE FACILITY — A place, person, association, corporation, institution
or agency which provides day care for three or more children for more than
three hours and less than 24 hours per day per child and in which parents,
guardians or others responsible for care place children.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION — The New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual (New York State Department of Environmental Conservation), most
recent version or its successor, including applicable updates, which serves
as the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:350
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, clearing,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers, drainage ditches or field tiles along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVE-IN SERVICE FACILITY — An establishment which includes provision
for a customer to conduct business or secure consumer goods while
remaining within a motor vehicle. Also commonly referred to as a "drive
through" or "drive-thru," such uses include, but are not limited to, windows
or similar features that allow customers to order and/or pick up goods
such as food, beverages and prescription drugs, conduct banking services
or operate an automatic teller machine while remaining within a motor
vehicle.[Amended 10-26-2015 by L.L. No. 12-2015]
DRIVEWAY — Any entrance or exit used by vehicular traffic to or from lands
or buildings abutting a street or alley.
DRY-CLEANING FACILITY — An establishment used to collect, distribute
and process articles made of fabric through dry cleaning, pressing, dyeing
or stain removal.
DRY-CLEANING OUTLET — An establishment used primarily to collect and
distribute articles to a dry-cleaning facility.
DWELLING, ACCESSORY — An accessory use involving a separate and
complete dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family
dwelling, or a separate accessory building on the same lot as the principal
building with separate bathing, housekeeping and cooking facilities,
intended to provide supplementary housing and not to exceed 35% of the
primary structure or occupancy of more than two persons.
DWELLING, GROUP — A group of two or more dwellings located on the
same lot and having any yard or open space in common.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units designed or used for occupancy by three or
more families living independently of each other, with separate bathing,
housekeeping and cooking facilities.
DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for
living, cooking, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one
family.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A dwelling unit designed for or occupied
exclusively by one or more persons living as a single, nonprofit
housekeeping unit. The dwelling must consist of a permanent structure
placed on a permanent foundation, cellar, or basement.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units and
used or intended to be used exclusively for occupancy by two families living
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:351
independently of each other, or two single-family dwellings having a party
wall in common with separate bathing, housekeeping and cooking facilities.
ENGINEER or LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person
licensed as a professional engineer by the State of New York.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Empire State Chapter of
the Soil and Water Conservation Society, 2004), most current version or its
successor, commonly known as the "Blue Book."
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a premises and living together
as a single housekeeping unit, subject to a limit of not more than three
unrelated persons 18 years of age or over.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal area of all floors of a building,
excluding the basement (unless used and habitable in conjunction with the
building function), stairway, permanent corridors, attic storage and toilet
areas. All dimensions shall be measured between the interior faces of walls.
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or enclosed space not available to the
public that is used primarily for the storage of vehicles, provided that no
business, occupation or service is conducted for profit therein.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A place for the sale at retail of gasoline
and/or other petroleum products which may or may not include facilities for
the servicing of vehicles or the sale of convenience goods.
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
GREEN — A parcel of land located in a central position in the neighborhood
and surrounded by streets and/or building lots on at least three sides. It is
designed and landscaped as a space for common neighborhood use.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY — Those infrastructure elements,
materials and construction practices designed in accordance with the most
current version of the New York State Storm Water Management Design
Manual, which facilitate the evaporation, transpiration and infiltration of
stormwater runoff and minimize the flow of such runoff into the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
GREENSPACE — Any nonimpervious vegetated surface.
GROUP RESIDENCE — A place and/or domicile occupied by two or more
persons wherein the residential quarters are considered an integral
component of a recognized program of rehabilitation, custodial supervision
or care, together with required supervisory personnel living in a familytype
setting. Said residence shall not be institutional in character or scale
and shall maintain a resident count compatible with the character of the
neighborhood.
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:352
HARDSCAPE — Areas within a property or public right-of-way that are
paved with durable, hard surface materials, typically poured concrete, brick
or concrete pavers. These areas typically form plazas, patios and other
outdoor pedestrian-oriented spaces. Parking lots are not considered
hardscape for the purposes of these design standards.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the finished grade level
at the sides of the building or structure to the highest level of a flat or
mansard roof, to the average height of a pitched, gabled, hip or gambrel
roof (excluding spires, chimneys, stairwell housings and other similar
structures) or to the highest elevation of structures not containing a roof.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use for personal gain conducted entirely on
a residential premises by the residents thereof and which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential purposes and does not change
the character thereof.
HOTEL — A building which contains 15 or more living and sleeping
accommodations for transient occupancy and which may or may not include
dining facilities. The word "hotel" includes the word "motel," "motor lodge,"
"motor hotel," "motor court," "tourist court" or similar names.
HOSPITAL — A facility providing inpatient medical treatment and care.
IMPERVIOUS COVER or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those surfaces,
improvements and structures that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall,
snowmelt and water (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks,
driveways, etc.).
INAPPROPRIATE — The use, design or construction of land or any structure
thereon deemed by the Planning/Architectural Review Board and/or the
Zoning Board of Appeals to be inconsistent with the spirit and intent of
Sections 101 and 105 of the Design Standards, or that which fails to
substantially achieve the standards outlined in Sections 300 through 1000.
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) permit, issued to a commercial industry or
group of industries, which regulates the pollutant levels associated with
industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control
strategies.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT — New development on vacant or unimproved land
that is located directly adjacent to existing developed sites.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
INN — A commercial facility for the housing and feeding of transients,
containing more than four rooms and less than 15 rooms. The facility may
have accessory uses such as a restaurant or a bar.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian use extending from a
street into a structure or across a structure to another street.
JUNKYARD — An activity characterized by the storage, sale or dismantling
of discarded machinery equipment, paper, rags, scrap, vehicles and similar
materials.
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:353
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
KENNEL — Any premises that:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
LANDSCAPED AREA — That area of a site plan or development not
consisting of structures or pavement. Landscaped area shall consist of those
areas on a site plan that are planted, seeded or provide similar vegetative or
landscaped cover. Landscaped area does not include man-made stormwater
retention ponds, but may include other green infrastructure.
LICENSED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — An individual holding a valid
license as a registered landscape architect in New York State.
LOADING AREA — An area of a commercial property utilized for the
loading, unloading, staging and standing of commercial delivery vehicles.
LOT — A parcel of land that is described on a subdivision map or defined by
a survey.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines, expressed
in square units.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by the combined
area of all principal and accessory buildings and structures on the lot.
LOT, DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT, EXTERIOR — A lot on a corner.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — The legally defined boundary or limit of a parcel of land.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line coincidental with the line of the public
right-of-way, except that where such line is described as being within the
boundaries of a public right-of-way, then the most interior boundary of such
rights-of-way shall be construed to be the front lot line. Where two public
rights-of-way intersect, a lot line coincidental with the boundary line of
either may be selected as the front lot line, as long as no nonconforming
elements are thereby created.
Accommodates the boarding, sale or care of more than three dogs, cats,
rabbits or any domestic animal.
A.
Harbors more than three domestic animals over the age of three
months.
B.
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:354
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line generally parallel to or directly opposite a
front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — A lot line extending between a front and rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot in which both the front lot line and rear lot line
abut a street or alley.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between side lot lines.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
MANUFACTURING OR INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS — A business activity
characterized by the transformation of raw materials or the fabrication of
new products, as well as transportation facilities, storage facilities, truck
terminals and similar facilities.
MANUFACTURING OR INDUSTRIAL, MIXED-USE — A manufacturing use
involving small-scale production or assembly of products conducted in
connection with on-site retail sales and/or restaurant use. The
manufacturing component of such uses shall not exceed 5,000 square feet
and may not generate noxious by-products or employ processes or
equipment that creates noise, heat, glare, dust, smoke, fumes, odors, or
vibration detectable off the property. Deliveries or pickups in connection
with such uses are limited to parcel and small freight carriers.[Added
1-27-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
MASSING — The sense of bulk, size and shape of a structure, usually
perceived by reference to the surrounding space, nearby structures and
natural features such as trees.
MEDICAL CENTER — A facility providing outpatient medical treatment and
care.
MIXED USE or MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part for
one use and in part for some other use not accessory thereto. See "building,
mixed use."
MOBILE HOME — A transportable dwelling unit that is designed for yearround
occupancy and connected to utilities.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE — The on-premises repair, maintenance and
general servicing of motor vehicles.
NEIGHBORHOOD — An area of the Village where the primary use as a
percentage of total gross building area is residential housing.
NIGHTCLUB — Any room, space, or premises operated as a commercial
establishment in which eating and/or drinking takes place, where alcoholic
beverages are served subject to the regulatory authority of the New York
State Liquor Authority, and where the provision of entertainment is the
primary activity. Entertainment includes music by a live musician or
musicians, or any mechanical, electronic, or other means such as records,
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:355
laserdiscs, audio, video, or other audio or audio-visual means, including
operation as a motion-picture theater; acting, play performances, theater
performances, dinner theater, burlesque shows, revue pantomime, scene,
dance, act, or song-and-dance act participated in by one or more employees,
guests, customers, or other person or persons; or dancing by guests,
customers, or any other person or persons.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any lawful building, use of a building or use of
land existing at the time of enactment of this chapter or any amendments
thereto which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter or to the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
OFFICE — Any facility in which consulting, recordkeeping or clerical work
is conducted and no retail product is offered.
OPEN LAND — Dedicated parkland and other undeveloped public or private
properties, excluding highway and utility rights-of-way.
OUTPARCEL — A parcel of land, generally located on the perimeter of a
larger parcel of commercial land that is subordinate to the larger parcel for
access, parking and drainage purposes.
PARAPET WALL — A low wall projecting from the edge of a platform,
terrace, or roof. Parapets may rise above the cornice of a building or form
the upper portion of a screen wall to hide rooftop equipment.
PARKING AREA OR LOT — Any place, lot, parcel, or yard used in whole or
in part for the storage or parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING GARAGE — A garage, in which licensed motor vehicles used for
personal conveyance or conveyance of passengers are parked.
PARKING LOT END ISLAND — An enclosed and typically curbed area of
vegetation that is formed parallel to, within, or at the end of a row of
parking to separate parked cars from vehicular drive aisles within a parking
lot.
PARKING LOT MEDIAN — An enclosed and typically curbed area of
vegetation that is formed parallel to parking lot drive aisles and separates
vehicles from pedestrian and vehicular circulation routes.
PARKING, REAR-LOADED — Parking that is located behind the principal
structure and outside of front yards and side yards.
PARKING, ROOM — An arrangement that utilizes parking lot medians to
break up the massing of parking lots into smaller components with no more
than 50 parking spaces each.
PARKING, SIDE-LOADED — Parking that is located between the principal
structure and the side yard property boundary.
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:356
PARKING SPACE — A space used for the temporary location of one motor
vehicle, not including an access driveway, and having direct access to a
street or alley.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A parking space not located in the public
right-of-way.
PARKING SPACE, ON-STREET — A parking space located in the public
right-of-way.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION — An improved pathway at least five feet in
width devoid of obstructions or hazards and intended for use by pedestrians
to commute between destinations, including but not limited to buildings,
structures, parks and open spaces, parking areas, the sidewalk system or
other walkways.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building and its accessory buildings where people
regularly assemble for religious worship, maintained and controlled by a
religious organization.
PLANTING UNIT — The unit of measure, based upon gross building square
footage and the lot line distance along public streets, utilized to determine
the amount of plant material required for development applications in the
Mixed Use Zoning District.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — Any movable container with a
capacity of greater than 300 cubic feet designed for the storage of
materials.[Added 1-23-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
PROFESSIONAL RESIDENCE-OFFICE — A dwelling in a residentially
zoned district containing the office of a health-care practitioner, architect,
engineer, accountant, attorney or similar professional.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
PUB — See "bar."
PUBLIC REALM — All areas legally open to public use, such as public
streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys and parks, as well
as the interior and areas surrounding public buildings.
PUBLIC REALM AMENITY — Structures or improvements open to the
general public and intended to strengthen the urban fabric and enhance the
pedestrian experience, such as, but not limited to, sidewalks, landscaped
open spaces, public seating, public art and crossing aids.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land dedicated for the construction or
maintenance of a public street or alley. For the purpose of this chapter, that
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:357
part between the curbline or outer pavement edge and the outer edge of
the public sidewalk shall be the public right-of-way; where no curb and/or
sidewalk exists, the area within eight feet of the outer pavement edge shall
be the public right-of-way.
PUBLIC USE — Any one or more of the following uses, including grounds
and accessory buildings necessary for their use:
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
RECREATIONAL AREA — A space designed and used for active and passive
participatory athletic and general recreation activities.
RECREATION/FITNESS CENTER — A privately operated establishment
providing facilities or recreational athletics, exercise or physical therapy.
REFUSE AREA — A screened and enclosed area that is solely utilized for the
temporary staging and storage of refuse, and located on the same parcel as
the primary structure to which it services.
RELIGIOUS FACILITY —
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designed, at which food and
beverages are sold for consumption on the premises to patrons seated
within a structure or otherwise enclosed within a building or elsewhere on
the premises. A snack bar or refreshment stand at a public, semipublic or
community swimming pool, playground, playfield or park, or an approved
vendor operating the recreational facilities for the convenience of the
patrons of the facility, shall not be deemed to be a restaurant.
RETAIL, BOUTIQUE — Any retail use of a building or structure less than
8,000 square feet in gross building area in which a limited range of
merchandise or services are provided for sale, including, but not limited
to, salons, clothing and accessory stores, small-scale grocery or nutritional
A. Places of worship, cemeteries, parish houses and convents.
Public parks, playgrounds and recreational areas when authorized or
operated by governmental authority.
B.
Nursery schools, elementary schools, high schools, colleges or
universities having curriculum approved by the Board of Regents of the
State of New York.
C.
D. Public libraries and museums.
E. Nonprofit fire, ambulance and public safety buildings.
place of worship, together with such other structures and uses as are
normally incidental thereto.
A.
A residential care facility operated exclusively for aged persons, under
the control and supervision of a religious or eleemosynary society or
agency, shall for the purposes of this chapter be deemed a religious
facility.
B.
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:358
goods stores, or proprietary goods manufactured or assembled within the
Village of Williamsville.
RETAIL BUSINESS — A commercial activity, including personal service
establishments, characterized by the direct on-premises sale of goods and
services to a consumer, generally involving stock-in-trade.
RETAIL, CONVENIENCE STORE — Small commercial establishments less
than 3,000 square feet in gross building area catering primarily to residents
of nearby areas, providing frequently needed retail goods and personal
services, except petroleum-based fuels and lubricants for motor vehicles.
RETAIL, GOODS AND SERVICES — Any retail use of a building or structure
larger than 8,000 square feet in gross building area in which one or more
articles of general merchandise, commerce or services are provided,
including, but not limited to, department stores, banks, salons, insurance
sales, clothing and accessory stores, grocery stores and pharmacies. Such
uses may include an individual business, a building with multiple
businesses, or a parcel with multiple retail buildings.
RETAIL, NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET — A small retail establishment not to
exceed 8,000 square feet in gross building area, specializing in the sale of
articles such as food products, over-the-counter drugs, tobacco products,
magazines, candy, beverages and similar convenience items.
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between and having frontage
on a collector or arterial traffic street and a local street, and with vehicular
access solely from the latter.
ROOF — The exterior covering on the uppermost part of a building, with the
primary purpose to protect the building and its contents from the effects of
weather.
ROOF EAVE — The extension of the roof beyond the structural building
wall.
ROOF, FALSE — A structure utilized to screen the appearance of rooftop
mechanical equipment, having the appearance of a roof structure that is
integrated and appropriate to the architecture of the building.
ROOF, GABLE — A roof section with a single break at the center of the roof
structure which creates a triangular portion of wall below the sloping roof.
ROOF, GAMBREL — A usually symmetrical two-sided roof with two slopes
of either side, with the upper slope positioned at a shallow angle, and the
lower slope having the steeper pitch.
ROOF, HIP — A roof where all sides slope downwards to the walls, usually
with a fairly gentle slope.
ROOF, MANSARD — A roof with a double pitch on all four sides, the lower
slope having the steeper pitch.
ROOF, SHED — A roof that slopes only in one direction, having a side wall
that is higher than the other.
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:359
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any parabolic dish or other antenna apparatus or
device which is designed to receive television, radio, microwave or other
electronic signals or combinations thereof from a transmitter or transmitter
relay located in outer space.
SCHOOL — An institution providing instruction on a regular basis.
SCREEN or SCREENING DEVICE — A method of reducing the impact of
noise, glare and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive or more
harmonious elements, such as vegetation, berms, fences, walls or any
appropriate combination thereof. See "buffer."
SEASONAL OUTDOOR SEATING — The temporary installation or location
of removable tables and chairs on any public sidewalk or other outdoor area
within the Village for the purpose of serving patrons in connection with
the operation of a restaurant or other commercial establishment serving
food or beverages, except that special event outdoor seating, as regulated
under Chapter 73, shall not constitute seasonal outdoor seating.[Amended
4-23-2012 by L.L. No. 6-2012; 5-28-2013 by L.L. No. 4-2013]
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY — A business establishment providing clothes
washers and dryers for hire to be used by customers on the premises and
may also include washing and folding service for a fee.
SENSITIVE AREA — Cold-water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, or habitats
for threatened, endangered or special-concern species.
SERVICE CANOPY — A canopy utilized to protect drive-through areas,
drop-off zones and gas station fuel pumps.
SERVICE USE — Uses which provide skilled professional labor to
consumers including insurance offices, restaurants, financial services,
business-to-business consulting and other similar services.
SETBACK — The distance between a lot or street line and a building,
structure or portion thereof.
SETBACK, FRONT — The horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the principal building measured at the shortest point.
SETBACK, REAR — The horizontal distance between the rear lot line and
the principal building measured at the closest point.
SETBACK, SIDE — The horizontal distance between the side lot line and the
principal building measured at the closest point.
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of retail and service establishments
providing a range of uses on a single lot or adjacent lots under common
ownership.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — The rental of a dwelling unit for a time period of
between one and 30 days.[Added 11-25-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:360
SHRUB — A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several stems
from the ground or small branches near the ground, may be deciduous or
evergreen.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — See § 112-23 of the Village Code.
SOLID-TO-VOID RATIO — The proportion of wall surface area to window
and door openings in the exterior wall of a building.
SPACE, PRIVATE — Privately held space that is only accessible to the public
upon invitation or upon the granting of permission to enter the space.
SPACE, PUBLIC — A publicly controlled space that is typically available and
open to the public.
SPACE, SEMIPUBLIC — A privately held space that is made available to the
public for public and private use, such as parking lots, interior and exterior
circulation spaces and common areas.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
SPECIAL PERMIT — Authority to use property in a manner which is
otherwise prohibited by this chapter.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORAGE, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT — The location for the long-term
or permanent storage of materials and equipment required to sustain a
commercial enterprise.
STORAGE, REFUSE — The location for the temporary storage or staging
of refuse, recyclable, hazardous, or spent materials prior to pickup by a
sanitation company.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:361
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee or officer
designated by the Board of Trustees to accept and review stormwater
pollution prevention plans (SWPPPs), forward the plans to such agency,
committee, employee, or board of the Village of Williamsville which may be
reviewing any application for a construction activity requiring submission
of a SWPPP, and inspect stormwater management practices. The Board
of Trustees shall appoint such employee or officer to act as the SMO by
resolution.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities prepared and sealed by New York State Professional
Engineer. [Amended 11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018]
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
STORY — That portion of a building which is between one floor level and
the next higher floor level or the roof.
STREET — A thoroughfare, publicly or privately owned, other than a
driveway, designed for vehicular use.
STREET LINE — The right-of-way or established property line of a street as
indicated by dedication, deed of record or by a filed subdivision plan.
STREET, PRIMARY — New York State Route 5, also known as Main Street,
and all intersecting streets.
STREET, SECONDARY — All streets not defined as primary streets.
STREET WALL — The perceived visual boundary of the Main Street corridor
created by building frontages for individual lots.
STRINGCOURSE — A horizontal band (such as bricks) in a building forming
a part of the design.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the
ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, but
not including a trailer.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — Any structure, other than a principal or
accessory building, generally associated with the use of property.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:362
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
SWIMMING POOL — A structure intended for bathing, swimming or diving
purposes, either permanently or temporarily installed, whether above or
below the ground.
TAVERN — See "Bar."
TOWNHOUSE or TOWNHOME — A multifamily project of single-family
dwelling units, which may consist of one or more buildings, attached or
detached, wherein the real property title and ownership are vested in an
owner having an undivided interest with others in the common usage areas
and facilities which serve the project. Administration and maintenance of
common usage areas and facilities must be provided. Although units may
share party walls, each unit is situated on a different parcel of land.
TOWNHOUSE or TOWNHOME, PARENT PARCEL — A lot which is
subdivided into privately owned parcels to create a project of townhouse or
townhome units, which may consist of one or more buildings, attached or
detached.
TRADITIONAL ARCHITECTURE — Architectural designs and styles which
were commonly utilized in the Village of Williamsville and throughout
Western New York State prior to the 1950's. Traditional architectural styles
often include locally driven design elements, materials, and conventions
utilized during the 19th and 20th centuries.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND) — A development
pattern that caters to the pedestrian, requiring a walkable scale and a mix
of residential and commercial uses similar to a traditional village.
TRAILER — A vehicle with two or more wheels designed to be towed
by another motor vehicle, but not including trailers used for the general
hauling of freight.
TRAILER, BOAT — A trailer used for the purpose of transporting a boat.
TRAILER, CAMP — A transportable camping unit designed to be towed
by another vehicle, suitable for temporary shelter but not equipped with
permanent services for water, waste disposal or electricity.
TRAILER, PORTABLE HOT TUB — A trailer used for the purpose of
transporting a hot tub specifically designed for temporary use out-of-doors.
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:363
TRAILER, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A transportable dwelling unit,
either self-propelled or designed to be towed, suitable for year-round
occupancy.
TREE LAWN — The area between the edge of a sidewalk and the curbline
of a street, typically within the public right-of-way.
TREE, ORNAMENTAL — A small deciduous tree (rarely, evergreen),
typically less than 35 feet in height when mature, that is utilized and valued
for the aesthetic appearance, color and/or texture of its flowers, fruits,
foliage, bark, form or habit.
TREE, SHADE — A large deciduous tree (rarely, evergreen), typically
greater than 35 feet in height when mature, that is utilized for its broad leaf
canopy and ability to cast a shadow upon a large area.
USABLE SATELLITE SIGNAL — In the case of a television antenna, a
satellite signal which, when viewed on a conventional television set, is at
least equal in picture quality to that received from a local commercial
television channel or by way of cable television.
USE — The specific purpose for which land, a building or a structure is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — An activity which is incidental, subordinate to and
which may not be carried on independently of a principal use.
USE, PRINCIPAL — An activity which may be carried on independently of
any other activity and which generally characterizes the primary purpose
for which land, buildings or structures thereon are intended and designed.
VALUED HISTORIC FORMS — Those architectural styles and building
forms determined valuable and of historic and aesthetic importance by the
Village of Williamsville Historic Preservation Commission.
VERNACULAR — The use of locally available resources, materials and
traditions, typically developed over many generations within a limited
geography.
VIDEO SALE OR RENTAL FACILITY — Any establishment dedicated
primarily to the sale or rental of video cassette recordings.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — A commercial activity characterized by the
sale, storage or distribution of merchandise in quantity to retail
establishments.
WINDOW AREA — The total area of any single windowpane or series of
windowpanes separated by mullions.
§ 112-2 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-2
1:364
YARD — That portion of a building plot not occupied by a building,
extending open and unobstructed from the ground upward.
YARD, FRONT — The lot area bounded by the front and side lot lines and
front building line, open and unoccupied.
YARD, FRONT EQUIVALENT — That portion of a rear yard of a through
lot extending along a street and from the street line for a depth equal to a
required front yard.
YARD, REAR — The lot area bounded by the rear and side lot lines and rear
building line, open and unoccupied.
YARD, SIDE — The lot area between the side lot line and side building line
further bounded by the front and rear yards, open and unoccupied.
YARD, SIDE EXTERIOR — A side yard abutting on a street line.
YARD, SIDE INTERIOR — A side yard abutting on a lot line of an adjoining
lot.
§ 112-3. Applicability.
A. Except as hereinafter provided:
(1) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered
unless in conformity with all of the provisions of this chapter and
the Code Enforcement Officer has issued an approved building
permit.
(2) No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered
except in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(3) Except as expressly provided for in this chapter, no part of a yard or
open space required about any building or structure for the
purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of
a yard or open space similarly required for another building or
structure.
(4) All uses not specifically permitted in a district shall be deemed
prohibited.
(5) This section shall not apply to existing buildings or structures, nor
to the existing use of any building, structure or land to the extent
that it was a legal use at the time of enactment of this chapter.
Hereafter, this chapter shall apply to any change in use, alteration,
extension or movement of a building or structure and to any change
in use of land.
B. Certain public uses excluded. This chapter shall not be construed to
limit or interfere with the dedication, development or use of any land or
building as public parks, playgrounds or schools required for
compulsory education, or with the use of land or buildings owned by the
§ 112-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-3
1:365
§ 112-4. Conflict with other regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall be considered to be the minimum
requirements to promote and protect public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and other aspects of the general welfare. Whenever
any provision of this chapter is at variance or conflict with any other
provision of this chapter or of any other statute, local law or regulation
covering any of the same subject matter, the most restrictive provision and
the highest standard shall apply.
§ 112-5. Administration, enforcement and penalties.
United States government, State of New York, County of Erie, Village
of Williamsville or the Town of Amherst and used for governmental
purposes, or with the construction, installation, operation and
maintenance for public utilities existing or hereafter authorized, and
shall not be interpreted to permit yards, garages or structures for
service or storage unless permitted within the district.
C. Interpretation of permitted uses and boundaries.
(1) If any use can be construed to be incorporated within a more
general use listing, the more specific listing, if any, shall control.
Where a use is first listed in a less restricted district, such use shall
not be construed to be permitted in a more restricted district.
(2) No use shall be permitted in any zoning district unless stated to be
permitted in a specific or generally permitted use listing for such
zoning district.
D. Temporary structures or uses.
(1) Any contractor, engineer or architect may erect in any district(s) an
on-site temporary structure for use incidental to construction work,
for a period of time not to exceed one year. Such structure shall be
removed immediately upon the completion or abandonment of the
work.
(2) The temporary use of a dwelling or dwelling unit as a sales model
shall be permitted in all districts.
A. Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer may cause inspection of any building,
structure, land or use thereof. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
order, in writing, the correction of any violation of this chapter.
C. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$250 for each violation. Each day of continued violation shall constitute
a separate and additional violation.
§ 112-3 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-6
1:366
§ 112-6. Zoning districts. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
The Village of Williamsville is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
R-3 Single-Family or Two-Family Residential District
R-3M Multiple-Dwelling Residential District
MU Mixed Use District
NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
§ 112-7. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of each zoning district are shown on a map
entitled "Zoning Map of the Village of Williamsville."20
§ 112-8. Boundary interpretations.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any district as
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 112-9. Classification of annexed territory.
The zoning classification of any area hereafter annexed shall be established
by the Board of Trustees at the time of annexation.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, alleys or highways shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the corporate
boundaries of the Village of Williamsville shall be construed as
following such corporate boundaries.
D. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of streets, alleys or
highways shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on
the Zoning Map21 shall be determined by the scale of the map.
E. Where a district boundary line divides an existing lot, zone standards
are applied separately to each portion of the lot. [Amended 7-23-2018
by L.L. No. 11-2018]
20.Editor's Note: This Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
21.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Village offices.
§ 112-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:367
§ 112-10. Nonconforming uses and structures. [Amended 5-26-2015
by L.L. No. 7-2015; 10-26-2015 by L.L. No. 13-2015]
A. Except as otherwise provided herein or elsewhere in this Code, the
lawful use of land, buildings or structures existing at the date of the
adoption of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, may be continued
although such use, land, building or structure does not conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land,
building or structure is located.
B. Any nonconforming use may be changed to any other use permitted in
the district in which it is first permitted. Once a nonconforming use is
changed to a conforming use or to a more restricted use, such use
thereafter shall not revert to a less restricted use.
C. Enlargement. [Amended 10-11-2016 by L.L. No. 6-2016]
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended, except that
in any Mixed Use (MU and NMU) or Manufacturing (M-1) District,
a nonconforming building may be enlarged to an extent not
exceeding 20%, in the aggregate, of the floor area devoted to such
nonconforming use. In no case shall such enlargement extend
beyond the lot occupied by the nonconforming use or violate any
height, yard, parking area or other open space requirement of this
chapter. When the total of all enlargements equals 20% of the floor
area existing at the time the use became a nonconforming use, no
further enlargement shall be permitted.
(2) A nonconforming structure in any single- or two-family residential
home may be enlarged or extended up to 20% or 300 square feet,
whichever is lesser, provided that the enlargement does not
increase the degree of the existing nonconformity and the
enlargement or extension does not create a new nonconformity.
D. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance or
repair of a nonconforming building or structure or use thereof.
E. No alteration, either interior or exterior, shall be made to a
nonconforming building or structure except:
(1) When required by law.
(2) To restore to a safe condition after determination by the Code
Enforcement Official that it is unsafe.
(3) To accomplish enlargements as authorized by this chapter.
(4) To accomplish a change to a conforming use or to a more restricted
use.
F. Any nonconforming building or structure that has been destroyed or
damaged by any means, other than deliberate demolition, shall be
§ 112-10 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-10
1:368
allowed to be rebuilt and shall maintain its nonconforming status,
provided that:
(1) The total floor area is not increased from the total floor area of the
original nonconforming building or structure.
(2) If any modification shall result in additional parking spaces being
required or proposed, provision for the installation and design of
such parking spaces shall be required by the Planning/
Architectural Review Board as a precondition to approval of
reconstruction.
(3) Reconstruction shall commence within six months of date of
damage or destruction.
G. With respect to any such building or structure located in the R-3M, MU
or NMU Districts, any reconstruction shall be subject to the design
standards set forth in §§ 112-15, 112-16 and 112-17, respectively.
H. Nothing shall prevent the construction of a building or other structure
which is made nonconforming by this chapter or any amendment
thereto, provided that a building permit has been lawfully issued, and
further provided that:
(1) Construction of the foundation shall have commenced prior to the
nonconforming date and completion shall have been diligently
pursued.
(2) The Board of Appeals determines that substantial expenditures
have been made or substantial financial obligations have been
incurred prior to the nonconforming date and completion has been
diligently prosecuted.
I. Abandonment.
(1) In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, building or
structure or any part or portion thereof has been discontinued for a
period of six months, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter
be reestablished, and all future uses shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Such discontinuance of the active and
continuous operation of such nonconforming use or part or portion
thereof for such period of six months is hereby construed and
considered to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use,
regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon the same
or of an intent to resume active operations. If actual abandonment
of the nonconforming use of land and/or buildings is in fact
evidenced by the removal of buildings, structures, machinery,
equipment or other evidences of such nonconforming use, the
abandonment shall be construed to be completed, and all rights to
reestablish or continue such nonconforming use shall be
terminated immediately.
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:369
§ 112-11. Frontage on street.
In all zoning districts, no dwelling or principal building shall be erected on
a lot which does not have frontage on a street or alley.
§ 112-12. R-1 Single-Family Residence District.
(2) In addition to the requirements of § 112-10I(1), the use of any
property or portion thereof to operate a drive-in service facility
shall be deemed abandoned upon the change in the entity or
individual owning, leasing or operating such property or drive-in
service facility, regardless of any interruption in the operation of
such drive-in service facility.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in an R-1 Single-
Family Residence District:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) One single-family dwelling.
(b) Religious facility.
(c) A private, nonprofit elementary or secondary school accredited
by the New York State Department of Education.
(d) Boarding/rooming house.
(e) A day-care facility which is accessory to a school or religious
facility.
(f) Fire station without club facilities.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses may be permitted in an R-1 Single-
Family Residence District as follows:
(a) A single accessory apartment, subject to the following:
[1] Approval of a special permit, granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals under this chapter.
[2] The owner(s) of the dwelling unit in which the accessory
apartment is located shall occupy at least one of the
dwelling units on the premises, except for bona fide
absences, for a period of five years prior to applying for the
special permit, and said accessory apartment shall be
clearly a subordinate part of the dwelling units.
[3] No rent shall be received for the accessory apartment, and
such unit shall be occupied only by persons related by
blood or marriage to the family occupying the dwelling or
by not more than one employee of that family.
§ 112-10 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-12
1:370
[4] The accessory apartment may be created only through
conversion of a dwelling unit. Garage space shall not be
converted.
[5] No exterior changes shall be made which, in the opinion of
the Board of Appeals, do not conform to the visual
character of the one- or two-family neighborhood.
[6] Any new entrances shall be located on the side or in the
rear of the dwelling unit. In no case shall an accessory
apartment be greater in floor area than 500 square feet.
[7] At least three off-street parking spaces shall be available
for use by the owner-occupant(s) and tenant(s).
[8] In order to encourage the development of dwelling units
for disabled and handicapped individuals and persons with
limited mobility, the Board of Appeals may allow
reasonable deviation from these stated conditions where
necessary to install features that facilitate access and
mobility for disabled persons.
[9] Any other appropriate or more stringent conditions
deemed necessary by the Board of Appeals to protect
public health, safety and the character of the residential
neighborhood.
[10] Purchasers of a dwelling that has been previously granted
a special permit for an accessory apartment, who desire to
continue the accessory apartment, shall reapply for a
permit and must demonstrate that all conditions
prerequisite to granting of the original permit have been
met.
(b) Short-term rental, subject to the following: [Added
11-25-2019 by L.L. No. 8-201922]
[1] Approval of a special use permit granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals under this chapter. An application for a
special use permit shall be on a form provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by an
application fee as established by the Board of Trustees
from time to time. Such special use permit shall remain in
effect unless revoked by the Code Enforcement Officer for
noncompliance with the terms of the permit or any of the
following conditions, or the property is transferred to a
new owner.
22.Editor's Note: This local law also renumbered former Subsection A(2)(b) through (d) as
Subsection A(2)(c) through (e), respectively.
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-12
1:371
[2] Before such special use permit may be granted, the
premises must be inspected by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his/her designee to ensure that the premises is
in substantial compliance with these regulations and the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Codes. By applying for a special use permit, the owner
consents to biennial inspections of the premises for the
duration of the permit, unless more frequent inspections
are deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer or
his/her designee.
[3] The short-term rental dwelling unit may be, but is not
limited to, an attached or detached accessory apartment
or whole house property.
[4] The owner of the premises in which the short-term rental
dwelling unit is located shall continuously occupy the
premises throughout the operation of the short-term rental
units unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that such
non-owner-occupied short-term rental dwelling unit will
not adversely affect the overall character of the
neighborhood and would not violate the intent of this
chapter.
[5] No fewer than two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for the premises in which the short-term rental
dwelling unit is located.
[6] No two short-term rental dwelling units shall be located on
the same residential block without a finding by the Zoning
Board of Appeals that such short-term rental dwelling
unit(s) in excess of such limitation will not adversely affect
the overall character of the neighborhood and would not
violate the intent of this chapter.
[7] No exterior display or signage related to the use of the
premises for short-term rental shall be permitted.
[8] The owner/operator of a short-term rental property shall
also comply with Chapter 75 Rental Property.
(c) Home occupation, subject to the following:
[1] The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not
change the character thereof.
[2] Employment or participation of occupants shall not exceed
two persons, and of nonoccupants, one person.
[3] No exterior display or indication of the activity shall be
visible to the general public.
§ 112-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-12
1:372
[4] Outdoor sales or display of items for sale is prohibited.
[5] Signs, except for professional identification signs, are
prohibited.
[6] On-site parking of a commercial vehicle advertising the
home occupation is prohibited unless housed in an
enclosed residential garage whenever the vehicle is on the
premises.
[7] Any variation in the residential character of the property,
such as construction of a separate entrance, other exterior
structural alteration or addition of paved areas, is
prohibited.
[8] Outdoor storage of any materials or goods associated with
the home occupation is prohibited.
[9] The home occupation is confined to the principal structure
and no accessory structure or yard is used in conjunction
therewith, except for required parking spaces.
[10] The floor area within a principal building used or occupied
in conjunction with the home occupation, inclusive of
basements, attics, cellars and similar areas, shall not
involve more than 25% of any one story or exceed a
cumulative total of 500 square feet.
[11] The following uses are expressly prohibited: a barbershop,
a beauty parlor, a restaurant or tavern, a funeral home, a
dance studio, a printing/copy service, a product/
component manufacture or fabrication company, all motor
vehicle repair or dismantling and small-engine repair.
[12] The on-premises sale of merchandise is prohibited except
where clearly incidental and secondary to the home
occupation, limited in scope, and items for sale are not
displayed in any configuration resembling a retail store.
[13] The home occupation shall not create any hazards to
neighboring persons or property and shall not cause any
electronic interference, excessive noise, vibration, smoke,
dust, odors, heat or glare on surrounding properties.
[14] Students receiving instruction in visual or performing arts,
including but not limited to music, dance, fine arts or
crafts, within any common period of time shall not exceed
two.
(d) A single chicken coop, subject to the following: [Added
6-25-2018 by L.L. No. 10-201823; amended 6-24-2019 by
L.L. No. 5-2019]
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-12
1:373
[1] Approval of a permit granted by the Code Enforcement
Officer under this chapter. An application for a permit shall
be on a form provided by the Code Enforcement Officer
and shall be accompanied by an application fee as
established by the Board of Trustees from time to time.
[2] The raising of chickens shall be conducted as an accessory
use on the same premises associated with an occupied
single-family detached dwelling as the principal use;
[3] The chickens shall be raised for noncommercial purposes;
[4] The number of chickens shall be limited to a maximum of
six;
[5] Roosters shall not be allowed. Breeding of chickens on-site
shall not be allowed;
[6] The permit shall be limited to the applicant and shall not
be transferable;
[7] The raising of the chickens shall be subject to all
applicable sanitary, noise and property maintenance
regulations, ordinances and laws. Chicken waste shall not
be composted or mulched on-site. Chicken waste shall be
stored in appropriate containers that do not create any
nuisance;
[8] Any odor associated with the raising of the chickens shall
not be perceptible beyond the property line of the
premises where the chickens are being raised;
[9] The chickens shall not be allowed to roam freely beyond
the property lines of the premises associated with the
special use permit application and, unless the chickens
have had their wings clipped so as to prevent flight, must
be kept within the coop of other enclosed area to prevent
escape from said property;
[10] Feed for the chickens must be stored in secure, rodent
proof containers. Unsecured excess feed shall not be
allowed;
[11] Chickens shall not be allowed in the front yard between
the principal structure and a public or private street;
[12] Chicken coops shall be located at least 15 feet from any
property line.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(2)(c) as Subsection
A(2)(d).
§ 112-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-12
1:374
[13] The Code Enforcement Officer may require screening of
the chicken coop as deemed appropriate.
[14] The permit shall be valid for a maximum of two years.
Additional consecutive or non-consecutive permits may be
granted by the Code Enforcement Officer upon the filing of
each new application.
[15] The applicant shall provide proof that he or she has
notified, in person or in writing, all property owners within
100 feet of the applicant's property that the applicant has
applied for a special use permit to maintain a chicken coop
and informing such property owners of the date and time
of the public hearing on the application. Prior to the
issuance of a permit hereunder, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall conduct an inspection of the premises
associated with application and prepare a report
concerning the suitability of the property to house a
chicken coop without causing unreasonable interference
with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties and
without posing a threat to public health and safety. Any
property maintenance issues noted in such inspection
must be corrected prior to any application hereunder
being deemed complete and a public hearing scheduled.
[16] The Code Enforcement Officer may revoke any permit
granted hereunder if, upon inspection of the premises, he
or she determines that the permit holder is not in
compliance with the requirements of this subsection or the
permit.
[17] Any person aggrieved by the issuance, denial or
revocation of a permit granted hereunder may appeal such
determination or action by the Code Enforcement Officer
to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided for and
governed by New York Village Law §§ 7-712-a and
7-712-b(1). In deciding such appeal, the Board of Appeals
shall consider the requirements and intent of this
subsection and shall set forth the basis for its
determination in writing. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Board of Appeals may seek judicial review
of such determination as provided for and governed by
New York Village Law § 7-712-c.
(e) Other customary accessory uses, but not including any use
conducted for gain.
B. Prohibited uses. Uses prohibited shall be all other uses not enumerated
above.
C. Lot and structural requirements. The following lot and structural
requirements shall apply in an R-1 Single-Family Residence District:
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-12
1:375
(1) Lots.
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Street frontage: 75 feet minimum.
(c) Maximum lot coverage: not to exceed 25% for principal
building or 35% for principal and accessory buildings and
structures.
(2) Principal building.
(a) Minimum floor area.
Building Type Square Feet
One-story 1,200
Two-story 1,500
(b) Front yard setback: twenty-five-foot minimum and fifty-foot
maximum or an average of existing principal buildings within
150 feet on either side.
(c) Side yard setback: five-foot minimum on each of two required
side yards, and where a side yard is used for vehicle ingress or
egress, such side yard shall be at least 12 feet in width.
(d) Side yard setback, corner lots. An exterior side yard (corner
lot) shall have a width at least equal to 15% of the lot width but
need not exceed the front yard requirement along the street on
which the exterior yard abuts. In no event shall an exterior side
yard be less than 10 feet.
(e) Rear yard setback: 25% of the lot depth, but not less than 25
feet.
(f) Rear yard setback, through lot. On a through lot where the
rear lot line coincides with a street line, a front yard equivalent
shall be provided and shall take precedence over rear yard
setbacks.
(g) Maximum height: 30 feet.
(h) In no case shall a principal building or any addition thereto be
located within 10 feet of any other building or structure unless
the building or addition thereto is constructed with materials
that will afford one hour of fire protection, in accordance with
the New York State Uniform Building and Fire Safety Code.24
In no event, however, shall the distance between buildings and
structures be less than eight feet.
(3) Accessory buildings/structures.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Fire Prevention and Building Code Administration.
§ 112-12 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-12
1:376
§ 112-13. R-2 Single-Family Residence District.
(a) Front yard setback: not permitted in front yard.
(b) Side yard setback: not permitted in side yard, except that an
attached one-story garage not over 12 feet in height may
extend into a required side yard not more than three feet. In no
case shall any part of an accessory building be located within
10 feet of any other building or structure unless the accessory
building is constructed with materials that will afford one hour
of fire protection, in accordance with the New York State
Uniform Building and Fire Safety Code. In no event, however,
shall the distance between buildings and structures be less
than eight feet.
(c) Rear yard setback. No part shall be closer than two feet to a lot
line and in no case within 10 feet of any other building or
structure unless the building or structure is constructed with
materials that will afford one hour of fire protection, in
accordance with the New York State Uniform Building and Fire
Safety Code. In no event, however, shall the distance between
buildings and structures be less than eight feet. In the case of a
corner lot, no accessory building or structure shall be closer
than 10 feet to a rear lot line, nor shall it be closer to the
exterior side lot line than an average of existing buildings
within 150 feet on either side.
(d) Maximum height: 14 feet.
(4) Required open area. Access drives, walks, unenclosed steps or
terraces not extending more than one foot above the adjoining
finished grade level may be located in any required open area.
(5) Storage of firewood. No person shall store firewood or maintain a
woodpile unless it is kept stacked and reasonably secure, it is
raised at least three inches off the ground and it is stored in such a
manner as to protect against infestation by rodents, insects or
other pests.
(6) Berms. No berm shall be constructed, the height of which exceeds
more than 36 inches above the natural surface of the surrounding
terrain.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in an R-2 Single-
Family Residence District:
(1) Principal uses: as permitted and regulated in an R-1 District.
(2) Accessory uses: as permitted and regulated in an R-1 District.
B. Prohibited uses: as regulated in an R-1 District.
§ 112-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-13
1:377
§ 112-14. R-3 Single-Family or Two-Family Residence District.
C. Lot and structural requirements. The following lot and structural
requirements shall apply in an R-2 Single-Family Residence District:
(1) Lots.
(a) Minimum lot area: 6,250 square feet.
(b) Street frontage: 60 feet minimum.
(c) Lot coverage: not to exceed 25% for a principal building or
35% for a principal building and accessory buildings and
structures.
(2) Principal building.
(a) Minimum floor area.
Building Type Square Feet
One-story 1,000
Two-story 1,250
(b) All setbacks and height: as permitted and regulated in an R-1
District.
(c) In no case shall a principal building or any addition thereto be
located within 10 feet of any other building or structure unless
the building or addition thereto is constructed with materials
that will afford one hour of fire protection, in accordance with
the New York State Uniform Building and Fire Safety Code.25
In no event, however, shall the distance between buildings and
structures be less than eight feet.
(3) Accessory buildings/structures: as permitted and regulated in an
R-1 District.
(4) Required open area: as permitted and regulated in an R-1 District.
(5) Storage of firewood: as permitted and regulated in an R-1 District.
(6) Berms: as permitted and regulated in an R-1 District.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in an R-3 Single-
Family or Two-Family Residence District:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) As permitted and regulated in R-1 and R-2 Districts.
(b) One two-family dwelling.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Fire Prevention and Building Code Administration.
§ 112-13 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-14
1:378
(2) Accessory uses: as permitted and regulated in R-1 and R-2
Districts.
B. Prohibited uses: as regulated in R-1 and R-2 Districts.
C. Lot and structural requirements. The following lot and structural
requirements shall apply in an R-3 Single-Family or Two-Family
Residence District:
(1) Lots.
(a) Minimum lot area.
Building Type Square Feet
One-family 6,250
Two-family 7,500
(b) Street frontage: 50 feet minimum.
(c) Lot coverage: not to exceed 25% for a principal building or
35% for a principal building and accessory buildings and
structures.
(2) Principal building.
(a) Minimum floor area.
Building Type Square Feet
One-story 800
Two-story 1,000
(b) Setbacks and height: as permitted and regulated in R-1 and R-2
Districts.
(c) In no case shall a principal building or any addition thereto be
located within 10 feet of any other building or structure unless
the building or structure is constructed with materials that will
afford one hour of fire protection, in accordance with the New
York State Uniform Building and Fire Safety Code.26 In no
event, however, shall the distance between buildings and
structures be less than eight feet.
(3) Accessory buildings/structures: as permitted and regulated in R-1
and R-2 Districts.
(4) Required open area: as permitted and regulated in R-1 and R-2
Districts.
(5) Storage of firewood: as permitted and regulated in R-1 and R-2
Districts.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Fire Prevention and Building Code Administration.
§ 112-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-14
1:379
§ 112-15. R-3M Multiple-Dwelling Residence District. [Amended
5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015; 6-25-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
The permitted uses and regulations governing the R-3M District are set
forth in Attachment 1, "R-3M Multiple-Dwelling Residential District Design
Standards," expressly incorporated herein.27
§ 112-16. MU Mixed Use District. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No.
7-2015; 6-25-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
The permitted uses and regulations governing the MU District are set
forth in Attachment 2, "Mixed Use District Design Standards," expressly
incorporated herein.28
§ 112-17. NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District. [Added 5-26-2015
by L.L. No. 7-201529; amended 6-25-2018 by L.L. No. 10-2018]
The permitted uses and regulations governing the NMU District are set
forth in Attachment 3, "NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District Design
Standards," expressly incorporated herein.30
§ 112-18. through § 112-19. (Reserved)31
§ 112-20. M-1 Light Manufacturing District. [Amended 5-26-2015
by L.L. No. 7-2015]
(6) Berms: as permitted and regulated in R-1 and R-2 Districts.
A. Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in an M-1 Light
Manufacturing District:
(1) Principal building.
(a) As permitted and regulated in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3M, MU and
NMU Districts.
(b) Manufacturing or industrial business.
(c) Wholesale/warehouse business.
(d) Contractor's equipment or materials storage.
(e) Public utilities storage or service facility.
27.Editor's Note: The R-3M Multiple Dwelling Residential District Design Standards are
available in the Village offices or through the online version of the Code (eCode 360®).
28.Editor's Note: The Mixed Use District Design Standards are available in the Village offices
or through the online version of the Code (eCode 360®).
29.Editor's Note: This local law also repealed former § 112-17, C-1 Professional and
Administrative District.
30.Editor's Note: The NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use District Design Standards are available
in the Village offices or through the online version of the Code (eCode 360®).
31.Editor's Note: Former § 112-18, C-2 Restricted Commercial District, and § 112-19, C-3
General Commercial District, were repealed 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015.
§ 112-14 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-20
1:380
(f) Air structure.
(g) Junkyard.
(2) Accessory uses: as permitted and regulated in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3M,
MU and NMU Districts.
B. Prohibited uses.
(1) Uses prohibited shall be all other uses not previously enumerated.
(2) No use of land, buildings or structures shall be permitted if the
operation normally results in any fire or explosive hazard or
dissemination of atmospheric pollutant, noise, glare or odor beyond
the boundaries of the premises on which such use is located.
C. Lot and structural requirements. The following lot and structural
requirements shall apply in an M-1 Light Manufacturing District.
(1) Lot.
(a) Minimum lot area:
[1] No restriction for nonresidential or mixed-occupancy
buildings.
[2] Single-family dwelling: 6,000 square feet.
[3] Each additional dwelling unit: 2,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot coverage: as regulated by landscaping and offstreet
parking requirements.
(2) Principal building.
(a) Minimum floor area: no restriction.
(b) Front yard setback: as regulated by landscaping and off-street
parking requirements.
(c) Side yard setback: 10 feet for each side yard, except that
where a side lot line abuts a lot in an R District, its width shall
be not less than 20 feet.
(d) Rear yard setback: minimum of 12 feet.
(e) Height: as permitted and regulated by landscape and off-street
parking requirements.
(3) Accessory buildings/structures: shall not be greater than 18 feet in
height and shall be set back from any property line abutting a
residential district boundary a distance at least equal to the height
of the structure.
(4) Required open area: as permitted and regulated by landscaping
and off-street parking requirements.
§ 112-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-21
1:381
§ 112-21. Parking. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
A. Off-street parking requirements. In the R-1, R-2, R-3 and M-1 Districts,
the following off-street parking requirements shall apply:
(1) One- and two-family dwelling: minimum of two spaces per dwelling
unit, but in no event more than four for a single-family dwelling and
six for a two-family dwelling.
(2) Home occupation: one additional space for the nonresident
employee.
(3) Religious facility: one space for each five linear feet of bench
seating, or in the case of chair seating, one space for each two
seats, plus 10 spaces.
(4) School (elementary or secondary): one space for each classroom,
plus one space for each 250 square feet of office space.
(5) Day-care facility: two spaces for each four children.
(6) Boarding/rooming house: minimum of two spaces, plus one space
for each room to let.
(7) Manufacturing, industrial or other commercial use permitted
within the M-1 District: minimum of one space for every 1,000
square feet of occupied or usable space.
B. Residential parking area design standards.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises to
permit the placement or storage of any unlicensed or unregistered
vehicle or any vehicle without a valid inspection sticker, unless the
vehicle is stored within a wholly enclosed building.
(2) No premises shall provide outside parking for more than one
commercially licensed vehicle or more than 5,000 pounds in
weight, as indicated on currently valid registration, owned and/or
regularly used by a resident of the premises where the vehicle is
parked, nor provide parking, storage or a base of operations for
construction equipment and/or their support equipment.
(3) A trailer, boat trailer, camp trailer, recreational vehicle trailer or
portable hot tub trailer shall be parked or stored only in a rear
yard. Any trailer in excess of 26 feet in length shall be stored only
within a wholly enclosed building.
(4) No off-street parking shall be permitted in any front or exterior side
yard or within five feet of any side or rear lot line, except in an
established driveway. In no event shall any motor vehicle be parked
on the landscaped portion of a yard.
(5) A driveway may extend from the front edge of the property through
the front yard to the side or rear yard of a residence. The maximum
§ 112-21 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-21
1:382
width of the driveway at the street line and within the front yard
shall be 18 feet. In no event shall more than 25% of any front yard
area be paved or used for a driveway or off-street parking.
(6) No parking shall be permitted in the public right-of-way except on
the paved portion of a street or alley.
(7) The use of any camp trailer, recreational vehicle trailer or mobile
home as temporary living quarters, for hire or otherwise, is
prohibited.
(8) With respect to property located within an R-3M District and used
for multifamily purposes, the design standards contained in
§ 112-15 shall apply in addition to the requirements herein.
C. Mixed Use (MU and NMU) and Manufacturing (M-1) parking area
standards. In addition to the requirements contained in the applicable
design standards governing the MU and NMU Districts, the following
standards apply to all parking areas located in any Mixed Use (MU and
NMU) and Manufacturing (M-1) District:
(1) Parking spaces may not be located in any existing front yard or in
any required buffer areas.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any premises to
permit the placement or storage of any unlicensed or unregistered
motor vehicle or any vehicle without a valid inspection sticker on
the premises, unless stored within a wholly enclosed building.
(3) No premises shall provide outside parking for more than one
commercially licensed vehicle of more than 5,000 pounds in
weight, as indicated on currently valid registration, owned and/or
regularly used by the occupant or tenant where the vehicle is
parked, nor provide parking, storage or a base of operations for
construction equipment or their support equipment.
(4) The use of any camp trailer, recreational vehicle trailer or mobile
home as temporary living quarters, for hire or otherwise, is
prohibited.
(5) Parking shall not be permitted in the public right-of-way nor within
five feet of the public right-of-way in a rear yard. The land within
the area of prohibited parking shall be delineated at its inner line or
edge by a permanent continuous curb, and said area shall be
landscaped or planted with appropriate ground cover.
(6) The curb cut, driveway and parking area shall be designed so that
all vehicle movements to and from the public right-of-way are in a
forward direction. The design of the parking area shall permit entry
and exit without the necessity of moving any vehicle(s) parked in
another space.
§ 112-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-21
1:383
§ 112-22. (Reserved)32
§ 112-23. Planning/Architectural Review Board. [Amended
10-15-2013 by L.L. No. 8-2013; 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
(7) The location, number and width of each curb cut providing access
to and from a public road shall be specified by the Planning/
Architectural Review Board. A curb cut shall not be located within
20 feet of the nearest curb cut located on the same site or on any
adjoining property. A property less than 60 feet in width may be
exempt from compliance with this twenty-foot limitation.
(8) Landscaping, snow storage and drainage shall be provided as
required by the applicable design standards or, with respect to the
M-1 District, as determined by the Planning/Architectural Review
Board.
(9) Each parking area shall provide for a system of drainage and,
where possible, shall be connected to the public storm sewer. Such
system of drainage shall comply with any SWPPP submitted
pursuant to any provision of the Village Code.
(10) All off-street parking areas and driveways shall be paved and
striped to delineate parking spaces. A permanent concrete curb
shall be provided to protect buffers, lighting standards, signs and
other installations.
(11)With respect to any property located in a Mixed Use (MU or NMU)
District, in the event of any conflict between the standards
provided herein and the applicable design standards contained in
§§ 112-16 and 112-17, the applicable design standards shall
govern.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) It is the purpose of this chapter to:
(a) Preserve and promote the character and appearances and
conserve the property values of the Village, the attractiveness
of whose residential and business areas is the economic
mainstay of the community, by providing procedures for a site
plan and architectural review of structures henceforth erected,
reconstructed or altered in any MU, NMU, R-3M and M-1
District, as well as any proposed subdivision of land into four or
more buildable lots within any district;
(b) Encourage good qualities of exterior design and appearances
and to relate such design and appearances to the sites and
surroundings;
32.Editor's Note: Former § 112-22, Commercial and light manufacturing parking, was
repealed 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015.
§ 112-21 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-23
1:384
(c) Permit originality and resourcefulness in building design and
appearances which are appropriate to the sites and
surroundings;
(d) Prevent such designs and appearances as are unnecessarily
offensive to visual sensibilities or out of character with the
valued historic building forms within the Village;
(e) Foster the attractiveness and functional utility of the
community as a place to live and work;
(f) Encourage, where appropriate, a mix of uses within
permissible use zones;
(g) Raise the level of community expectations for the quality of its
built environment; and
(h) Promote the Village Land Use Vision as adopted in the Village
Community Plan.
(2) The Village Board shall hereby concur that any building or
structure found by the Planning/Architectural Review Board to be
visually offensive or inappropriate by reason of poor quality of
exterior design, by excessive similarity or striking visual discord in
relation to its site or surroundings mars the appearance of its area;
is detrimental to the character of its neighborhood; prevents the
most appropriate use and development of land; and therefore
adversely affects the economic stability, prosperity, health, safety
and general welfare of the entire community.
B. Creation of the Planning/Architectural Review Board. There is hereby
created a Planning/Architectural Review Board, which shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Village Board. Alternate members
shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees, to serve for such terms
established by the Village Board. All members shall be residents of the
Village. The Village Board shall annually choose one member to serve
as Chairperson. The Village Board shall have the power to remove any
member for cause. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of
any member whose place has become vacant. The Building and Zoning
Clerk or other Village Board designee shall serve as the Secretary to
the Board.
(1) Alternate Planning/Architectural Review Board member. The
position of alternate Planning/Architectural Review Board member
is hereby created for purposes of substituting for Board members
in the event that a Board member is unable to serve because of a
conflict of interest or for any other reason. The Village Board shall
have the power to appoint up to two alternates. The Planning/
Architectural Review Board Chairperson may designate an
alternate or alternate member(s) when such member(s) is/are
unable to participate for the reasons set forth herein. Such
alternate member(s) shall have all the powers and responsibilities
§ 112-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-23
1:385
of such member(s) of the Planning/Architectural Review Board.
Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of the initial
Planning/Architectural Review Board meeting at which the
designation(s) occurred.
(2) Effective date. This subsection shall take effect immediately upon
its filing with the New York State Department of State.
C. Referrals. The Planning/Architectural Review Board shall review all
applications in the following categories:
(1) R-3M and Mixed Use Districts:
(a) For lots zoned R-3M, any proposed action described in
§ 112-15A(4);
(b) For lots zoned MU, any proposed action described in
§ 112-16A(4);
(c) For lots zoned NMU, any proposed action described in
§ 112-17A(4).
(d) For all lots, a redevelopment plan or interim landscaping plan
required under § 12-4. [Added 11-25-2019 by L.L. No.
7-2019]
(2) For lots zoned M-1:
(a) All applications for the construction or reconstruction of any
building or structure.
(b) All plans for any exterior alteration or addition to any building
or structure or for which the Code Enforcement Officer
estimates the cost to be in excess of $10,000.
(c) All plans for the erection of a permanent sign as required
under Chapter 84, Signs, of the Village Code.]
(d) For all lots, a redevelopment plan or interim landscaping plan
required under § 12-4. [Added 11-25-2019 by L.L. No.
7-2019]
(3) For lots in any district:
(a) All proposals involving the subdivision of land into four or more
buildable lots.
(b) All plans or proposals which, in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Official, violate the intent of this chapter.
(c) All proposals by the Village Board for revisions of the
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Map and zoning of specific land
areas.
D. Permit required.
§ 112-23 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-23
1:386
(1) No activity subject to site plan or architectural review shall be
undertaken, or a permit issued therefor, without approval from the
Planning/Architectural Review Board.
(2) Prior to the Planning/Architectural Review Board making a
determination on any application subject to site plan and/or
architectural review, the applicant may request, or the Planning/
Architectural Review Board may, at its discretion, require, a
preliminary sketch plan conference to review basic design concepts
and generally determine the information to be required for the
Board to make its determination on the application. At any such
sketch plan conference, the applicant shall provide a statement of
rough sketch describing what is proposed, as well as an area map
depicting the lot under consideration and all properties, streets and
easements within 200 feet of the boundaries thereof.
(3) Upon a finding by the Planning/Architectural Review Board that,
due to special conditions peculiar to a site, certain information
normally required as part of the application for site plan and/or
architectural review, as specified below, is inappropriate,
unnecessary or may cause extraordinary or unnecessary hardship,
the Board may waive the provision of such information, provided
that such waiver will not impair the ability of the Board to fully
review such application or have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of these procedures.
E. Site plan approval.
(1) Any application requiring site plan approval shall be accompanied
by the following information:
(a) Proposed use.
(b) Cost of project.
(c) Current survey showing all existing buildings, lot lines and
fences sealed by a licensed surveyor. [Amended 11-26-2018
by L.L. No. 13-2018]
(d) Site plan, to scale, showing all properties, structures, streets
and easements within 500 feet of the applicant's property and
location of all proposed structures.
(e) Parking, including number of spaces, ingress, egress, buffers,
drainage, lighting and lot surface.
(f) Proposed site improvements, including fences, culverts,
retaining wall, etc.
(g) Compliance with Uniform Code regarding handicapped access
and parking.
(h) Access for firefighting.
§ 112-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-23
1:387
(i) Recommendation from the Traffic and Safety Committee, if the
application involves any planned alteration in movement of
vehicular traffic on the property, the addition or subtraction of
on-site parking or the addition or elimination of any curb cut on
the property.
(j) Recommendation from the Environmental Advisory Council, if
a landscape plan is required pursuant to § 57-3 of this Code.
(k) SWPPP, if required for the proposed land development activity
under § 112-28 of this chapter, together with the
recommendation of the SMO to approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove the SWPPP pursuant to § 112-28D
of this chapter. If a SWPPP is submitted pursuant to this
section, the site plan and SWPPP shall meet with the
requirements of § 112-28 of this chapter.
(2) A plan for the location and removal of snow during snowfall events.
(3) In acting on any proposed site plan development, the Planning/
Architectural Review Board shall take into consideration the
following:
(a) The requirements of any Village Development Plan,
Comprehensive Plan and/or the Official Map as the same may
have been adopted.
(b) The proposed location of principal and accessory buildings and
any other site improvements.
(c) The relation to one another of traffic circulation within the site,
height and bulk of buildings, provisions for off-street parking
space, provision of buffer areas and other open spaces on the
site so that any development will adequately handle pedestrian
and vehicle traffic within the site and in relation to the street
system adjoining.
(d) Snow removal provisions.
(e) Location of permanent signage.
(f) Adequate off-street parking, where applicable.
(g) Proper drainage and stormwater management pursuant to
§ 112-28 of this Code, road alignment, and other aspects which
may require review by engineering authorities. [Amended
11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018]
(h) Lighting.
(i) Lot surface.
(j) (Reserved)33
§ 112-23 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-23
1:388
(k) Landscaping.
(l) (Reserved)34
(m) With respect to any application relating to a lot or lots within
the R-3M District, conformance with the applicable Multiple-
Dwelling Residential District design standards set forth in
§ 112-15.
(n) With respect to any application relating to a lot or lots within
the MU District, conformance with the applicable Mixed Use
District design standards set forth in § 112-16.
(o) With respect to any application relating to a lot or lots within
the NMU District, conformance with the applicable
Neighborhood Mixed Use District design standards set forth in
§ 112-17.
F. Architectural review.
(1) Any application involving the proposed construction or exterior
alteration of a building or structure shall be accompanied by the
following information:
(a) Elevations of exterior design fronting on any public street.
(b) Samples of exterior colors, materials, roofing, window and
door design.
(c) All anticipated signage and location of all existing and
proposed signage.
(d) Cost of the project.
(e) Landscaping.
(f) Sealed drawing if project value is in excess of $50,000.
(g) Recommendation from the Environmental Advisory Council, if
a landscape plan is required pursuant to § 57-3 of this Code.
(2) In acting on any proposed project under architectural review, the
Planning/Architectural Review Board shall take into consideration
the following:
(a) The natural features of the site and its surroundings, exterior
design and appearances of existing structures and the
character of the district and its peculiar suitability for
particular purposes, with a view to conserving the values of
property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
33.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(3)(g), regarding review by engineering authorities,
was repealed 11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018.
34.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E(3)(l), regarding adequate stormwater management
facilities, was repealed 11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018.
§ 112-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-23
1:389
(b) The building, if erected or altered, would be in harmony with
the purpose of this chapter; would not be visually offensive or
inappropriate by reason of poor quality of exterior design,
excessive similarity or striking visual discord in relation to the
site or surroundings; would not impair the use, enjoyment and
desirability and reduce the values of properties in the area;
would not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood;
would not prevent the most appropriate development and
utilization of the site or of adjacent lands; and would not
adversely affect the functioning, economic stability, prosperity,
health, safety and general welfare of the community.
(c) Excessive similarity or striking dissimilarity to any other
structure or structures located or proposed to be located on
the same street or within 150 feet of the site would, if erected,
provoke one or more of the following effects:
[1] Substantially identical or striking dissimilar facade,
disregarding color.
[2] Substantially identical or striking dissimilar size and
arrangement of either doors, windows, porticoes, porches,
garages or other openings, breaks or extensions in the
facade, including reverse arrangements.
(d) Visual offensiveness or other poor qualities of exterior design
with respect to signs, harmony and discord of colors or
incompatibility of the proposed structure with the terrain on
which it is to be located, such as divergences of the height or
levels of any part of the structure from the finished grade level.
(e) With respect to any application relating to a lot or lots within
the R-3M District, conformance with the applicable Multiple-
Dwelling Residential District design standards set forth in
§ 112-15.
(f) With respect to any application relating to a lot or lots within
the MU District, conformance with the applicable Mixed Use
District design standards set forth in § 112-16.
(g) With respect to any application relating to a lot or lots within
the NMU District, conformance with the applicable
Neighborhood Mixed Use District design standards set forth in
§ 112-17.
(3) Any application involving a landmark subject to § 47-5 of the Code
shall not be subject to architectural review pursuant to this section.
G. Hearing; notice; decision.
(1) The Planning/Architectural Review Board may, at its discretion,
hold a public hearing on any application reviewed hereunder. If the
§ 112-23 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-23
1:390
Board elects to hold such hearing, it shall be scheduled within 62
days from the date of the submission of said application, and notice
thereof shall be published in the official Village newspaper at least
10 days prior to the date thereof. Notice of the public hearing shall
also be posted by the Code Enforcement Officer on the property
that is subject to the hearing in a manner such that the notice can
be viewed from a public street.
(2) The Planning/Architectural Review Board shall render its decision
on an application within 62 days after either the public hearing, or,
if no such hearing is held, the submission of a complete application;
provided that the time within which the Board must render its
decision may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and
the Board.
(3) The Planning/Architectural Review Board shall approve, approve
with modification(s) or disapprove an application; provided that,
prior to disapproval, the applicant has been afforded an
opportunity to confer upon suggestions for any change(s) to the
proposed action.
(4) Approval of any application hereunder shall be by a majority vote of
the Planning/Architectural Review Board's members.
(5) The decision of the Planning/Architectural Review Board shall be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five business days of
the vote thereon and a copy mailed to the applicant.
H. Waivers or deviation from requirements.
(1) Except as provided herein, whenever the Planning/Architectural
Review Board shall determine, pursuant to evidence and
documentation submitted by an applicant, that strict conformance
to the design standards governing such application is impractical
or impossible, the Planning/Architectural Review Board may, in its
discretion, waive or vary the provisions set forth in such design
standards provided that the applicant shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, mitigate any adverse consequences associated with
such failure to adhere to said design standards.
(2) In exercising its authority hereunder, under no circumstances shall
the Planning/Architectural Review Board grant any waiver or
deviation from any applicable dimensional requirement by more
than 50%.
(3) The authority granted under this section is not be mandatory on the
Planning/Architectural Review Board, and if the Planning/
Architectural Review Board shall not allow such deviation, the sole
remedy of the applicant shall be pursuit of a variance, if otherwise
available pursuant to § 112-24 of the Code and/or New York State
Village Law Section 7-712-b, by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 112-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-23
1:391
§ 112-24. Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection H(1) above or any
other provision herein, the Planning/Architectural Review Board is
not authorized to grant such a waiver or deviation from any
dimensional requirement related to the overall height, or minimum
or maximum number of stories, of any building or structure; the
minimum number of parking spaces required; or the location of
parking lots or spaces in relation to any buildings or structures.
Any such request to deviate from such dimensional requirement(s)
may only be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to
the standards governing area variances under § 112-24 of the Code
and New York State Village Law Section 7-712-b.
I. Any approval granted hereunder shall become null and void 12 months
after the date of approval if a building permit has not been approved
and construction commenced. Prior to the expiration of a valid
approval, an applicant may request, in writing, a six-month extension,
which request the Planning/Architectural Review Board may grant or
deny at its discretion. [Amended 11-23-2015 by L.L. No. 16-2015]
A. Creation, appointment and organization.
(1) A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby created and its Chairperson
shall be designated by the Board of Trustees. The Board shall
consist of five members appointed by the Board of Trustees in
accordance with § 7-712 of the Village Law of New York State.
(2) Consistent with Village Law, the Board of Appeals shall determine
its own rules of procedure, and all of its deliberations, resolutions
and orders shall be in accordance therewith.
(3) Alternate Zoning Board of Appeals member. The position of
alternate Zoning Board of Appeals member is hereby created for
purposes of substituting for Board members in the event that a
Board member is unable to serve because of a conflict of interest or
for any other reason. The Village Board shall have the power to
appoint up to two alternates. The Zoning Board of Appeals
Chairperson may designate an alternate or alternate member(s)
when such member(s) is/are unable to participate for the reasons
set forth herein. Such alternate member(s) shall have all the
powers and responsibilities of such member(s) of the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Such designation shall be entered into the minutes of
the initial Zoning Board of Appeals meeting at which the
designation(s) occurred.
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by an administrative official or board charged with the
enforcement of any local laws adopted pursuant to this chapter. It shall
§ 112-23 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-24
1:392
also hear and decide all matters referred to it upon which it is required
to pass under any such local law.
C. Appeals for variance.
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AREA VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of
Appeals for the use of land in a manner which is not allowed by
the dimensional or physical requirements of the applicable zoning
regulations.
USE VARIANCE — The authorization by the Zoning Board of
Appeals for the use of land for a purpose which is otherwise not
allowed or is prohibited by the applicable zoning regulations.
(2) Use variances.
(a) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or
determination of the administrative officer charged with the
enforcement of such local law, shall have the power to grant
use variances as defined above.
(b) No such use variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary
hardship. In order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the
applicant shall demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that for
each and every permitted use under the zoning regulations for
the particular district where the property is located:
[1] The applicant cannot realize a reasonable return, provided
that lack of return is substantial as demonstrated by
competent financial evidence.
[2] That the alleged hardship relating to the property in
question is unique and does not apply to a substantial
portion of the district or neighborhood.
[3] That the requested use variance, if granted, will not alter
the essential character of the neighborhood.
[4] That the alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(c) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate to address the unnecessary hardship proved by the
applicant and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(3) Area variance.
§ 112-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-24
1:393
(a) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an
appeal from a decision or determination of the administrative
official charged with the enforcement of such local law, to
grant area variances as defined above.
(b) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
take into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the
variance is granted as weighed against the detriment to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community
by such grant. In making such determination the Board shall
also consider:
[1] Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area
variance.
[2] Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be
achieved by some method feasible for the applicant to
pursue, other than an area variance.
[3] Whether the requested area variance is substantial.
[4] Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect
or impact on the physical or environmental conditions in
the neighborhood or district.
[5] Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created; which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board
of Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting
of the area variance.
(c) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall
grant the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and
adequate and at the same time preserve and protect the
character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and
welfare of the community.
(4) Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the
granting of both use variances and area variances, have the
authority to impose such reasonable conditions and restrictions as
are directly related to and incidental to the proposed use of the
property. Such conditions shall be consistent with the spirit and
intent of the Zoning Local Law and shall be imposed for the
purpose of minimizing any adverse impact such variance may have
on the neighborhood or community.
D. Procedure.
(1) The Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance with the
procedures specified by Village Law and by this chapter. All appeals
and applications made to the Board shall be in writing as
§ 112-24 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-24
1:394
prescribed by the Board. Every application for an appeal for a
variance shall:
(a) Refer to the specific provision of this chapter that is appealed.
(b) Set forth exactly the interpretation claimed or the details of the
variance sought.
(c) State the grounds on which it is claimed that the variance
should be granted.
(2) Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution and by
a majority vote of the Board. Each resolution shall contain a full
record of the findings of the Board.
(3) Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson. All meetings shall be open to the public, and public
notice shall be given thereof by publication in the official Village
publication at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. At least
10 days before the hearing, notices thereof shall be mailed to the
parties involved, including the record owner of all properties within
150 feet of the affected premises.
(4) The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon every resolution, or if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions.
(5) The Chairperson or Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses.
(6) Every rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof and every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a
public record.
(7) Any appeal to the Board of Appeals shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, except as otherwise
provided in Village Law.
E. Special Use Permits. [Amended 1-27-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
(1) The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all applications for the
following Special Use Permits: [Amended 6-25-2018 by L.L. No.
10-2018; 6-24-2019 by L.L. No. 5-2019]
(a) Accessory apartments, as defined in § 112-2 of this chapter;
(b) Any use listed in §§ 112-15A(6)(b), 112-16A(6)(b) or
112-17A(6)(b).
(c) Short-term rentals, as defined in § 112-2 and regulated in
§ 112-12A(2)(b). [Added 11-25-2019 by L.L. No. 8-2019]
§ 112-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-24
1:395
(2) In considering a special permit application, after notice and public
hearing, the Board of Appeals shall determine:
(a) That the permit will not prevent reasonable use of adjacent
properties or of properties in adjacent districts.
(b) That the permit will not prevent the reasonable use of
permitted or legally established uses in the district wherein the
proposed use is to be located or in adjacent districts.
(c) That the safety, health and welfare of the Village will not be
adversely affected by the proposed permit.
(d) That the permit will be in harmony with the intent of this
chapter.
(e) That the proposed special use conforms to all applicable
requirements, conditions or restrictions provided in this
chapter with respect to such special use. [Added 11-25-2019
by L.L. No. 8-2019]
(3) The Board, in granting a special permit, shall prescribe conditions
it deems reasonable and necessary in order that the results of its
action may be as nearly as possible in accordance with the intent of
this chapter and the zoning district in which the property is
located.
(4) If, for any reason, the practice of the use authorized under a special
permit shall fall into disuse or cease for more than six months, the
permit shall expire and shall be restored only upon the granting of
a new special permit.
(5) Any application for a Special Use Permit that would otherwise
require site plan or architectural review pursuant to § 112-23 shall
remain subject to the requirements of that section in addition to the
requirements herein.
F. Exceptions. The Board of Appeals may modify the exterior side yard
requirements for principal buildings on deep corner lots, provided that
the following findings are made:
(1) The rear yard is at least 50 feet in depth.
(2) Such modification will not adversely affect the adjoining property.
G. Lapse of authorization. Any variance, special permit, site plan approval
or modification of regulations authorized by the Board of Appeals shall
be automatically revoked unless a building permit conforming to all the
conditions and requirements established by the Board of Appeals is
obtained within 12 months of the date of approval by the Board of
Appeals and construction commenced within 18 months of such
approval date. [Amended 11-23-2015 by L.L. No. 16-2015]
§ 112-24 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-24
1:396
§ 112-25. Satellite antennas.
H. Violation of conditions or restrictions. Failure to comply with any
condition or restriction established by the Board of Appeals in
approving any variance or granting of a special permit or a modification
of regulations shall constitute a violation. Such violation may constitute
the basis for revocation of a variance, special permit or modification or
for the imposition of further penalties.
A. An accessory structure, as defined in § 112-2 of the Village Code, shall
be deemed to include a satellite antenna, unless attached to the
principal building.
B. For purposes of compliance with all setback requirements contained in
the Village Zoning Code, a satellite antenna shall be deemed to include
all cables, guide wires, supports and any other aboveground
appurtenances necessary for proper construction and maintenance of
the satellite antenna.
C. No satellite antenna shall be constructed without a building permit.
Application for a building permit shall be made by the owner of the
affected premises. The application shall include a survey of the
property, showing the location of all physical improvements on
premises as well as the proposed location of the satellite antenna and
any proposed fencing or landscaping to be used to screen the antenna.
Lot measurements and distances between all lot lines and structures
shall be clearly set out.
(1) Any application for erection of a satellite antenna on the roof of a
principal building must be accompanied by a set of plans detailing
the necessary construction particulars and sealed by an architect
or engineer.
(2) When attached to the roof of a principal building, a satellite
antenna shall be located as follows:
(a) Where the ridgeline of the roof is parallel to the street line, the
antenna shall be placed on the back sloping side of the roof.
(b) Where the ridgeline of the roof is perpendicular to the street
line, the antenna shall be placed no closer to the street than
the midpoint of the roof ridgeline.
D. The diameter of a satellite antenna shall not exceed eight feet along its
longest axis, and the maximum height above ground level shall not
exceed 14 feet when located on the ground.
E. The color of any satellite antenna shall be of solid earth tones in beige,
brown, black, gray or green, and the original color shall be maintained
at all times.
§ 112-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-25
1:397
§ 112-26. (Reserved)35
§ 112-27. Adult uses.
F. Consistent with the ability to receive a usable satellite signal, a satellite
antenna shall be so located and designed as to reduce or eliminate its
visibility from surrounding properties at street level and from the public
streets. The construction of any fence or other screening structure shall
be consistent with existing Village codes regulating fencing and other
types of screening.
G. The construction of any satellite antenna shall be accomplished in a
good, workmanlike manner, and installation shall be in such manner as
to give reasonable assurance of the absence of potential hazard
resulting from wind, electrical or other elements affecting the safety of
individuals on property. Every satellite antenna must be adequately
grounded for protection against a direct strike by lightning. An antenna
may not be located on any trailer or any other portable device.
H. All lettering, symbols or other pictorial matter displayed on any part of
a satellite antenna or supporting structures may consist only of the
manufacturer's identification and shall not exceed in size a total area of
two square feet.
I. Not more than one satellite antenna shall be erected on any individual
premises, except that in any district zoned R-3M or in any mixed use or
manufacturing district a maximum of two satellite antennas may be
permitted. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
J. A satellite antenna may be mounted on, or attached to or adjacent to, a
building in a district zoned mixed use (MU or NMU) or manufacturing
(M-1), but the maximum height thereof may not exceed 15 feet above
the highest point of the building roof. [Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L.
No. 7-2015]
A. Purpose.
(1) It is recognized that buildings and establishments operated as
adult uses have serious objectionable operational characteristics.
In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the Village of Williamsville, this part of the Zoning
Code is intended to restrict adult uses to certain nonresidential
areas of the Village of Williamsville and otherwise regulate their
operation. This part of the Zoning Code is intended to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Village of
Williamsville by regulating the concentration of such uses.
(2) The Constitution and laws of the State of New York grant to the
Village of Williamsville powers, especially police power, to enact
35.Editor's Note: Former § 112-26, Telecommunication facilities, as amended, was repealed
4-8-2019 by L.L. No. 1-2019. See now Ch. 100, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
§ 112-25 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-27
1:398
reasonable legislation and measures to regulate and supervise
adult entertainment establishments in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(3) It is not the intent of the Village of Williamsville in enacting this
section to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the
United States and/or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the
Village of Williamsville to impose any additional limitations or
restrictions on the contents of any communicative materials,
including sexually oriented films, video tapes, books and/or other
materials. Further, by enacting this section, the Village of
Williamsville does not intend to deny or restrict the rights of any
adult to obtain and/or view any sexually oriented materials
protected by the United States and/or State Constitutions, nor does
it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally protected rights
that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented materials
may have.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment or business, whether retail
or wholesale, having as a substantial or significant portion of its stockin-
trade books, magazines and other periodicals, films and viewing
materials for sale or viewing on premises by use of motion-picture
devices or any coin-operated means, including video tapes and props
and toys, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas or an establishment or business containing
a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT CABARET — A business enterprise which serves food or
beverage for consumption on the premises, with or without carryout
service, which features entertainers or waiters and/or waitresses
who display any specified anatomical area or who depict, describe or
simulate specified sexual activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private
establishment which presents topless dancers, strippers, male or
female impersonators or exotic dancers, or other similar
entertainments.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building or
structure or portion of a building or structure used for presenting
materials having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons therein.
ADULT USE — An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult entertainment
cabaret, adult motion-picture theater, massage establishment, body-rub
establishment, peep show or any other business(es) where specified
§ 112-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-27
1:399
anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual activities are
encountered.
BODY-RUB ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed
place of business where body rubs are administered for pay.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where massages are administered for pay, including but
not limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This
definition shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home
or medical clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor,
osteopath or duly licensed physical therapist or barbershops or beauty
salons in which massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck
or shoulders. This definition also shall exclude health clubs which have
facilities for physical exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball courts
or exercise rooms, and which do not receive their primary source of
revenue through the administration of massages. Such establishments
are not prohibited, provided that they have a duly licensed massage
therapist on the premises.
PEEP SHOWS — A theater which presents material in the form of
live shows, films or videotapes viewed from an individual enclosure for
which a fee is charged and which is not open to the public generally.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
SUBSTANTIAL CONNECTION —
Less than the completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or
bestiality.
(2)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
(3)
In a sole proprietorship, an individual who owns, operates, controls
or conducts, directly or indirectly, any premises, building or
location upon which any adult use takes place.
(1)
In a partnership, limited or general, an individual who shares in
any potential profits or losses of the business or who shares in the
ownership of any of the assets of the partnership business.
(2)
§ 112-27 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-27
1:400
In a corporation, an individual who is an officer, director or a
holder, either directly, indirectly or beneficially, of more than 20%
of any class of stock.
(3)
Any person who furnishes more than 20% of the capital of the
financing or assets of such business, whether in cash, goods or
services.
(4)
These definitions are to include any type of business(es) or
combination of business(es) where specified anatomical areas are
displayed or specified sexual activities are encountered.
(5)
C. Restrictions affecting adult uses.
(1) The adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult entertainment cabarets,
adult motion-pictures theaters, adult motels, massage
establishments, body-rub establishments and peep shows or any
other adult use governed by these provisions shall be allowable
only for properties located in the manufacturing districts and
subject to the requirements herein established.
(2) Not more than one of the uses governed by these provisions shall
be permitted on any single lot in the Village of Williamsville.
(3) None of the uses governed by these provisions shall be allowed:
(a) Within 250 feet of the boundary of any residential zoning
district.
(b) Within 1,000 feet of the property line of a public or private
school, hospital, synagogue, church or other religious
institution, day-care center, youth center, park or playground,
public library or areas where minors congregate.
(c) Within 500 feet of the property line of another lot containing an
adult use.
(4) All adult uses, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult motion-picture theaters, adult
motels, massage establishments, body-rub establishments and
peep shows, with the exception of their permitted signs,
landscaping and off-street parking, shall be conducted in an
enclosed building. Regardless of location or distance, no one who is
passing by an enclosed building having a use governed by these
provisions shall be able to see any specified anatomical area or any
specified sexual activity by virtue of any act or display which
depicts or shows anatomical area or any specified sexual activity by
virtue of any act or display which depicts or shows said area or
activity. This requirement shall apply to any display, decoration,
sign, window or other opening.
(5) A person who knowingly owns, manages, operates, conducts or
maintains any of the uses governed by these provisions in any way
§ 112-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-27
1:401
which is contrary to these regulations shall be subject to
prosecution under this code.
(6) No such establishment as defined in this section shall employ any
individual below the age of 18 years.
D. Registration.
(1) No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall lease, rent,
maintain, operate, use or allow to be operated or used any business
or establishment, any part of which contains an adult use, without
first complying with the provisions of this part of the Zoning Code
as set forth below.
(2) In addition to any and all other necessary licenses and permits, no
form of adult use shall be allowed to operate or continue to operate
until a certificate of registration is filed with the Village Clerk
containing:
(a) The name and address of the business or the establishment
subject to the provisions of this part of the Zoning Code.
(b) The names, business and home addresses and business or
home phone numbers of all owners of the business or
establishment subject to the provisions of this part of the
Zoning Code.
(c) The names, business and home addresses and business or
home phone numbers of all those persons having a substantial
connection with the business or establishment subject to the
provisions of this part of the Zoning Code.
(d) The date of the initiation of the adult use.
(e) The exact nature of the adult use.
(f) If the premises or the building in which the business
containing the adult use is located is leased, a copy of the
lease, name of the tenant and name, address and telephone
numbers of the landlord.
(g) The applicant shall also submit a plan drawn to appropriate
scale of the premises proposed for registration indicating the
areas to be covered by the registration, all windows, doors,
entrances and exits and the fixed features of the proposed
registered premises. The term "fixed features" shall include
walls, stages, immovable partitions, projection booths,
admission booths, concession booths and stands, immovable
counters and similar appurtenances that are intended to be
permanent.
(h) The applicant shall state all criminal convictions, the nature of
this conviction and location.
§ 112-27 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-27
1:402
(3) If there occurs any change in the information required for the
information of registration or the certification of registration, the
Village Clerk shall be notified of such change and a new or
amended certificate filed within 30 days of such change.
(4) The processing fee for such certificate of registration or
amendment thereto shall be $250.
(5) No certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this
part of the Zoning Code shall be transferable to any person other
than the registrant, nor shall a certificate of registration be
transferable for use at any premises, building or location other than
stated in the certificate of registration.
(6) Change of name. A registrant may not move the registered adult
use to a new location without first following the same procedure for
the issuance of a new registration and the payment of an
application fee of $250. The registrant shall submit to the Village
Clerk an application for a change of location, accompanied by the
application fee of $250.
(7) The owner, manager or agent of any adult use shall cause a copy of
the certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this
part of the Zoning Code to be prominently displayed on the
premises, building or location for which it is issued.
(8) Any knowingly false statement or any statement which the
registrant or applicant should reasonably have known to be false
which is provided in the certificate of registration or any document
or information supplied therewith shall be grounds for denial,
rejection, suspension or revocation of the certificate of registration.
(9) It is a violation of this part of the Zoning Code for the owner or
person in control of any property to establish or operate thereon or
to permit an adult use without having in force a certificate of
registration complying with this subsection.
(10)No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any
public way or from any property not registered as an adult use. This
provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window,
screen or other opening.
E. Issuance.
(1) Upon the completion of the investigation of an application by the
Department of Building and the Chief of Police, the Building
Department shall submit a recommendation for approval or
disapproval of the application to the Village Clerk. If approved, the
Village Clerk shall issue the registration upon the payment of the
appropriate registration fee.
§ 112-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-27
1:403
(2) If the Building Department recommends disapproval, that person
shall indicate the reason for the disapproval on the application or in
a separate writing. The Village Clerk shall inform the applicant of
approval or disapproval. A notice of disapproval shall state the
reason thereof. Notification of disapproval shall be by certified mail
and shall be sent to the address on the registration application,
which shall be considered to be the correct address.
F. Term of registration.
(1) All registrations issued under this part of this Zoning Code shall be
classified as annual registrations which shall be paid for on or
before June 1 and shall expire on May 31; a new registration may
be obtained upon application therefor and the payment of the
appropriate annual registration fee, and such registration shall
expire on May 31 of the same year. The provisions of this
subsection shall not affect any other provisions of this part of the
Zoning Code.
(2) A registrant under this section shall be entitled to a renewal of his
or her annual registration from year to year, as a matter of course,
on or before June 1, by presenting the registration for the previous
year or satisfactory evidence of its loss or destruction to the Village
Clerk and by paying the appropriate registration fee.
G. Denial. A new or renewal application for registration shall be denied:
(1) When the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant
to this part of the Zoning Code have had their registration
previously suspended or revoked or have been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a
corporation whose registration under this part of the Zoning Code
has previously been suspended or revoked.
(2) When any false statement is made on the application for
registration.
(3) When the applicant or partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a former or existing corporation
or the corporation itself has been convicted of a criminal act in this
state or any other state within five years immediately preceding the
date of the application.
(4) Any new corporation formed by an officer, directors or principal
shareholders of a corporation which has been convicted of a
criminal act in this state or any other state within five years
immediately preceding the date of the application.
H. Revocation. The registration issued under this part of this Zoning Code
shall be revoked immediately if the applicant or partner, officer or
principal stockholder of a former or existing corporation or the
§ 112-27 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-27
1:404
§ 112-28. Stormwater management.
corporation itself is convicted of a criminal act in this state or any other
state.
I. Amortization. In all districts, except as provided in this part of the
Zoning Code, any adult use shall terminate not later than one year after
the effective date of this part of the Zoning Code, and thereafter, the
space or premises or building formerly occupied by such use shall be
used only for a conforming use.
A. Findings. It is hereby determined that:
(1) Land development activities and associated increases in site
impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and
deposition.
(2) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
water-borne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for
fish and other desirable species.
(3) Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil
erosion and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for
terrestrial and aquatic habitats.
(4) Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation.
(5) Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil,
thereby decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow.
(6) Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts
on the waters of the Village.
(7) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can
be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater
runoff from land development activities.
(8) The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land
development activities in order to control and minimize increases
in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with
stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will minimize threats
to public health and safety.
(9) Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the
adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 112-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-28
1:405
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and
safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing
within this jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 112-28A
of this chapter. This section seeks to meet those purposes by achieving
the following objectives:
(1) Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Stormwater
Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-0-15-003, as amended or
revised; [Amended 11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018]
(2) Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) General Permit for Construction Activities, Permit No.
GP-0-15-003, as amended or revised; [Amended 11-26-2018 by
L.L. No. 13-2018]
(3) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
(4) Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from
land development activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
(5) Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
(6) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater
management practices and ensure that these management
practices are properly maintained and eliminate threats to public
safety.
C. General provisions.
(1) Applicability. This section shall be applicable to all land
development activities.
(2) Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from review
under this section:
(a) Agricultural activity.
(b) Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul
roads are subject to this section.
§ 112-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-28
1:406
(c) Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres
and are performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity or original purpose of a facility.
(d) Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility
deemed necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
(e) Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been
approved by the Village of Williamsville on or before the
effective date of this section.
(f) Land development activities for which a building permit has
been approved on or before the effective date of this section.
(g) Cemetery graves.
(h) Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and
other kinds of posts or poles.
(i) Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life,
property or natural resources.
(j) Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by
growing flowers, vegetables and other plants primarily for use
by that person and his or her family.
(k) Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an
existing structure.
D. Requirements.
(1) The Village of Williamsville shall designate an SMO who shall
accept and review all SWPPPs. The SMO may:
(a) Review the SWPPPs;
(b) Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, engage the services of
a registered professional engineer to review the SWPPPs,
specifications and related documents at a cost not to exceed a
fee schedule established by the Board of Trustees; or
(c) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the
SWPPPs conform to the requirements of this section.
(2) For all land development activities subject to review and approval
by any board, commission, agency or official of the Village under
this Code, the applicant or developer shall be required to submit a
SWPPP, prepared by licensed professional engineer, that complies
with the requirements of this section to the SMO, and the land
development activity shall be reviewed subject to the standards
contained in this section. Within 30 days of receipt of a SWPPP, the
SMO shall forward the SWPPP, together with his or her written
recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, or
disapprove the SWPPP, to such board, commission, agency or
§ 112-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-28
1:407
official of the Village which may be reviewing the application for
approval of a land development activity requiring submission of a
SWPPP. A recommendation of approval shall only be given if the
SWPPP complies with the requirements of this section. In making
a recommendation to approve with modifications or disapprove
the SWPPP, the SMO shall state the reasons for the decision in
writing. If the SMO recommends to approve with modifications or
disapprove the SWPPP, the applicant shall revise such SWPPP in
accordance with the recommendations of the SMO and shall submit
the revised SWPPP to the SMO for review. The board, commission,
agency or official of the Village reviewing the application for a land
development activity shall not approve such application unless the
SWPPP complies with the requirements of this section. [Amended
11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-201836]
E. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application
for approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until
the SMO or such agency, council, committee, employee, or board of
the Village of Williamsville which may be reviewing any application
for a land development activity requiring submission of a SWPPP
has received a SWPPP prepared in accordance with the
specifications in this section.
(2) Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(a) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background
information and erosion and sediment controls:
[1] Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project;
[2] Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including
a general location map. The site map should be at a scale
of no smaller than one inch to 100 feet. At a minimum, the
site map should show the total site area; all improvements;
areas of disturbance; areas that will not be disturbed;
existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent off-site surface
water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that could be
affected by the land development activity; existing and
final slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or
equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the
stormwater discharge(s);
[3] Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
[4] Construction phasing plan describing the intended
sequence of construction activities, including clearing and
36.Editor’s Note: This local law also repealed former Subsection D(3), regarding the
submission of a SWPPP.
§ 112-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-28
1:408
grubbing, excavation and grading, utility and
infrastructure installation and any other activity at the
site that results in soil disturbance. Consistent with the
Erosion Control Manual, not more than five acres shall be
disturbed at any one time unless pursuant to an approved
SWPPP;
[5] Description of the pollution prevention measures that will
be used to control litter, construction chemicals and
construction debris from becoming a pollutant source in
stormwater runoff;
[6] Description of construction and waste materials expected
to be stored on site, with updates as appropriate, and a
description of controls to reduce pollutants from these
materials, including storage practices to minimize
exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill
prevention and response;
[7] Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative
measures to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control
and sediment control for each stage of the project from
initial land clearing and grubbing to project close-out;
[8] A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the
location(s), size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and
sediment control practice;
[9] Dimensions, material specifications and installation details
for all erosion and sediment control practices, including
the siting and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
[10] Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
[11] Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion
and sediment control practices, including the timing of
initial placement and duration that each practice should
remain in place;
[12] Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
[13] Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
[14] Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for
each part of the site;
[15] Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff
and the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the
site to the degree attainable; and
§ 112-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-28
1:409
[16] Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at
the site.
(b) Land development activities meeting Condition A, B, C or D
below shall also include water quantity and water quality
controls (post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as set
forth in § 112-28E(2)(c) of this chapter as applicable:
[Amended 11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018]
[1] Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list
of impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater
have been identified as a source of the impairment.
[2] Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
[3] Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development
activity disturbing between one and five acres of land
during the course of the project, exclusive of the
construction of single-family residences and construction
activities at agricultural properties.
[4] Condition D: Stormwater runoff from land development
activities not meeting Condition A, B, or C, above, but
involving soil disturbance between one-quarter acre
(10,890 square feet) and one acre of land during the
course of the project, or creation of 18 or more parking
spaces and associated driveways and aisles, exclusive of
the construction of single-family residences and
construction activities at agricultural properties, shall
require water quantity controls only demonstrating postdevelopment
peak flows during a twenty-five-year storm
will be less than pre-development peak flows during a tenyear
storm.
(c) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B, C or D. [Amended
11-26-2018 by L.L. No. 13-2018]
[1] All information in § 112-28E(2)(a) of this chapter;
[2] Description of each post-construction stormwater
management practice;
[3] Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction
stormwater management practice;
§ 112-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-28
1:410
[4] Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
[5] Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff
conditions with pre-development conditions;
[6] Dimensions, material specifications and installation details
for each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
[7] Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater
management practice;
[8] Maintenance easements to ensure access to all
stormwater management practices at the site for the
purpose of inspection and repair. Easements shall be
recorded on the plan and shall remain in effect with
transfer of title to the property; and
[9] Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 112-28G of
this chapter.
(d) The SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed professional and
must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who
shall certify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meets the requirements in this section.
(3) Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all
other applicable environmental permits have been or will be
acquired for the land development activity prior to approval of the
final stormwater design plan.
(4) Contractor certification.
(a) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP
who will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater
management practice installation shall sign and date a copy of
the following certification statement before undertaking any
land development activity: "I certify under penalty of law that I
understand and agree to comply with the terms and conditions
of the stormwater pollution prevention plan. I also understand
that it is unlawful for any person to cause or contribute to a
violation of water quality standards."
(b) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm, the address (or other identifying description)
of the site, and the date the certification is made.
§ 112-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-28
1:411
(c) The certification statement(s) shall be included with and
become part of the SWPPP for the land development activity.
(5) A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation
of construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
F. Performance and design criteria for stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control. All land development activities shall be
subject to the following performance and design criteria:
(1) Technical standards. For the purpose of this section, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that
are designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by
this section:
(a) The Design Manual; and
(b) The Erosion Control Manual.
(2) Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater
management practices are not in accordance with technical
standards, the applicant or developer must demonstrate
equivalence to the technical standards set forth in § 112-28F(1) of
this chapter.
(3) Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not
cause an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible
contrast to natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New
York.
G. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater facilities.
(1) Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(a) The applicant or developer of the land development activity or
his or her representative shall at all times properly operate and
maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control
(and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the
applicant or developer to achieve compliance with the
conditions of this section. Sediment shall be removed from
sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their design
capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(b) For land development activities meeting Condition A, B or C in
§ 112-28E(2)(b) of the Village Code, the applicant shall have a
qualified professional conduct site inspections and document
the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control practices
every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event
producing 0.5 inch of precipitation or more. Inspection reports
shall be maintained in a site log book.
§ 112-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-28
1:412
(2) Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval
that has a stormwater management facility as one of the
requirements, the applicant or developer must execute a
maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the stormwater management
facility. The easement shall provide for access to the facility at
reasonable times for periodic inspection by the Village of
Williamsville to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this section. The easement shall be
recorded by the grantor in the office of the County Clerk after
approval by the counsel for the Village of Williamsville.
(3) Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of
permanent stormwater management practices installed in
accordance with this section shall ensure they are operated and
maintained to achieve the goals of this section. Proper operation
and maintenance also includes, as a minimum, the following:
(a) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this section.
(b) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and
training new maintenance personnel.
(c) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or
cause or contribute to water quality standard violations in
accordance with § 112-28F of this chapter.
(4) Maintenance agreements. The Village of Williamsville shall
approve a formal maintenance agreement for stormwater
management facilities binding on all subsequent landowners and
recorded in the office of the County Clerk as a deed restriction on
the property prior to final plan approval. The maintenance
agreement shall be consistent with the terms and conditions of
Schedule A of this chapter, entitled "Sample Stormwater Control
Facility Maintenance Agreement."37 The Village of Williamsville, in
lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion, may accept
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management
facility, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this
section and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient
area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
H. Administration and enforcement.
(1) Construction inspection.
37.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 112-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-28
1:413
(a) Erosion and sediment control inspection.
[1] The SMO may require such inspections as necessary to
determine compliance with this section and may either
approve that portion of the work completed or notify the
applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the
requirements of this section and the SWPPP as approved.
To obtain inspections, the applicant shall notify the SMO at
least 48 hours before any of the following, as required by
the SMO:
[a] Start of construction;
[b] Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
[c] Completion of site clearing;
[d] Completion of rough grading;
[e] Completion of final grading;
[f] Close of the construction season;
[g] Completion of final landscaping; or
[h] Successful establishment of landscaping in public
areas.
[2] If any violations are found, the applicant and developer
shall be notified, in writing, of the nature of the violation
and the required corrective actions. No further work shall
be conducted except for site stabilization until any
violations are corrected and all work previously completed
has received approval by the SMO.
(b) Stormwater management practice inspections. The SMO is
responsible for conducting inspections of SMPs. All applicants
are required to submit as-built plans for any SMPs located on
site after final construction is completed. The plan must show
the final design specifications for all stormwater management
facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
(c) Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion.
Inspection programs shall be established on any reasonable
basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice
of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas
identified as higher-than-typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or
industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual
discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of
a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to
cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality
§ 112-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-28
1:414
standards or the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint
inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but
are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records;
sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material
or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the
condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater
management practices.
(d) Submission of reports. The SMO may require monitoring and
reporting from entities subject to this section as are necessary
to determine compliance with this section.
(e) Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater
management facility is installed on private property or when
any new connection is made between private property and the
public stormwater system, the landowner shall grant to the
Village of Williamsville the right to enter the property at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose
of inspection as specified in § 112-28H(1) of this chapter.
(2) Performance guarantee.
(a) Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full
and faithful completion of all land development activities
related to compliance with all conditions set forth by the
Village of Williamsville in its approval of the SWPPP, the Village
of Williamsville may require the applicant or developer to
provide, prior to construction, a performance bond, cash
escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate
financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory
completion of the project and names the Village of
Williamsville as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an
amount to be determined by the Village of Williamsville based
on submission of final design plans, with reference to actual
construction and landscaping costs. The performance
guarantee shall remain in force until the surety is released
from liability by the Village of Williamsville, provided that such
period shall not be less than one year from the date of final
acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) has
(have) been constructed in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications and that a one-year inspection has
been conducted and the facilities have been found to be
acceptable to Village of Williamsville. Per-annum interest on
cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until
the surety is released from liability.
(b) Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities are to be operated and
maintained by the developer or by a corporation that owns or
manages a commercial or industrial facility, the developer,
§ 112-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-28
1:415
prior to construction, may be required to provide the Village
of Williamsville with an irrevocable letter of credit from an
approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and
erosion control facilities both during and after construction
and until the facilities are removed from operation. If the
developer or landowner fails to properly operate and maintain
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
facilities, the Village of Williamsville may draw upon the
account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
(c) Recordkeeping. The Village of Williamsville may require
entities subject to this section to maintain records
demonstrating compliance with this section.
(3) Enforcement and penalties.
(a) Notice of violation. When the Village of Williamsville
determines that a land development activity is not being
carried out in accordance with the requirements of this
section, it may issue a written notice of violation to the
landowner, developer, and/or applicant. The notice of violation
shall contain:
[1] The name and address of the landowner, developer and/or
applicant;
[2] The address, when available, or a description of the
building, structure or land upon which the violation is
occurring;
[3] A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
[4] A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring
the land development activity into compliance with this
section and a time schedule for the completion of such
remedial action;
[5] A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of
violation is directed; and
[6] A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the Village by filing a written notice of appeal
within 15 days of service of notice of violation.
(b) Stop-work orders. The Village of Williamsville may issue a stopwork
order for violations of this section. Persons receiving a
stop-work order shall be required to halt all land development
activities, except those activities that address the violations
leading to the stop-work order. The stop-work order shall be in
§ 112-28 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § 112-28
1:416
§ 112-29. (Reserved)38
effect until the Village of Williamsville confirms that the land
development activity is in compliance and the violation has
been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work
order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or
monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement
measures authorized in this section.
(c) Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or
is conducted contrary to this section may be restrained by
injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
(d) Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty
provided herein or by law, any person who violates the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both, for conviction of a
first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which
were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine
not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both. However, for the
purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial
officers generally, violations of this section shall be deemed
misdemeanors, and for such purpose only all provisions of law
relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each
week's continued violation shall constitute a separate
additional violation.
(e) Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of
this section, the SMO may prevent the occupancy of said
building or land.
(f) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore
land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration
is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the
Village of Williamsville may take necessary corrective action,
the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until
paid.
(4) Fees for services. The Village of Williamsville may require any
person undertaking land development activities regulated by this
section to pay reasonable costs at prevailing rates for review of
SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance performed by the
Village of Williamsville or performed by a third party for the Village
of Williamsville.
§ 112-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-30
1:417
§ 112-30. Portable storage containers. [Added 1-23-2012 by L.L. No.
2-2012]
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2005 4-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
2-2005 4-25-2005 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 47
3-2005 4-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
A. No portable storage container may be stored or placed on property in
any residential (R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-3M) or mixed use (MU or NMU) for
more than 14 days without obtaining a permit from the Building
Department pursuant to Subsection C. Such portable storage
containers may be used only to temporarily store equipment or material
used in connection with work being performed on said property.
[Amended 5-26-2015 by L.L. No. 7-2015]
B. Any portable storage container must be placed in the rear of the
property or, in the case of residentially zoned properties with a
driveway, in said driveway and not closer than 15 feet from the street.
C. Any property owner wishing to store or place a portable storage
container for more than 14 days must, as soon as practicable but in no
event prior to the expiration of the 10th day, apply for a permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer to maintain the Portable Storage Container
on the property for a period not to exceed 30 days. The Code
Enforcement Officer may grant such application only upon a showing of
substantial need and impracticability of storing the materials contained
in the Portable Storage Container either within a permanent structure
on the property or off site. In granting any application hereunder, the
Code Enforcement Officer may impose such conditions as he or she
deems necessary, including conditions that adequately screen such
Portable Storage Container from view from the street or neighboring
properties.
38.Editor's Note: Former § 112-29, Seasonal outdoor seating, was repealed 4-23-2012 by L.L.
No. 6-2012. See now § 112-16J.
§ 112-30 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:418
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2005 11-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
5-2005 12-19-2005 Water amendment (crossconnection
control)
Ch. 107
1-2006 3-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment (crosswalks)
Ch. 103
2-2006 8-28-2006 Signs Repealed by L.L. No.
4-2011
3-2006 9-11-2006 Fire prevention and
building code
administration amendment
Repealed by L.L. No.
5-2006
4-2006 9-11-2006 Fire prevention and
building code
administration amendment
Repealed by L.L. No.
5-2006
5-2006 12-18-2006 Fire prevention and
building code
administration
Ch. 28
1-2007 1-8-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2-2007 4-9-2007 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse
Ch. 39
3-2007 5-29-2007 Trees amendment Ch. 101
4-2007 12-17-2007 Fire prevention and
building code
administration
amendment; flood damage
prevention amendment;
landscaping amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 28; repealed by
L.L. No. 2-2019; 57;
112
5-2007 12-17-2007 Sewer use amendment Ch. 81
1-2008 1-28-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L. No.
3-2011
2-2008 7-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
3-2008 9-8-2008 Flood damage prevention Repealed by L.L. No.
2-2019
1-2009 1-12-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
2-2009 3-23-2009 Public order amendment Ch. 73
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:419
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3-2009 5-26-2009 Public parks and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II
4-2009 8-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
5-2009 8-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
6-2009 8-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
7-2009 9-28-2009 Fire prevention and
building code
administration
amendment; swimming
pools and hot tubs
amendment
Chs. 28; 93
8-2009 11-23-2009 Text messaging while
operating motor vehicles
Repealed by L.L. No.
6-2013
9-2009 12-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
1-2010 1-11-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L. No.
3-2011
2-2010 1-11-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L. No.
3-2011
3-2010 5-24-2010 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L. No.
3-2011
4-2010 5-24-2010 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Repealed by L.L. No.
2-2019
5-2010 8-9-2010 Property maintenance Ch. 72
6-2010 10-25-2010 Public parks and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II
1-2011 1-10-2011 Zoning amendment Repealed by L.L. No.
3-2011
2-2011 6-13-2011 Fire prevention and
building code
administration amendment
Ch. 28
3-2011 10-24-2011 Landscaping; zoning Chs. 57; 112
4-2011 11-28-2011 Signs Superseded by L.L.
No. 3-2019
5-2011 12-12-2011 Public order amendment Ch. 73
§ DL-1 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:420
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2012 1-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
2-2012 1-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
3-2012 2-28-2012 Signs amendment Superseded by L.L.
No. 3-2019
4-2012 2-28-2012 Taxation: Industrial and
Commercial Incentive
Board amendment;
industrial and commercial
exemption amendment
Ch. 97, Arts. VI and
VII
5-2012 4-9-2012 Fire prevention and
building code
administration amendment
Ch. 28
6-2012 4-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
7-2012 8-13-2012 Water amendment Ch. 107
8-2012 9-10-2012 Code of Ethics Ch. 23, Art. I
9-2012 9-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
10-2012 10-22-2012 Fire prevention and
building code
administration amendment
Ch. 28
11-2012 11-26-2012 Public order amendment Ch. 73
1-2013 3-25-2013 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 47
2-2013 4-22-2013 Rental property:
registration
Ch. 75, Art. I
3-2013 5-28-2013 Alarms amendment Ch. 6
4-2013 5-28-2013 Public order amendment;
zoning amendment
Chs. 73; 112
5-2013 6-24-2013 Fences amendment Ch. 25
6-2013 8-26-2013 Text messaging repealer Ch. 100A, reference
only
7-2013 8-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
8-2013 10-15-2013 Historic preservation
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 47; 112
9-2013 10-29-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:421
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2014 1-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
2-2014 4-14-2014 Vehicles, abandoned Ch. 102
3-2014 4-28-2014 2014 tax levy limit
override
NCM
4-2014 7-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
5-2014 8-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
6-2014 8-25-2014 Zoning amendment See § 112-16
7-2014 8-25-2014 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 11
8-2014 8-25-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 72
9-2014 9-29-2014 Animals amendment Ch. 8
10-2014 11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
1-2015 12-15-2014 Fire prevention and
building code
administration
amendment; swimming
pools and hot tubs
amendment
Chs. 28; 93
2-2015 12-15-2014 Demolition of buildings;
blasting amendment
Ch. 12
3-2015 3-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
4-2015 4-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
5-2015 4-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
6-2015 4-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
§ DL-1 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:422
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2015 5-26-2015 Engineering cost recovery
amendment; fire
prevention and building
code administration
amendment; landscaping
amendment; signs
amendment; streets and
sidewalks amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 21; Ch. 28; Ch.
57; superseded by
L.L. No. 3-2019; Ch.
89; Ch. 103; Ch. 112
8-2015 5-26-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
9-2015 9-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
10-2015 9-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
11-2015 9-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
12-2015 10-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
13-2015 10-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
14-2015 10-26-2015 Fire prevention and
building code
administration amendment
Ch. 28
15-2015 11-9-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 89
16-2015 11-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
1-2016 1-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
2-2016 3-14-2016 Zoning amendment See § 112-16
3-2016 3-28-2016 Demolition of buildings;
blasting amendment
Ch. 12
4-2016 5-23-2016 Sewer rents amendment Ch. 78
5-2016 6-27-2016 Sewer use amendment Ch. 81
6-2016 10-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
7-2016 10-24-2016 Public order amendment Ch. 73
8-2016 12-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 112
1-2017 1-23-2017 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 89
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:423
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2017 1-23-2017 Development plan review
fees
Ch. 21
3-2017 2-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
4-2017 3-13-2017 Parks and public areas:
regulations for Glen Park
amendment; public parks
and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. I; Ch.
70, Art. II
5-2017 3-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
6-2017 3-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
7-2017 3-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
8-2017 8-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
9-2017 10-10-2017 Signs amendment Superseded by L.L.
No. 3-2019
1-2018 3-12-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
2-2018 3-12-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
3-2018 3-12-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
4-2018 3-12-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
5-2018 3-12-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
6-2018 3-12-2018 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 103
7-2018 5-29-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
8-2018 6-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
9-2018 6-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
10-2018 6-25-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 112
11-2018 7-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 112
§ DL-1 WILLIAMSVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:424
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-2018 10-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
13-2018 11-26-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 112
1-2019 4-8-2019 Wireless
Telecommunications
Facilities; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 100; Ch. 112
2-2019 4-8-2019 Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 31
3-2019 4-22-2019 Signs Ch. 84
4-2019 6-24-2019 Animals Amendment Ch. 8
5-2019 6-24-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 112
6-2019 8-19-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 103
L.L. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
7-2019 11-25-2019 Buildings,
Demolition of;
Blasting
Amendment; Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 12; Ch.
112
2
8-2019 11-25-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 112 2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:425