Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-27-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule Law,
the local laws and ordinances of the Village of Warsaw, as codified by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 163,
shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Warsaw," hereafter
termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the local laws
and ordinances contained in the "Code of the Village of Warsaw" to any
other local law or ordinance appearing in said Code, such reference shall be
changed to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, Article number
or section number appearing in the Code as if such local law or ordinance
had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of local laws and ordinances in force immediately prior to the
enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws and ordinances and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior local law or ordinance. All such provisions are hereby continued in full
force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the Board
of Trustees of the Village of Warsaw, and it is the intention of said Board
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed
as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former local laws and
ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or
abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Warsaw in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date
of this local law. Specifically repealed is the 1965 Code of the Village of
Warsaw, adopted February 15, 1995.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Warsaw prior to the effective date
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law or ordinance included in this Code now
or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Warsaw or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Warsaw.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Warsaw.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Warsaw providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Warsaw or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Warsaw appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Warsaw or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any legislation adopted subsequent to February 6, 1995.
§ 1-4 WARSAW CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Warsaw and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and,
if this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Warsaw by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village
of Warsaw, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of the
local laws and ordinances known collectively as the "Code of the Village
of Warsaw" or any new local laws or resolutions, when enacted or adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to be
a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so
that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law or ordinance contained herein, and
such local laws or ordinances may be amended, deleted or changed from
time to time as the Board of Trustees deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Warsaw required to be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of Trustees
subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code-shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local laws or
resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village
of Warsaw upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board
of Trustees, which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Warsaw or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Warsaw to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Warsaw, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws and ordinances for
publication as the Code of the Village of Warsaw, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws and ordinances have been made,
except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain
grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were
made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention of
the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws and ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following amendments and/or additions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws and
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-11B, the following were added or amended: §§ 17-1, 27-4,
36-8A, 48-2, 48-5A, 48-18, 62-3B, 66-5, 66-6, 66-13, 66-14, 66-16, 66-18, 66-19, 74-2, Ch.
112, Ch. 117, §§ 137-1, 137-9, 141-8, Ch. 145 and § 149-4. In addition, the following
original sections were deleted: §§ 16-1C and 16-2C. A complete description of these
changes is on file in the Village Clerk's office.
§ 1-10 WARSAW CODE § 1-13
1:6
Chapter 3
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 21.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
[Adopted 8-6-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012]
§ 3-1. Authority.
Authorization for this article is granted under New York State General
Municipal Law Article 5-G and Village Law, Article 7, § 7-741, Subdivision
4(a).
§ 3-2. Legislative purpose and intent.
There is little argument that sharing services on a voluntary basis often
makes good sense and efforts to expand the number and variety of
cooperative services should be encouraged. Over the years, it has become
increasingly difficult to obtain sufficient numbers of individuals willing to
accept appointments to the respective Planning Boards of the Village and
Town of Warsaw. The economy and efficiency of a Joint Planning Board is
advantageous to both the Town and Village. The Town and the Village find
that it would be in the best interests of the residents of both municipalities
for a Joint Planning Board to be created pursuant to the authority cited
above.
§ 3-3. Establishment; members.
A. The Village of Warsaw is authorized to create, in accordance with an
intermunicipal agreement with the Town of Warsaw, a Joint Planning
Board consisting of seven members:
(1) Three of which will be appointed by the Town (from outside the
Village);
(2) Three of which will be appointed by the Village (from inside the
Village); and
(3) One will be appointed by the Town and the Village.
B. The initial appointment of representatives from the Village will be for:
(1) A term of one year;
(2) A term of three years; and
(3) A term of four years.
C. The initial appointment of representatives from the Town will be for:
(1) A term of two years;
(2) A term of four years; and
(3) A term of five years.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:9
§ 3-4. Intermunicipal agreement.
Immediately following the enactment of this article, the Village of Warsaw
shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the Town of Warsaw.
All matters currently pending before the Planning Board of the Village of
Warsaw shall be transferred to the Joint Planning Board.
§ 3-5. Severability.
If any part of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this article. The
Village hereby declares that it would have passed this article and each
section and subsection thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more of these sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be
declared unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 3-6. Precedence.
This article and its provisions are in addition to all other applicable laws,
rules and regulations.
D. The initial appointment of the jointly appointed representative will be
for:
(1) A term of five years.
E. At the expiration of each term thereafter, successors to these positions
shall be appointed for terms of five years.
F. At the expiration of each original appointment to the Joint Planning
Board, vacant Town positions will be filled through appointment by the
Town, vacant Village positions will be filled through appointment by the
Village, and the vacant joint position will be appointed jointly by the
Village and the Town. However, in the event either municipality is
unable to fill appointments from their respective subdivision, both
parties hereto agree to honor appointments from the Town or Village in
an effort to maintain a viable Joint Planning Board.
G. If a vacancy shall occur in an unexpired term, appointment will be made
by the respective municipality from which that member was appointed
to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. However, if
either municipality is unable to fill a vacancy from their respective
political subdivision, both parties hereto agree to honor appointments
from the Town or Village in an effort to maintain a viable Planning
Board.
H. The Mayor of the Village of Warsaw shall have the power to remove
members appointed by the Village of Warsaw, subject to the provisions
of § 7-718 of the Village Law of the State of New York.
§ 3-3 WARSAW CODE § 3-7
1:10
§ 3-7. Effective date.
This article shall be filed with the New York Secretary of State and shall be
effective October 1, 2012.
§ 3-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:11

ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Appeals
[Adopted 8-6-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012]
§ 3-8. Authority.
Authorization for this article is granted under New York State General
Municipal Law Article 5-G and Village Law, Article 7 § 7-741, Subdivision
4(b).
§ 3-9. Legislative purpose and intent.
There is little argument that sharing services on a voluntary basis often
makes good sense and efforts to expand the number and variety of
cooperative services should be encouraged. Over the years, it has become
increasingly difficult to obtain sufficient numbers of individuals willing to
accept appointments to the respective Zoning Boards of Appeals of the
Village and Town of Warsaw. The economy and efficiency of a Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals is advantageous to both the Town and Village. The Town
and the Village find that it would be in the best interests of the residents
of both municipalities for a Joint Zoning Board of Appeals to be created
pursuant to the authority cited above.
§ 3-10. Establishment; members.
A. The Village of Warsaw is authorized to create, in accordance with an
intermunicipal agreement with the Town of Warsaw, a Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals consisting of seven members:
(1) Three of which will be appointed by the Town (from outside the
Village);
(2) Three of which will be appointed by the Village (from inside the
Village); and
(3) One will be appointed by the Town and the Village.
B. The initial appointment of representatives from the Village will be for:
(1) A term of one year;
(2) A term of three years; and
(3) A term of four years.
C. The initial appointment of representatives from the Town will be for:
(1) A term of two years;
(2) A term of four years; and
(3) A term of five years.
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10
1:13
§ 3-11. Intermunicipal agreement.
Immediately following the enactment of this article, the Village of Warsaw
shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the Town of Warsaw. All
matters currently pending before the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village
of Warsaw shall be transferred to the Joint Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 3-12. Repealer.
All ordinances, local laws and parts thereof inconsistent with this article are
hereby repealed, including, but not limited to, Local Law No. 1 of 1988.
§ 3-13. Severability.
If any part of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this article. The
Village hereby declares that it would have passed this article and each
section and subsection thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or
more of these sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be
declared unconstitutional or invalid.
D. The initial appointment of the jointly appointed representative will be
for:
(1) A term of five years.
E. At the expiration of each term thereafter, successors to these positions
shall be appointed for terms of five years.
F. At the expiration of each original appointment to the Joint Zoning Board
of Appeals, vacant Town positions will be filled through appointment by
the Town, vacant Village positions will be filled through appointment by
the Village, and the vacant joint position will be appointed jointly by the
Village and the Town. However, in the event either municipality is
unable to fill appointments from their respective subdivision, both
parties hereto agree to honor appointments from the Town or Village in
an effort to maintain a viable Joint Zoning Board of Appeals.
G. If a vacancy shall occur in an unexpired term, appointment will be made
by the respective municipality from which that member was appointed
to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. However, if
either municipality is unable to fill a vacancy from their respective
political subdivision, both parties hereto agree to honor appointments
from the Town or Village in an effort to maintain a viable Joint Zoning
Board of Appeals.
H. The Mayor of the Village of Warsaw shall have the power to remove
members appointed by the Village of Warsaw, subject to the provisions
of § 7-712 of the Village Law of the State of New York.
§ 3-10 WARSAW CODE § 3-14
1:14
§ 3-14. Precedence.
This article and its provisions are in addition to all other applicable laws,
rules and regulations.
§ 3-15. Effective date.
This article shall be filed with the New York Secretary of State and shall be
effective October 1, 2012.
§ 3-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15
1:15
Chapter 7
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 11.
§ 7-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide legal and financial protection for
those individuals serving the Village of Warsaw from losses which may be
brought against them in their individual capacities for actions taken while
in the performance of their official duties and responsibilities. In enacting
this chapter, the Board of Trustees finds that the State of New York has
enacted similar provisions for the legal and financial security of its officers
and employees and further finds that such security is also required for local
personnel. By enactment of this chapter, the Board of Trustees does not
intend to limit or otherwise abrogate any existing right or responsibility of
the village or its employees with regard to indemnification or legal defense.
It is solely the intent of this chapter to provide similar coverage for local
employees as is presently provided for state employees, so as to continue to
attract qualified individuals to local government service.
§ 7-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any person holding a position by election, appointment
or employment in the service of the Village of Warsaw, whether or not
compensated, or a volunteer expressly authorized to participate in a
municipally sponsored volunteer program but shall not include an
independent contractor. The term "employee" shall include a former
employee, his estate or judicially appointed personal representative.
§ 7-3. Provisions for defense by village.
A. Upon compliance by the employee with the provisions of § 7-5 of this
chapter, the village shall provide for the defense of the employee in any
civil action or proceeding in any state or federal court arising out of any
alleged act or omission which occurred or is alleged in the complaint to
have occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his
public employment duties or which is brought to enforce a provision of
42 U.S.C. § 1981 or 1983. This duty to provide for a defense shall not
arise where such civil action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of
the Village of Warsaw.
§ 3-15 WARSAW CODE § 7-3
1:16
§ 7-4. Indemnification.
B. Subject to the conditions set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
employee shall be entitled to be represented by the Village Attorney;
provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to
representation by private counsel of his choice in any civil judicial
proceeding whenever the Village Attorney determines, based upon his
investigation and review of the facts and circumstances of the case, that
representation by the Village Attorney would be inappropriate or
whenever a court of competent jurisdiction, upon appropriate motion or
by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of interest exists and
that the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel of his
choice. The Village Attorney shall notify the employee, in writing, of
such determination that the employee is entitled to be represented by
private counsel of his choice. The Village Attorney may require, as a
condition to payment of the fees and expenses of such representation,
that appropriate groups of such employees be represented by the same
counsel. If the employee or group of employees is entitled to
representation by private counsel under the provisions of this chapter,
the Village Attorney shall so certify to the Village Board. Reasonable
attorneys' fees and litigation expenses shall be paid by the village to
such private counsel from time to time during the pendency of the civil
action or proceeding, subject to certification that the employee is
entitled to representation under the terms and conditions of this
chapter by the head of the department, commission, division, office or
agency in which such employee is employed and upon the audit and
warrant of the Village Treasurer. Any dispute with respect to
representation of multiple employees by a single counsel or the amount
of litigation expenses or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees shall be
resolved by the court upon motion or by way of a special proceeding.
C. Where the employee delivers process and a request for a defense to the
Village Attorney as required by § 7-5 of this chapter, the Attorney shall
take the necessary steps, including the retention of private counsel
under the terms and conditions provided in Subsection B of this section,
on behalf of the employee to avoid entry of a default judgment, pending
resolution of any question pertaining to the obligation to provide for a
defense.
A. The village shall indemnify and save harmless its employees in the
amount of any judgment obtained against such employees in any state
or federal court or in the amount of any settlement of a claim, provided
that the act or omission from which such judgment or settlement arose
occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of his public
employment or duties. The duty to indemnify and save harmless
prescribed by this section shall not arise where the injury or damage
resulted from intentional wrongdoing or recklessness on the part of the
employee.
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-4
1:17
§ 7-5. Conditions.
The duty to defend or indemnify and save harmless provided by this chapter
shall be conditioned upon delivery to the Village Attorney or his assistant,
at his office, by the employee of the original or a copy of any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading within five days after he is
served with such document and upon the full cooperation of the employee
in the defense of such action or proceeding and in defense of any action
or proceeding against the village based upon the same act or omission and
in the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed a request
by the employee that the village provide for his defense pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 7-6. Limitation on applicability.
The benefits of this chapter shall inure only to employees as defined herein
and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other party, nor shall any
provision of this chapter be construed to affect, alter or repeal any provision
of the Workers' Compensation Law.
§ 7-7. Effect on insurers.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to impair, alter, limit
or modify the rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of
insurance.
§ 7-8. Effect on pending proceedings.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all actions and proceedings
pending upon the effective date thereof or thereafter instituted.
B. An employee represented by private counsel shall cause to be
submitted to the Board of Trustees any proposed settlement which may
be subject to indemnification by the village, and if not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter, the Mayor shall certify such settlement
and submit such settlement and certification to the Village Attorney.
The Attorney shall review such proposed settlement as to form and
amount and shall give his approval if, in his judgment, the settlement is
in the best interest of the village. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize the village to indemnify or save harmless an
employee with respect to a settlement not so reviewed and approved by
the Village Attorney.
C. Upon entry of a final judgment against the employee or upon the
settlement of the claim, the employee shall cause to be served a copy of
such judgment or settlement, personally or by certified or registered
mail, within 30 days of the date of entry or settlement, upon the Mayor;
and if not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, such
judgment or settlement shall be certified for payment by such Mayor. If
the Attorney concurs in such certification, the judgment or settlement
shall be paid upon the audit and warrant of the Village Treasurer.
§ 7-4 WARSAW CODE § 7-9
1:18
§ 7-9. Construal of provisions.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed in any way to impair, alter, limit,
modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or conferred upon
any unit, entity, officer or employee of the village or any right to defense
and/or indemnification provided for any government officer or employee by,
in accordance with or by reason of any other provision of state or federal
statutory or common law.
Chapter 11
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 7. Residency requirements — See Ch. 27.
§ 11-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Village
Board of the Village of Warsaw recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government. It is the purpose of this chapter
to promulgate these rules of ethical conduct for the officers and employees
of the Village of Warsaw. These rules shall serve as a guide for the official
conduct of the officers and employees of the Village of Warsaw. The rules of
ethical conduct of this chapter, as adopted, shall not conflict with but shall
be in addition to any prohibition of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law
or any other general or special law relating to ethical conduct and interest
in contracts of municipal officers and employees.
§ 11-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code of Ethics, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
INTEREST — A pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a municipal officer
or employee, unless the context otherwise requires.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the
Village of Warsaw, whether paid or unpaid, including members of any
administrative board, commission or other agency thereof. No person shall
be deemed to be a municipal officer or employee solely by reason of being
a volunteer fireman or civil defense volunteer, except a chief engineer or
assistant chief engineer.
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:19
§ 11-3. Standards of conduct.
Every officer or employee of the Village of Warsaw shall be subject to and
abide by the following standards of conduct:
A. Gifts. He shall not directly or indirectly solicit any gift or accept or
receive any gift having a value of $25 or more, whether in the form of
money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise or any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him, or
could reasonably be expected to influence him, in the performance of
his official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on
his part.
B. Confidential information. He shall not disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interest.
C. Representation before one's own agency. He shall not receive or enter
into any agreement, express or implied, for compensation for services
to be rendered in relation to any matter before any municipal agency of
which he is an officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency
over which he has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint
any member, officer or employee.
D. Representation before any agency for a contingent fee. He shall not
receive or enter into any agreement, express or implied, for
compensation for services to be rendered in relation to any matter
before any agency of this municipality, whereby his compensation is to
be dependent or contingent upon any action by such agency with
respect to such matter, provided that this subsection shall not prohibit
the fixing at any time of fees based upon the reasonable value of the
services rendered.
E. Disclosure of interest in legislation. To the extent that he knows thereof,
a member of the Village Board and any officer or employee of the
Village of Warsaw, whether paid or unpaid, who participates in the
discussion or gives official opinion to the Village Board on any
legislation before the Village Board shall publicly disclose on the official
record the nature and extent of any direct or indirect financial or other
private interest he has in such legislation.
F. Investments in conflict with official duties. He shall not invest or hold
any investment, directly or indirectly, in any financial, business,
commercial or other private transaction which creates a conflict with
his official duties.
G. Private employment. He shall not engage in, solicit, negotiate for or
promise to accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service creates a conflict with or
impairs the proper discharge of his official duties.
§ 11-3 WARSAW CODE § 11-3
1:20
§ 11-4. Claims against village due to personal injury or property
damage.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former municipal officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Village of Warsaw or any agency thereof on
behalf of himself or any member of his family arising out of any personal
injury or property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted
by law.
§ 11-5. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
The Clerk of this Board shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be
distributed to every officer and employee of the Village of Warsaw within
20 days after the effective date of this Code of Ethics. Each officer and
employee elected or appointed thereafter shall be furnished a copy before
entering upon the duties of his office or employment.
§ 11-6. Code of Ethics to be posted.
The Clerk of this Board shall cause to be kept and posted on the bulletin
board in the Village Clerk's office a certified copy of this chapter and Code
of Ethics.
§ 11-7. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 17
LOCAL LAWS, PUBLICATION OF
§ 17-1. Summary publication authorized.2
Every local law and every amendment or supplement to a local law
hereafter adopted or approved by the Village Board of the Village of Warsaw
which is or may be required to be published in one or more newspapers in
order to make such local law, amendment or supplement effectual shall not
be so published in full, but it shall be sufficient to publish in such newspaper
H. Future employment. He shall not, after the termination of service or
employment with this municipality, appear before any board or agency
of the Village of Warsaw in relation to any case, proceeding or
application in which he personally participated during the period of his
service or employment or which was under his active consideration.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 11-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1
1:21
or newspapers a notice setting forth the title thereof, a brief description of
the provisions thereof and a statement that the full text thereof is on file
and may be inspected in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 17-2. Effect on state law.
This chapter shall supersede in its application to the Village of Warsaw the
provisions of § 7-706 of the Village Law relating to publication only of a local
law, amendment or a supplement to a local law adopted or approved by the
Village Board.
§ 17-3. When effective; referendum.
This chapter shall be subject to referendum on petition pursuant to § 24 of
the Municipal Home Rule Law and shall take effect immediately upon filing
in the office of the Secretary of State in accordance with § 27 of such law.3
Chapter 21
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 3.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 7.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 11.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 27.
3. Editor's Note: No valid petition requesting such referendum was filed. This chapter was
therefore deemed duly adopted on 10-2-1978.
§ 17-1 WARSAW CODE § 17-3
1:22
ARTICLE I
Term of Office of Trustees
[Adopted 2-17-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 21-1. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Article 2, § 10, of the
Municipal Home Rule Law and Article 3, § 3-302, of the Village Law of the
State of New York.
§ 21-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to increase the term of office of
Trustee from two years to four years in accordance with the provisions of
Village Law § 3-302, Subdivision 5.
§ 21-3. Terms of office.
§ 21-4. Permissive referendum.
This article shall be subject to a permissive referendum and shall become
effective in 30 days after its adoption, or, thereafter, upon approval by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the Village voting
A. For the Trustee positions currently held by Trustee Wagner and Trustee
Barber:
(1) Said current two-year term will be expiring on the 31st day of
March after the next Village election scheduled for March 18,
2014; and
(2) The successive term of office for those elected to said position in
the Village election scheduled for the third Tuesday in March 2014
shall be a four-year term and shall apply to those elected
thereafter; and
(3) Said term is subject to permissive referendum pursuant to § 21-4
below.
B. For the Trustee position currently held by Trustee Appleton and Trustee
Marsh:
(1) Said current two-year-term will be expiring on the 31st day of
March after the Village election scheduled for March 17, 2015;
(2) The successive term of office for those elected to said position in
the Village election scheduled for the third Tuesday in March 2015
shall be a four-year term and shall apply to those elected
thereafter; and
(3) Said term is subject to permissive referendum pursuant to § 21-4
below.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4
1:23
on such proposition for its approval if, within 30 days after its adoption,
there is filed with the Village Clerk a petition signed and acknowledged by
electors in the Village in number equal to at least 20% of such electors in
the Village, as shown on the register of electors for the previous general
Village election, protesting against such act or resolution and requesting
that it be submitted to the electors of the Village for their approval or
disapproval.4
§ 21-5. Supersession of Village Law.
This article shall supersede Village Law § 3-301 and § 3-302, Subdivision 5,
relating to the term of office for Trustee of the Village of Warsaw.
§ 21-6. Severability.
In the event that any word, phrase or part of this article shall be declared
unconstitutional, the same shall be severed and separated from the
remainder of this article and shall not effect the remainder of said article,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 21-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon posting and filing and following such
permissive referendum as may be called by the resident electors of the
Village or, in the absence of such permissive referendum, upon the
expiration of the time period within which a permissive referendum may be
called for.
4. Editor's Note: No valid petition for referendum was filed.
§ 21-4 WARSAW CODE § 21-7
1:24
ARTICLE II
Term of Office of Mayor
[Adopted 2-17-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 21-8. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Article 2, § 10, of the
Municipal Home Rule Law and Article 3, § 3-302, of the Village Law of the
State of New York.
§ 21-9. Legislative intent.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to increase the term of office of
Mayor from two years to four years in accordance with the provisions of
Village Law § 3-302, Subdivision 5.
§ 21-10. Terms of office.
For the Mayoral position currently held by Mayor Robinson:
§ 21-11. Permissive referendum.
This article shall be subject to a permissive referendum and shall become
effective in 30 days after its adoption, or, thereafter, upon approval by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors of the Village voting
on such proposition for its approval if, within 30 days after its adoption,
there is filed with the Village Clerk a petition signed and acknowledged by
electors in the Village in number equal to at least 20% of such electors in
the Village, as shown on the register of electors for the previous general
village election, protesting against such act or resolution and requesting
that it be submitted to the electors of the Village for their approval or
disapproval.5
§ 21-12. Supersession of Village Law.
This article shall supersede Village Law § 3-301 and § 3-302, Subdivision 5,
relating to the term of office for Mayor of the Village of Warsaw.
A. Said current two-year-term will be expiring on the 31st day of March
after the Village election scheduled for March 17, 2015;
B. The successive term of office for those elected to said position in the
Village election scheduled for the third Tuesday in March 2015 shall be
a four-year term and shall apply to those elected thereafter; and
C. Said term is subject to permissive referendum pursuant to § 21-11
below.
5. Editor's Note: No valid petition for referendum was filed.
§ 21-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-13
1:25
§ 21-13. Severability.
In the event that any word, phrase or part of this article shall be declared
unconstitutional, the same shall be severed and separated from the
remainder of this article and shall not effect the remainder of said article,
which shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 21-14. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon posting and filing and following such
permissive referendum as may be called by the resident electors of the
Village or, in the absence of such permissive referendum, upon the
expiration of the time period within which a permissive referendum may be
called for.
§ 21-13 WARSAW CODE § 21-14
1:26
Chapter 27
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 11. Officers and employees — See Ch. 21.
§ 27-1. Purpose.
The legislative body of the Village of Warsaw notes that unemployment
within the community is currently rising. It further recognizes that
emergency work situations arise which require employees of the Village
of Warsaw to be near their place of employment and to assume the
continuation of public services to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the people. Through the adoption of this chapter, the Village
Board makes a legislative determination that those who are residents of
the community take a greater interest in promoting the public safety and
health and in the future of this community than do nonresidents whose
families reside in areas unaffected by community services. The Village
Board further declares that such a quality is desirable for its employees.
The legislative body considers that residency by its employees and officers
within a community will strengthen the economic status of the community
and will encourage stability in its neighborhoods and assure continuation
of essential public services. Pursuant to the authority of law and pursuant
to determinations by the State Public Employment Relations Board, the
Village Board determines that the public need is sufficient to require that
employees hired after the effective date of this chapter be residents of the
community.
§ 27-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNITY — The area within the limits of the Township of Warsaw.
RESIDENCY — The actual principal domicile of an individual, where he or
she normally eats or sleeps and maintains usual personal and household
effects.
§ 27-3. Residency requirement.
A. The Village Board hereby establishes a residency requirement for all
employees of the Village. Every person employed or promoted by the
Village of Warsaw on or after July 1, 1982, shall be a resident of the
community of Warsaw or shall become a resident within six months of
the date of completion of his or her probationary period for the Village.
During the time of service of such employees, no individual shall cease
to be a resident of the community. This chapter shall be applicable to all
§ 21-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:27
§ 27-4. Termination of service.
Should it be alleged that an employee subject to the provisions of § 27-3
of this chapter is no longer a resident of the community, the Mayor, upon
becoming aware of the allegation, shall provide the employee written notice
of his alleged violation and shall allow the employee seven calendar days
in which to respond. Regardless of whether or not a response is received,
a hearing date shall be determined to examine the charge of nonresidency.
The employee shall be sent a notice of the hearing date 15 days prior to the
hearing. Upon a determination by a hearing officer or by a board conducting
the hearing that the employee is a nonresident in violation of this chapter,
the employee will be deemed to have voluntarily resigned.
§ 27-5. Waiver of requirements.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 36
employees regardless of civil service classification, except as follows:
[Amended 2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 2-2013]
(1) Residency requirements shall not apply to any full-time and/or parttime
police officers of the Village of Warsaw Police Department. All
full-time and part-time police officers must live within the County of
Wyoming.
B. Except for the case of promotion, the provisions of this chapter do not
apply to Village employees hired prior to July 1, 1982.
C. A copy of this chapter shall be provided to all employees upon hiring or
promotion. However, the failure of the employer to do so shall not affect
the applicability of this chapter to any employee hired after its effective
date. A copy of this chapter shall also be posted on all notice boards
normally used by the employer for employee communications.
A. In the event that the Village Board determines that it is in the best
interests of the Village to do so, the provisions of § 27-3 may be waived
with respect to a particular person or a particular position in
accordance with these standards:
(1) Lack of applicants. The requirement of residency may be waived in
those instances where the Village has difficulty hiring persons
because of the residency requirement.
(2) Necessity for nonresidency. The requirement of residency may be
waived in those instances where it is determined that residency is
not in the best interests of the Village.
B. Such a waiver shall not in any way affect the application of § 27-3 of this
chapter to any other person or position.
§ 27-3 WARSAW CODE § 27-5
1:28
ADULT BOOKSTORES, CABARETS AND THEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 42.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 56.
Noise — See Ch. 102.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 36-1. Findings; statement of policy.
In the development and execution of this chapter, it is recognized that there
are some uses which, because of their very nature, are recognized as having
serious objectionable operational characteristics, that such activities are
deleterious to the health, welfare and well-being of the Village of Warsaw
and those who live within the village and that the concentration of such
activities in any one area can and does adversely and seriously endanger
the adjacent areas thereto. It is further recognized that the location of these
uses in regard to areas where our youth may regularly assemble and the
general atmosphere encompassing their operation is of great concern to
the Village of Warsaw. Therefore, it is recognized that special regulation of
these uses is necessary to ensure that the adverse effects will not contribute
to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods or land
uses and to prevent their accessibility to minors.
§ 36-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, films for sale or
viewing on the premises, by use of motion picture devices or any other
coin-operated means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material, which excludes minors by virtue of age.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private establishment
which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features
topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar
entertainers, which excludes minors by virtue of age.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation
by patrons therein, when such establishment is customarily not open to the
public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any
minor by reason of age.
§ 27-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-2
1:29
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building, with a
capacity of 50 or more persons, used regularly and routinely for presenting
material having as a dominant theme material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation
by patrons therein, when such establishment is customarily not open to the
public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any
minor by reason of age.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or legal
representative acting individually or jointly.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
§ 36-3. Designation as regulated uses.
Adult bookstores, adult cabarets and adult motion-picture theaters are
hereby deemed to be regulated uses.
§ 36-4. Location restrictions.
Adult uses, including but not limited to adult bookstores, adult motionpicture
theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters and adult
entertainment cabarets, shall be permitted, subject to the following
restrictions:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
A.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
C.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
A. No such adult use shall be allowed within 500 feet of another existing
adult use.
B. No such adult use shall be located within 500 feet of the boundaries of
any zoning district which is zoned exclusively for residential uses.
C. No such adult use shall be located within 500 feet of a preexisting
school, place of worship, cemetery, public or semipublic building, park
or playground or other area where large numbers of minors travel or
congregate. [Amended 6-26-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 36-2 WARSAW CODE § 36-4
1:30
§ 36-5. Registration.
§ 36-6. Display of registration.
The owner, manager or agent of a registered adult use shall display in a
conspicuous place on the premises of the adult use a copy of the registration
filed with the Village Clerk.
§ 36-7. Prohibition regarding public observance.
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation
of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any
property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
§ 36-8. Special use permit.
D. No such adult use shall be located in any zoning district except an
industrial district.
A. The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purpose of
managing or controlling rents or any other person managing or
controlling a building or premises, any part of which contains an adult
use, shall register the following information with the Village Clerk of
the Village of Warsaw:
(1) The address of the premises.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the premises and the names
and addresses of the beneficial owners if the property is in a land
trust.
(3) The name of the business or establishment subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The name(s) and addresses of the owner, the beneficial owner and
the major stockholder(s) of the business or the establishment
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(5) The date of the initiation of the adult use.
(6) The nature of the adult use.
(7) If the premises or building is leased, a copy of said lease.
B. It is a violation of this chapter for the owner or person in control of any
property to establish or operate thereon or to permit any person to
establish or operate thereon an adult use without having properly
registered said adult use with the Village Clerk.
A. No use as described in this chapter shall be established until the
issuance of a special use permit by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
§ 36-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-8
1:31
§ 36-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 42
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult bookstores, cabarets and
theaters — See Ch. 36.
Bingo — See Ch. 48.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 56.
Parks — See Ch. 108.
§ 42-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 42-2. Consumption and possession; presumptive evidence.
village. Applications for such special use permit shall be in writing to
the Code Enforcement Officer and shall consist of a description of the
premises for which the permit is sought, a plain and concise statement
of the use which is proposed and such additional information as shall
be required by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Planning Board shall
call a public hearing for the purpose of considering the request for a
special use permit. At least 10 days' notice of the time and place of
the public hearing shall be given by the publication of a notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village, indicating the general
nature of the public hearing and the fact that those persons interested
therein may be heard at the time and place of such hearing. [Amended
3-27-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
B. A special use permit issued under the provisions of this section shall not
be transferable.
A. The Village Board finds that the unrestricted consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places often leads to disorders and related
problems as well as to the littering of such public places and is
disturbing to the public and threatens peace and good order.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in certain public places in order to prevent disorderly
behavior and the littering of public places and to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and to promote the public good.
§ 36-8 WARSAW CODE § 42-2
1:32
§ 42-3. Exceptions.
Upon written application to the Village Board on forms provided by the
Village Clerk, the Board may grant special permission for the use of
alcoholic beverages in or on the public sidewalks, streets, highways,
parking lots, public parks or other public places, as defined by § 240.00 of
the Penal Law of the State of New York, but only for times, dates and places
specified in the application. Said application shall contain, among other
things, a list of three names and addresses of those who are responsible for
the activity.
§ 42-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
A. Prohibitions on consumption. No person shall, within the Village of
Warsaw, drink or otherwise consume liquor, wine, beer or other
alcoholic beverages while such person is in or upon any public
sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, public park or such other place,
as defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of New York, or on
private property without invitation or permission of the owner or
occupant of such property.
B. Possession of open containers. No person shall carry or have in his or
her possession, within the Village of Warsaw, any open bottle or open
container containing liquor, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage,
with the intent of the possessor or another to consume the same in any
of the public places described in Subsection A of this section.
C. Presumptions.
(1) The possession of an open bottle or open container unwrapped or
with the top exposed in a public place, as herein defined, shall be
presumptive evidence that such open bottle or open container is
intended to be consumed in a public place.
(2) An open bottle or open container in any vehicle while in or on any
public sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, public park or other
public place, as defined by § 240.00 of the Penal Law of the State of
New York, shall be presumptive evidence that the same is in the
possession of all the occupants thereof.
§ 42-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-4
1:33
Chapter 48
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 42. Games of chance — See Ch. 86.
§ 48-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Warsaw
Bingo Licensing Ordinance."
§ 48-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Includes only bona fide religious,
charitable or nonprofit organizations of veterans, volunteer firemen and
similar nonprofit organizations.
BINGO OR GAME — Includes a specific game of chance, commonly known
as "bingo" or "lotto," in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated
numbers or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected
at random.
CONTROL COMMISSION — The State Racing and Wagering Board.6
LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
STATE LAW — Chapter 438 of the Laws of the State of New York of 1962.7
§ 48-3. Restrictions upon conduct of games.
A. The conduct of bingo games authorized by this chapter shall be subject
to the following restrictions:
(1) No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other
than a licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General
Municipal Law shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise
make available for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for
any consideration whatsoever, direct or indirect. [Added
4-1-1963]
(2) No bingo game shall be held, operated or conducted on or within
any leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly
or partly, on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits
derived from the operation of such game. [Added 4-1-1963]
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
7. Editor's Note: See General Municipal Law Article 14-H, § 475 et seq.
§ 42-4 WARSAW CODE § 48-3
1:34
§ 48-4. Application for license.
(3) No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in
the conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed
under the Bingo Control Law8 or from another authorized
organization. [Added 4-1-1963]
(4) The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall
be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same. [Added 4-1-1963]
(5) No prize shall exceed the sum or value of $250 in any single game
of bingo. [Amended 4-1-1963]
(6) No series of prizes on any one bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than $1,000. [Amended 4-1-1963]
(7) No person except a bona fide member of any such organization
shall participate in the management or operation of such game.
(8) No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo. [Amended
4-1-1963]
B. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
A. Each applicant for a license shall file with the Village Clerk a written
application therefor in the form prescribed in the rules and regulations
of the control commission, duly executed and verified, in which shall be
stated the name and address of the applicant, together with sufficient
facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable the Village
Clerk to determine whether or not it is a bona fide authorized
organization; the names and addresses of its officers; the specific kinds
of games of chance intended to be held, operated and conducted by the
applicant; and the place or places where and the date or dates and the
time or times when such games of chance are intended to be held,
operated and conducted by the applicant under the license applied for;
the items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with
the holding, operating and conducting of such games of chance and the
names and addresses of the persons to whom and the purpose for which
they are to be paid; the specific purposes to which the entire net
proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted and in what
manner; that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or
recompense will be paid to any person for holding, operating or
conducting such game or games of chance or for assisting therein
8. Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 430 et seq.
§ 48-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-4
1:35
§ 48-5. Investigation; matters to be determined; issuance of license;
fees; duration of license.
except as in this chapter otherwise provided; and that no prize or
aggregate of prizes will be offered or given under such license of a
value in excess of the sum or value authorized to be offered or given by
this chapter; and a description of all prizes to be offered and given in all
such games of chance to be held, operated and conducted under such
license and such other information as shall be prescribed by such rules
and regulations.
B. In each application, there shall be designated an active member or
members of the applicant organization under whom the game or games
of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and
conducted, and to the application shall be appended a statement
executed by the applicant and by the member or members so
designated that he or they will be responsible for the holding, operation
and conduct of such games of chance in accordance with the terms of
the license and the provisions of the rules and regulations governing
the holdings, operation and conduct of such games of chance and of this
chapter, if such license is granted.
C. In the event that any premises, upon which any such game of chance is
to be held, operated or conducted or which is to be used for any other
purpose in connection with the holding, operating or conducting
thereof, is to be leased from any person, persons or corporation, a
written statement shall accompany the application signed and verified
under oath by such person or persons or executed and verified under
oath on behalf of such corporation, stating his or its address and the
amount of rent which will be paid for such premises and that such
lessor or lessors or, if a corporation, all of its officers and each of its
stockholders who hold 10% or more of its stock, issued and
outstanding, are of good moral character and have not been convicted
of a crime.
A. The Village Clerk shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the
qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each application, with
due expedition after the filing of the application. If he shall determine
that the applicant is duly qualified to be licensed under this chapter to
hold, operate and conduct the games of chance under the provisions of
this chapter and the rules and regulations governing the holding,
operation and conduct thereof in the village; that the member or
members of the applicant designated in the application to hold, operate
or conduct the games of chance which the license was applied for are
bona fide active members of the applicant and are persons of good
moral character and have never been convicted of a crime; that such
games of chance are to be held, operated and conducted in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the rules and
regulations governing the holding, operation and conduct thereof and
that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of as provided by this
§ 48-4 WARSAW CODE § 48-5
1:36
§ 48-6. Hearing; amendment of license.
§ 48-7. Form and contents of license; display.
Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the control commission and shall contain a
description of the kind of games of chance authorized to be held, operated
and conducted thereunder; a statement of the name and address of the
licensee; of the names and addresses of the member or members of the
licensee under whom such games of chance will be held, operated and
conducted; of the number of times or the hours during which such games
of chance are authorized to be conducted; and the place or places where
and the date or dates and time or times when such games of chance are to
be conducted; and of the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds
of such games of chance are to be devoted; if any prize or prizes are to
chapter, and, if the Village Clerk is satisfied that no commission, salary,
compensation, reward or recompense whatever will be paid or given to
any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding,
operation and conduct of any such games of chance except as in this
chapter otherwise provided; that no prize will be offered and given
in excess of the sum or value of $250 in any single game of chance;
and that the aggregate of all prizes offered and given in all of such
games of chance held, operated and conducted on a single occasion
under said license shall not exceed the sum or value of $1,000, he shall
issue a license to the applicant for the holding, operation and conduct
of the specific kinds of games of chance applied for, accordingly, upon
payment of a license fee or fees of $18.75 for each occasion upon which
any games of chance are to be conducted under such license.9
B. On or before the 30th day of each month, the Village Clerk shall
transmit to the State Comptroller a sum equal to 50% of all license fees
collected by the village pursuant to this section during the preceding
calendar month.
C. No license for the holding, operation and conduct of any game or games
of chance shall be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for
a period of more than one year.
A. No application for the issuance of a license shall be denied by the
Village Clerk until after a hearing, held on due notice to the applicant,
at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the
qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application.
B. Any license issued under this chapter may be amended, upon
application made to the Village Clerk, if the subject matter of the
proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in
the original license and upon payment of such additional license fee, if
any, as would have been payable if it had been so included.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 48-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-7
1:37
be offered and given in cash, a statement of the amounts of the prizes
authorized so to be offered and given; and any other information which may
be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein. Each
license issued for the conduct of any game or games of chance shall be
conspicuously displayed at the place where the same is to be conducted at
all times during the conduct thereof.
§ 48-8. Supervision; suspension of license; inspection of premises.
The Board of Trustees shall have and exercise control and supervision over
all games of chance held, operated or conducted under such license to the
end that the same are fairly held, operated and conducted in accordance
with the provisions of such license, the rules and regulations promulgated
by the control commission and the provisions of this chapter governing the
holding, operation and conduct of the same, and the Board of Trustees and
the control commission shall have the power and the authority to suspend
any license issued by the Village Clerk and to revoke the same after notice
and hearing for violation of any such provision, and the Board of Trustees,
or any village officer or village officers designated by it, shall have the right
of entry at all times into any premises where any such game of chance
is being held, operated and conducted or where it is intended that any
such game of chance shall be held, operated and conducted or where any
equipment being used or intended to be used in the conduct thereof is
found, for the purpose of inspecting the same.
§ 48-9. Conduct of games on Sundays.
No games of chance shall be conducted under any license issued under this
chapter on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated as
"Sunday."
§ 48-10. Participation by persons under 18 years.
No persons under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to participate in
any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any
license issued under this chapter unless accompanied by an adult.
§ 48-11. Frequency of games; alcoholic beverages.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued under this chapter oftener than on six days in any one
calendar month or in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served during the progress of the game or games.
§ 48-12. Persons operating and conducting games; equipment;
expenses; compensation.
No person shall hold, operate or conduct any game or games of chance
under any license issued under this chapter except an active member of
the authorized organization to which the license is issued, and no person
shall assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games
§ 48-7 WARSAW CODE § 48-12
1:38
of chance under such license except such an active member or a member
of an organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or
a member of an organization or association of which such licensee is an
auxiliary or a member of an organization or association which is affiliated
with the licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or
association and except bookkeepers or accountants as hereinafter provided.
No such game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such
as shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation
therefor by the licensee. No item of expense shall be incurred or paid
in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any game of
chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any license issued under
this chapter, except such as are bona fide items of reasonable amount
for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered which
are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding,
operating or conducting thereof under any circumstances whatever. No
rental shall be paid for the use of any premises for holding, operating or
conducting any such game of chance thereon or for any other purpose in
connection with the holding, operating or conducting thereof unless the
amount of such rental is stated in a statement annexed to the application
for the license as provided in § 48-4 of this chapter or which is in excess of
the sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement. No
commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall
be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating
or conducting or assisting in the holding, operation or conduct of any
game of chance so held, operated or conducted, except that reasonable
compensation may be paid to bookkeepers or accountants for bookkeeping
or accounting services rendered according to a schedule of compensation
prescribed by the rules of the control commission.
§ 48-13. Admission charge; prize values; award of prizes.
Not more than $1 shall be charged by any licensee for admission to any
room or place in which any game or games of chance are to be held,
operated and conducted under any license issued under this chapter, which
admission fee, upon payment thereof, shall entitle the person paying the
same to a card entitling him to participate without additional charge in all
regular games of chance to be played under such license on such occasion,
and no charge in excess of $1 shall be made for a single opportunity to
participate in all special games to be played under such license on such
occasion. No prize greater in amount or value than $250 shall be offered
or given in any single game conducted under any such license, and the
aggregate amount or value of all prizes offered or given in all games
played on a single occasion shall not exceed $1,000. All winners shall be
determined and all prizes shall be awarded in any game played on any
occasion within the same calendar day as that upon which the game was
played. No alcoholic beverage shall be offered or given as a prize in any
such game.
§ 48-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-14
1:39
§ 48-14. Advertisement of games.
No game of chance to be conducted under any license issued under this
chapter shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be
or has been played or the prizes awarded or to be awarded by means of
newspapers, radio, television or sound trucks or by means of billboards,
posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general public,
except that one sign not exceeding 60 square feet in area may be displayed
on or adjacent to the premises where the game will be played and an
additional sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises where the
prize or prizes are displayed and additional signs may be displayed upon
any fire-fighting equipment belonging to any licensee which is a volunteer
fire company or upon any first aid or rescue squad equipment belonging
to any licensee which is a first aid or rescue squad in and throughout the
community or communities served by such volunteer fire company or such
first aid or rescue squad, as the case may be.
§ 48-15. Statement required; records to be kept.
Within 15 days after the conclusion of the holding, operating and
conducting of any such game of chance, the authorized organization which
held, operated or conducted the same and its members who were in charge
thereof shall furnish to the Village Clerk a duly verified statement showing
the amount of the gross receipts derived from each game of chance, which
shall include receipts from the sale of shares, tickets or rights in any
manner connected with participation in said game or the right to participate
therein, each item of expense incurred or paid and each item of expenditure
made or to be made, the name and address of each person to whom each
such item has been paid or is to be paid, with a detailed description of
the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor, the net profit
derived from each such game of chance and the use to which such net profit
has been or is to be applied, and a list of prizes offered and given, with the
respective values thereof. It shall be the duty of such licensee to maintain
and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the
particulars of each such report.
§ 48-16. Examination of records and officers; disclosure of
information.
The Board of Trustees and the control commission shall have the power to
examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any authorized
organization to which any such license is issued, so far as they may relate
to any transactions connected with the holding, operating and conducting
of any game of chance thereunder, and to examine any manager, officer,
director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation to
the conduct of any such game of chance under any such license, but any
information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as may be
necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 48-14 WARSAW CODE § 48-17
1:40
§ 48-17. Appeals to control commission.
Any applicant for or holder of any license issued or to be issued under
this chapter aggrieved by any action of the Village Clerk, to whom such
application has been made or by whom such license has been issued, or by
any action of the Board of Trustees may appeal to the control commission
from the determination of said Village Clerk or the Board of Trustees by
filing with the Village Clerk or the Board of Trustees, as the case may
be, a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the determination or
action appealed from. Upon the hearing of such appeal, the evidence,
if any, taken before the Village Clerk or the Board of Trustees and any
additional evidence may be produced and shall be considered in arriving
at a determination of the matters in issue, and the action of the control
commission upon said appeal shall be binding upon said Village Clerk or the
Board of Trustees and all parties to said appeal.
§ 48-18. Immunity from prosecution; exemption.10
No person or corporation lawfully conducting or participating in the
conduct of or possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of any shares,
tickets or rights to participate in or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it of any game of chance conducted or to
be conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be liable for violation of any provision of Article 225 of the Penal
Law or any other law or ordinance to the extent that such conduct is
specifically authorized by this chapter, but this immunity shall not extend
to any person or corporation knowingly conducting or participating in the
conduct of any game of chance under any license obtained by any false
pretense or statement made in any application for such license or otherwise
or possessing, selling or disposing of shares, tickets or rights to participate
in or permitting the conduct upon any premises owned by him or it of any
game of chance conducted under any license known to him or it to have
been obtained by any such false pretense or statement.
§ 48-19. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for any such license or in any statement
annexed thereto or shall pay any rental for the use of any premises for
holding, operating or conducting any game of chance under this chapter
or for any other purpose in connection with the holding, operating or
conducting thereof, unless the amount of such rental is stated in a
statement annexed to the application for the license as provided in § 48-4 of
this chapter, or shall pay or receive any sum for such rental in excess of the
sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement executed
by him or on its behalf or shall fail to keep such books and records as shall
fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding, operating
and conducting of games of chance under any such license or shall falsify
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 48-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-19
1:41
or make any false entry in any book of record so far as they relate to
any transaction connected with the holding, operating or conducting of
any game of chance under any such license or shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or of any term of such license shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall forfeit any license issued to it under this chapter and
be ineligible to apply for a license under this chapter for one year thereafter.
§ 48-20. Effective upon approval at referendum.
The provisions of this chapter shall remain inoperative in this village unless
and until a proposition therefor submitted at an annual or a special election
in this village shall be approved by a vote of the majority of the qualified
electors in this village voting thereon.11
§ 48-21. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time or repealed by the Board
of Trustees, and such amendment or repeal, as the case may be, may be
made effective and operative not earlier than 30 days following the date of
enactment of the ordinance effecting such amendment or repeal, as the case
may be. The approval of the majority of the electors of this village shall not
be a condition prerequisite to the taking effect of such ordinance.
§ 48-22. Effect on state law.
In the event that any provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto
conflict with state law or any amendment thereto, then the applicable
provisions of state law shall prevail, except to the extent that this chapter or
any amendment thereto includes provisions imposing restrictions upon the
conduct of such games in addition to the restrictions of state law.
Chapter 52
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 78.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
11.Editor's Note: This chapter was approved at referendum by a majority of the qualified
electors voting thereon on 5-6-1958.
§ 48-19 WARSAW CODE § 48-22
1:42
ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 11-7-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
§ 52-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to protect the health and well-being of the
residents of the Village of Warsaw by requiring that building contractors,
through registration, disclose certain historical, financial and technical
information pertinent to their ability to perform building improvements. It
is the further purpose of this article to assure, through said registration
process, that building contractors be fully conversant with all applicable
zoning, building and fire safety codes in force within the Village of Warsaw.
§ 52-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING CONTRACT — An oral or written agreement between a building
contractor and an owner for the performance of building improvement, and
includes all labor, services and materials to be furnished and performed
thereunder.
BUILDING CONTRACTOR — Any person engaged in the construction,
repair, remodeling, alteration, conversion, modernization, improvement or
addition to any property, building, or other structure and shall include,
but not be limited to, alarm systems; awnings; basements; bathrooms;
cabinetmaking; carpentry; central vacuum; cleaning, cesspools; dormers;
driveways; extensions; exterminating; fencing; flagpoles; flooring;
fumigation; garages; heating; ventilating; air conditioning; kitchens;
masonry; railings; roofing; sidewalks; siding; sprinkler systems; storms and
screens; swimming pools; tennis courts; termite control; tile installation;
weatherproofing and waterproofing; landscaping; painting and decorating,
but shall not include, the sale of goods by a seller who neither arranges to
perform nor performs directly or indirectly any work or labor in connection
with the installation of or application of the goods.
BUILDING IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, remodeling, alteration,
conversion, modernization, improvement or addition to any property, and
shall include but not be limited to alarm systems, awnings, basements,
bathrooms, cabinetmakers, carpentry, central vacuum cleaning, cesspools,
flagpoles, flooring, fumigation, garages, heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, kitchens, masonry, railings, roofing, septic tanks, siding,
sprinklers, storms and screens, swimming pools, tennis courts, termite
control, tile installers, waterproofing and weatherproofing and also general
contracting, landscaping, painting and decorating, but shall not include:
The sale of goods by a seller who neither arranges to perform nor
performs, directly or indirectly, any work or labor in connection with
the installation or application of the goods.
A.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:43
OWNER — Any owner of residential property, tenant or any other person
who orders, contracts for or purchases the service of a building contractor
pursuant to a building contract.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity.
PLACE OF BUSINESS — Any shop, residence, place or premises from which
a construction business is transacted.
REGISTRANT — A person permitted to engage in the construction business
under the provisions of this article.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A one-family, two-family or multifamily house
or dwelling and the property associated therewith.
§ 52-3. Registration required.
No person shall conduct or engage in any construction business without
first obtaining a certificate of registration with the Village of Warsaw as
hereinafter required.
§ 52-4. Exceptions.
No certificate of registration shall be required under this article in the
following instances:
§ 52-5. Application fee; rules and restrictions pertaining to
certificate and registrant.
Improvements to residences owned by or controlled by any government
subdivision.
B.
A. An individual who performs labor or services for a registered building
contractor for wages or salary.
B. A member or partner of a firm, partnership or other entity which is a
registered building contractor, who performs labor or services for such
registered building contractor.
C. A stockholder or officer of a corporation which is a registered building
contractor, who performs labor or services for such registered building
contractor.
D. An architect, professional engineer or any other person who is required
by state or village law to attain standards of competency or experience
as a prerequisite to engaging in such craft or profession and who is
acting exclusively within the scope of the craft or profession for which
he is currently licensed.
A. A fee, in an amount to be determined by resolution of the Village Board,
shall be paid to the Village of Warsaw upon the filing of each application
for a certificate of registration for the purpose of defraying expenses
incidental to the issuance and recording of said certificate and the
§ 52-2 WARSAW CODE § 52-5
1:44
§ 52-6. Application requirements.
Applicants for certificates of registration or renewals thereof shall file a
written, signed and notarized application with the Clerk of the Village of
Warsaw. Where the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be
signed and verified by an officer thereof. When the applicant is a firm,
partnership or other entity, the application shall be signed and verified
by a member or partner thereof. Applications shall set forth the following
information or documentation:
enforcement of the provisions of this article. The same fee shall be
payable upon applications for renewals.
B. No certificate issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned
to any person or used by any person other than the registrant to whom
it was issued.
C. A certificate issued hereunder may not be construed to authorize the
registrant to perform any work or engage in any kind of business which
is reserved to qualified licensees under separate provisions of state or
village law.
D. No building certificate shall be approved for any building contractor to
whom a valid certificate has not been issued and duly recorded by the
Clerk of the Village of Warsaw.
E. Upon reasonable notification, a certificate of registration must be made
available at every job site.
F. Every registrant shall, within 10 days after a change of control in
ownership or of management or of address or of trade name, notify the
Village of Warsaw of such change, in writing.
G. The requirements as stipulated in this article will take effect
immediately upon its passage and will be subject to annual renewal to
be due on April 1 of each succeeding year that this article remains in
effect.
A. The name, trade name and business address of the applicant.
B. If the applicant is an individual, his name and resident address; if the
applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of the
officers thereof; if the applicant is a firm, partnership or other entity,
the names and residence addresses of the members or partners thereof.
C. Whether there are any outstanding liens or judgments against the
applicant.
D. An affirmation that the applicant is conversant with the requirements
and stipulations as set forth in state and village building and fire codes
as well as the requirements and stipulations of Chapter 163, Zoning.
§ 52-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-6
1:45
§ 52-7. Issuance of certificate of registration.
After the filing of an application for a certificate of registration or renewal
thereof and payment of the required fee, the Clerk of the Village of Warsaw
will issue a valid certificate of registration. In the event that the applicant
is not able to furnish any of the requisite information or documentation, the
application will be referred to the Village Board of Trustees which may, by
resolution, allow a waiver if it is satisfied that the applicant is in substantial
compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 52-8. Penalties for offenses.
E. Disclosure of the types and limits of insurance coverage, including but
not limited to liability and workman's compensation, held by each
registrant.
F. Such other reasonable information as the Village Board of Trustees may
deem necessary or advisable to facilitate purposes of and enforcement
of this article, including but not limited to the following:
(1) The names and residence addresses of any employees of the
applicant.
(2) The names and residence addresses of the stockholders and
directors of a corporate applicant.
(3) Whether or not the applicant or any member, partner, officer,
stockholder or employee thereof ever engaged in the construction
business under another name or for another person and, if so,
reasonable information with respect thereto.
(4) Information relating to the financial responsibility and character of
the applicant.
A. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who shall conduct
or engage in any construction business without having obtained a
certificate of registration therefor shall be deemed to be in violation of
this article and, upon conviction, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not
less than $10 nor more than $250 for each day or part thereof during
which such violation continues.
B. Each and every building contract entered into or undertaken or
performed by a building contractor without having obtained or
maintained in effect a certificate of registration therefor, in violation of
this article, shall be deemed a separate violation of this article.
§ 52-6 WARSAW CODE § 52-8
1:46
Chapter 56
CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND TRAVELING SHOWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance — See Ch. 86. Noise — See Ch. 102.
§ 56-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the public peace and good order,
to prevent tumultuous assemblages and to assure the health and safety
of the residents of the Village of Warsaw in regard to the conduct of all
amusement events.
§ 56-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT EVENTS — Any form of entertainment open to the public,
conforming in a large degree to the definitions of carnival, circus or
traveling show as indicated in this section, including but not limited to
forms of entertainment commonly known as "fairs," "bazaars" and "outdoor
shows."
CARNIVAL OR TRAVELING SHOW — A transient outdoor show or
exhibition conducted in a temporary structure, composed wholly or partly
of canvas or similar material, as a place of amusement or recreation or
for any other similar public assemblage in which are conducted, operated
or permitted games of chance, skill or partly chance or skill; or wherein
goods are given or awarded to persons paying a consideration for a chance
or opportunity to win or secure the same as a prize or award; or where
concession stands or amusement stands are operated, conducted or
maintained.
CIRCUS — A transient outdoor show or exhibition conducted in a temporary
structure, composed wholly or partly of canvas or similar material, in which
are displayed or exhibited for the amusement or recreation of the general
public feats of horsemanship, tumbling, acrobatics and feats of human
skill and daring, together with feats of highly trained or unusually skilled
animals, either alone or in concert with their tamers, trainers or keepers,
and the performance of those persons garbed or dressed and made up
in costumes and makeup commonly or generally associated with circus
clowns.
§ 56-3. Permit required.
§ 52-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-3
1:47
§ 56-4. Issuance of permit.
The Village Board will issue a permit authorizing the operation of an
amusement event, provided that the following conditions are met:
§ 56-5. Restrictions and revocation.
No permit for an amusement event shall be issued, and any outstanding
permit shall be revoked, if the Village Board determines that such
amusement event includes any activity which, in the judgment of the Village
A. All amusement events are prohibited in the Village of Warsaw unless a
permit has been obtained in advance and remains in effect throughout
the duration of the event.
B. It shall be unlawful to erect, operate or maintain any amusement event
without having secured a permit from the Village Board, or to continue
to erect, operate or maintain such event after the expiration or
revocation of such permit.
A. An application is filed with the Village Clerk containing the following
information:
(1) The date(s), time(s) and location(s) of the amusement event.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of an authorized officer
or director who will be responsible for and can be contacted during
the operation of the amusement event and who shall sign the
application.
(3) A general description of all activities, games of skill, rides and
special events.
(4) A notarized letter signed by the property owner stating the nature,
extent and duration of the amusement event and granting
permission for the amusement event to use the property.
(5) The name(s) and address(es) of the amusement event's insurance
carrier(s).
(6) The signature of the Village Zoning Officer stating that the
proposed amusement event is in compliance with Chapter 163,
Zoning.
B. A certificate of insurance is filed with the Village Clerk indicating that
the amusement event is covered by public liability insurance of not less
than $1,000,000 for bodily injury and $200,000 for damage to property.
C. A certificate naming the Village of Warsaw as "also insured" and
indicating that the insurance is noncancelable without 10 days' prior
notice to the Village Clerk.
D. The payment of an application fee of $10.
§ 56-3 WARSAW CODE § 56-5
1:48
Board, will disturb the order and peace of the village or will jeopardize the
health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Village of Warsaw.
§ 56-6. Proof of inspection.
Prior to opening an amusement event to the public, the permit holder
shall file proof with the Village Clerk that his mechanical rides have been
inspected and found satisfactory by the appropriate agencies of New York
State in compliance with provisions of New York State law.
§ 56-7. Duration of the permit.
The term of any permit will not exceed a total of seven consecutive calendar
days of operation, which shall include the days necessary to erect or
construct, dismantle or remove the structures or machinery used in the
amusement event.
§ 56-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 62
CURFEW
§ 62-1. Curfew established; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys,
parks, public places of amusement and entertainment, public buildings,
vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions
of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor
or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor.12
§ 62-2. Responsibility of parents and guardians.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care and custody of a minor under the age of 16 years to knowingly
permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public
12.Editor's Note: Former § 16-1C, which immediately followed this section and stated that
each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense, was deleted 3-27-1995 by
L.L. No. 6-1995.
§ 56-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-2
1:49
streets, highways, roads, alleys or parks or other public grounds, public
places and public buildings, places of amusement or entertainment, vacant
lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian
or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or when the
minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his
or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody
of the minor.13
§ 62-3. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 66
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 102. Parks — See Ch. 108.
A. Offenders under the age of 16 will be referred to the Wyoming County
Probation Department for adjudication either in Wyoming County
Family Court as a Person In Need of Supervision (PINS) or for
disposition in Wyoming County Youth Court. [Amended 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 2-2001]
B. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody
of a minor violating § 62-2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a
violation pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
[Amended 3-27-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
13.Editor's Note: Former § 16-2C, which immediately followed this section and stated that
each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense, was deleted 3-27-1995 by
L.L. No. 6-1995.
§ 62-2 WARSAW CODE § 62-3
1:50
Part 1
[Adopted 2-15-1965 AGse Cnehr. a2l7 P Orofv Tishieo nCsode Of The Village Of
Warsaw]
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Certain Animals Restricted
§ 66-1. Restrictions; enclosures.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pasture or keep any horses, cattle,
goats, sheep or swine within 500 feet of any dwelling or place of business
occupied by another unless the same shall be properly enclosed within a
building.
§ 66-2. Fowl.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep fowl unless the same shall be
properly enclosed within a fence or building.
§ 66-3. Bees.
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter keep or maintain or suffer
to be kept or maintained bees within the limits of the Village of Warsaw
without permission of the Board of Trustees of said village. Every applicant
for such permission shall give at least one week's notice, in writing, of
such application, personally or by mail, to the owners or occupants of all
houses and buildings within a distance of 300 feet from where the bees
are to be kept or maintained. No such application shall be presented to the
Village Board without verified proof of the service of the notice hereinbefore
mentioned.
§ 66-4. Mink.
No mink shall be raised within the village limits.
§ 66-5. Penalties for offenses.14
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this Part 1 shall,
upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this
Part 1 shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate and
distinct offense hereunder.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-5
1:51

Part 2
[Adopted 7-19-1971 (Ch. 18 ODf oTghse 1965 Code Of The Village Of
Warsaw)]
ARTICLE II
Title
§ 66-6. Short title.15
This Part 2 shall be known as the "Dog Ordinance of the Village of Warsaw,
Wyoming County, New York."
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-6
1:53

ARTICLE III
Leashing and Control of Dogs
§ 66-7. When leashing required.
No person owning or having the care, custody or charge of any dog,
whether licensed or not, shall allow or permit such dog at any time to be
in any street, park or public place or upon any opened, unfenced area or
lot within the Village of Warsaw, New York, except when it shall be upon
the premises of the owner or on the premises of another person with the
knowledge and consent of such other person, unless such dog is effectively
restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length and under the
control of a competent person.
§ 66-8. Responsibility of owner.
The owner or person having the care, custody or charge of any such dog
who violates or permits the violation of this Article shall be deemed to have
committed an offense against this Part 2 and shall be liable for any such
violation or penalty therefor.
§ 66-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-8
1:55

ARTICLE IV
Nuisances; Maintenance
§ 66-9. Nuisances prohibited.
No owner or harborer of a dog shall permit or allow such dog to urinate,
defecate or commit any other nuisances or damage to public property in any
park, public building, street, parking lot, alley or sidewalk or on any private
property of another without the consent of such owner.
§ 66-10. Barking, whining and howling.
No owner or harborer of a dog or person having charge or custody of a dog
shall permit such dog to habitually and in a prolonged manner bark, whine
or howl so as to disturb the quiet of the neighborhood.
§ 66-11. Living conditions.
No owner, harborer or person having care, custody or charge of any dog
shall permit such dog to be abandoned or kept under cruel or unsanitary
conditions.
§ 66-12. Responsibility of owner.
The owner or person having care, custody or charge or harboring any such
dog who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this Article shall
be deemed to have committed an offense against this Part 2 and shall be
liable for any such violation or penalty therefor.
§ 66-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-12
1:57

ARTICLE V
Enforcement
§ 66-13. Authorized personnel.16
Dog Control Officers designated by the Warsaw Village Board, as provided
by § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law, shall enforce this Part 2.
Village of Warsaw police officers or any persons being authorized by law to
seize or impound dogs are also authorized to enforce Part 2.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-13
1:59

ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 66-14. Penalties for offenses.17
Any person violating this Part 2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50.
§ 66-15. Civil penalty.
Any person violating this Part 2 may also be subject to a civil penalty
enforceable and collectible by the Village of Warsaw in an amount of $3,
which shall be the seizure fee of such animal.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-15
1:61

ARTICLE VII
Seizure; Redemption by Owner
§ 66-16. Authorization.18
Any dog seized and impounded for violating any of the provisions of this
Part 2 or of the New York State Agriculture and Markets Law shall be held
until disposed of pursuant to § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law.
§ 66-17. Requirements for redemption by owner.
Before any dog is redeemed from village custody, proper and sufficient proof
of ownership and licensing of said dog shall be required and the payment of
the seizure fee and care.
§ 66-18. Disposal of dog upon failure to redeem.19
If any dog impounded by the village is not redeemed as provided by law,
the Dog Control Officer, Police Department, Village Board or any person
or agency authorized by law to seize and impound dogs may order the
destruction of such dog or may deliver said dog to a responsible and proper
person upon paying the seizure fee and the cost of care and impounding of
such dog and the producing of the license for such dog.
§ 66-19. Right of entry.20
For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this Part 2, the Dog
Control Officer and each member of the Police Department or any other
village agency or employee designated for the purpose of enforcing this
Part 2 is hereby authorized and directed to enter upon any premises in
the village upon which any dog is kept or harbored and to demand the
exhibition by the person owning or having charge of or control of said dog
of the license tag for such dog. The Dog Control Officer and each member
of the Police Department or any other village agent or employee designated
for the purpose of enforcing this Part 2 is hereby authorized and directed
to enter upon any such premises for the purpose of enforcing the same to
ascertain if any provisions of this Part 2 or the Agriculture and Markets Law
of the State of New York are being violated. No person shall hinder, resist or
oppose any duly authorized official in the performance of his duties under
this Part 2.
§ 66-20. Impoundment.
Seized dogs shall be impounded and held by the Village of Warsaw at such
place or places as the Village Board shall designate, and such dog shall
remain so impounded until redeemed or destroyed.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-21
1:63
§ 66-21. Records to be kept.
Suitable records shall be kept of all seized dogs.
§ 66-21 WARSAW CODE § 66-21
1:64
Chapter 70
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY REVIEW
§ 70-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement for the Village of Warsaw the
State Environmental Quality Review Act and 6 NYCRR 617.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
§ 70-3. Compliance with standards.
No action, other than an exempt, excluded or Type II action, shall be carried
out, approved or funded by any agency, board, body or officer of the village,
unless it has complied with SEQR and Part 617 to the extent applicable to
this chapter.
§ 70-4. Determination of environmental significance;
commencement of running and approval time.
A. The terms and words used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as such terms and words are defined in Article 8 of the Environmental
Conservation Law and 6 NYCRR 617, unless the context requires a
different meaning.
B. The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
indicated:
EAF — Environmental assessment form.
EIS — Environmental impact statement.
PART 617 — The rules and regulations set forth in 6 NYCRR 617.
SEQR — The State Environmental Quality Review Act as set forth in
Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
VILLAGE — The Village of Warsaw.
A. An EAF shall be prepared by or on behalf of any agency, board, body or
officer of the village in connection with any Type I action which such
agency, board, body or officer contemplates or proposes to carry out
directly. For an unlisted action, an EAF in a short or long form may be
prepared to facilitate a preliminary determination of environmental
significance.
B. An application for permit or funding of a Type I action shall be
accompanied by an EAF and for an unlisted action may be accompanied
by a short form EAF as may be needed to assist the lead agency in
making a preliminary determination of environmental significance. An
applicant may prepare a draft EIS to accompany the application in
place of the EAF. In lieu of an EAF, the Village Board or a lead agency
§ 66-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4
1:65
§ 70-5. Procedure.
If the lead agency determines that an EIS is required, it shall proceed
as provided in Sections 617.8, 617.9 and 617.10. Commencing with the
acceptance of the draft EIS, the time limitations for processing the EIS
shall run concurrently with the time limitations applicable to processing
the application for approval or funding of the action, and a public hearing
on the draft EIS, if any, shall be held concurrently with any hearing to be
held on such application. The draft EIS shall be prepared by the applicant.
Failure by the applicant to prepare an EIS acceptable to the lead agency
shall, at the option of the lead agency, be deemed an abandonment and
discontinuance of the application.
§ 70-6. Determination and designation of lead agency.
The lead agency shall be determined and designated as provided in Sections
617.6 and 617.7, except that, in the following Type I and unlisted actions,
the lead agency shall be as provided herein:
having authority to adopt its own regulations may adopt a different
procedure for reviewing environmental significance of unlisted actions.
The lead agency shall make a preliminary determination of the
environmental significance of the action on the basis of the EAF, draft
EIS or, with respect to unlisted actions, in accordance with its own
procedures, as the case may be, and such other information it requires.
Such determination shall be made within 15 days of its designation
as lead agency or within 15 days of its receipt of all information it
requires, whichever is later. For Type I actions, a determination of
nonsignificance shall be noticed and filed as provided in Section
617.10(b); for unlisted actions, a determination of nonsignificance shall
be sent to the applicant and maintained in accordance with Sections
617.7(e) and 617.10(f). After a determination of nonsignificance, the
action, including one involving a permit or funding, shall be processed
without further regard to SEQR, Part 617 or this chapter.
C. The time of filing an application for approval or funding of an action
shall commence to run from the date the preliminary determination of
environmental nonsignificance is rendered or, if in lieu of an EAF the
applicant prepares a draft EIS, from the date the applicant files a draft
EIS acceptable to the lead agency.
A. The adoption, amendment or change in zoning regulations not
requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval: the Village
Board.
B. The construction or expansion of village buildings, structures and
facilities within the village not requiring a federal or state agency
permit or approval: the Village Board.
C. Variances not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval:
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 70-4 WARSAW CODE § 70-6
1:66
§ 70-7. Village Board to act as clearinghouse.
The Village Board shall act as the village clearinghouse for lead agency
designation. Such clearinghouse shall assist agencies and applicants in
identifying other agencies, including federal and state, that may be involved
in approving, funding or carrying out Type I and unlisted actions. The
clearinghouse shall also make recommendations on the designation of a
lead agency.
§ 70-8. Processing of actions involving federal agency.
Environmental review of actions involving a federal agency shall be
processed in accordance with Section 617.16.
§ 70-9. Fees.
The fees for review or preparation of an EIS involving an applicant for
approval or funding of an action shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Village Board. (Section 617.17 prescribes limitations on
the amount of fees. If the applicant prepares the EIS, the village may charge
a fee for actual expenses of reviewing it, but if a village agency prepares an
EIS on behalf of an applicant, it may charge a fee for the cost of preparing,
including publication of notices, but not for the cost of professional review.)
§ 70-10. Designation of critical areas of environmental concern.
Critical areas of environmental concern may be designated by resolution of
the Village Board in accordance with Section 617.4(j).
§ 70-11. Designation of Type I actions.
D. The purchase, sale and lease of real property by the village not
requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval: the Village
Board.
E. A planned unit development or cluster zoning not requiring a federal or
state agency permit or approval: the Village Planning Board.
F. A site plan review and special use permit not requiring a federal or
state agency permit or approval: the Village Planning Board.
G. The construction or expansion of a nonresidential facility not requiring
a federal or state agency permit or approval: the Zoning Officer.
H. A parking lot not requiring a federal or state agency permit or approval:
the Zoning Officer.
A. The actions listed in this section are deemed Type I actions in addition
to those set forth in Section 617.12.
B. The purpose of the list of actions identified as Type I in this section is to
identify for agencies, project sponsors and the public those actions and
§ 70-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-11
1:67
projects that are more likely to require the preparation of EIS's than
those not so listed (i.e., unlisted actions). This Type I list is not
exhaustive of those actions that an agency may determine have a
significant effect on the environment and require the preparation of an
EIS. Therefore, the fact that an action or project has not been listed as
a Type I action does not carry with it the presumption that it will not
have a significant effect on the environment. For all individual actions
which are Type I or unlisted, the determination of significance must
be made by comparing the impacts which may be reasonably expected
to result from the proposed action with the criteria listed in Section
617.11. The Type I actions on this list are considered more likely to
require the preparations of an EIS than other actions and are likely to
involve review by more than one governmental agency, and therefore
the procedural requirements for Type I actions (Section 617.6) are
more extensive than for those unlisted actions (Section 617.7).
C. The following actions are Type I if they are directly undertaken, funded
or approved by an agency:
(1) The adoption of a municipality's land use plan or zoning regulations
or the adoption by any agency of a comprehensive resource
management plan.
(2) The following changes in the allowable uses within any zoning
district affecting 25 or more acres of the district.
(a) The authorization of industrial or commercial uses within a
residential or agricultural district.
(b) The authorization of residential uses within an agricultural
district.
(3) The granting of a zoning change at the request of an applicant for
an action that meets or exceeds one or more of the thresholds given
in other sections of this list.
(4) The acquisition, sale, lease or other transfer of 100 or more
contiguous acres of land by a state or local agency.
(5) The construction of new residential units which meet or exceed the
following thresholds:
(a) Ten units in municipalities which have not adopted zoning
regulations.
(b) Fifty units not to be connected (at commencement of
habitation) to community or publicly owned utilities.
(c) Two hundred fifty units to be connected (at commencement of
habitation) to community or publicly owned utilities in a city,
town or village having a population of less than 150,000.
§ 70-11 WARSAW CODE § 70-11
1:68
§ 70-12. Designation of Type II actions.
(6) The construction of new nonresidential facilities which meet or
exceed any of the following thresholds or the expansion of existing
nonresidential facilities by more than 50% of any of the following
thresholds, provided that the expansion and the existing facilities,
when combined, meet or exceed any threshold contained in this
section:
(a) A project or action which involves the physical alteration of 10
acres.
(b) A project or action which would use ground- or surface water
in excess of 2,000,000 gallons per day.
(c) Parking for 1,000 vehicles.
(d) A facility with more than 100,000 square feet of gross floor
area in a city, town or village having a population of 150,000
persons or less.
(7) Any structure exceeding 100 feet above original ground level in a
locality without any zoning regulation pertaining to height.
(8) Any nonagricultural use occurring wholly or partially within an
agricultural district (certified pursuant to the Agriculture and
Markets Law, Article 25AA, § 303) which exceeds 10% of any
threshold established in this section.
(9) Any action, unless the action is designed for the preservation of the
facility or site, occurring wholly or partially within or contiguous to
any facility or site listed in the National Register of Historic Places
or any historic building, structure or site or prehistoric site that has
been proposed by the Committee on the Registers for consideration
by the New York State Board on Historic Preservation for a
recommendation to the State Historic Officer for nomination for
inclusion in said National Register.
(10) Any project or action which exceeds 25% of any threshold in this
section, occurring wholly or partially within or substantially
contiguous to any publicly owned or operated parkland, recreation
area or designated open space.
(11) Any action which exceeds the locally established thresholds or, if
no such thresholds are established, any action which takes place
wholly or partially within or substantially contiguous to any critical
environmental area designated by a local agency pursuant to
Section 617.4.
A. The actions listed in this section are deemed Type II actions in addition
to those set forth in Section 617.13.
§ 70-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-12
1:69
B. Actions or classes of actions which have been determined not to have a
significant effect on the environment are classified as Type II actions
and do not require environmental impact statements or any other
determination or procedure under this section.
C. Each agency may adopt its own Type II list, provided that it finds that
each of the actions contained on it is no less protective of the
environment than the list in this section and will in no case have a
significant effect on the environment based on the criteria contained in
Section 617.11 and any additional criteria contained in its procedures
adopted pursuant to Section 617.4. An agency may not designate as
Type I any action on the Type II list.
D. The following actions are Type II actions:
(1) The replacement of a facility, in kind, on the same site, unless such
facility meets any of the thresholds in Section 617.12.
(2) The granting of individual setback and lot line variances.
(3) Agricultural farm management practices, including construction,
maintenance and repair of farm buildings and structures and land
use changes consistent with generally accepted principles of
farming.
(4) The repaving of existing highways not involving the addition of new
travel lanes.
(5) Street openings for the purpose of repair or maintenance of
existing utility facilities.
(6) Installations of traffic control devices on existing streets, roads and
highways.
(7) Public or private forest management practices, other than the
removal of trees or the application of herbicides or pesticides.
(8) The construction or placement of minor structures accessory or
appurtenant to existing facilities, including garages, carports,
patios, home swimming pools, fences, barns or other buildings not
changing land use or density.
(9) The maintenance of existing landscaping or natural growth.
(10) The mapping of existing roads, streets, highways, uses and
ownership patterns.
(11) Inspections and licensing activities relating to the qualifications of
individuals or businesses to engage in their business or profession.
(12) Sales of surplus government property, other than land, radioactive
material, pesticides, herbicides or other hazardous materials.
(13) Collective bargaining activities.
§ 70-12 WARSAW CODE § 70-12
1:70
Chapter 74
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 108.
§ 74-1. Discharge restricted.
No person, otherwise than in the discharge of official duty, shall discharge
any revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle, air rifle or firearm of any description
within the corporate limits of the Village of Warsaw, unless written
permission shall be granted by the Chief of Police.
§ 74-2. Penalties for offenses.21
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(14) Investments by or on behalf of agencies or pension or retirement
systems.
(15) The routine or continuing agency administration and management,
not including new programs or major reordering of priorities.
(16) License and permit renewals, where there will be no material
change in permit conditions or the scope of permitted activities.
(17) Routine activities of educational institutions, which do not include
capital construction.
(18) Information collection, including basic data collection and
research, Master Plan study components, water quality and
pollution studies, traffic counts, engineering studies, boring studies
and surveys and soils studies that are not a preliminary step
towards any given Type I project.
(19) Minor temporary uses of land having negligible or no permanent
effect on the environments.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 74-2
1:71
Chapter 78
FIRE PREVENTION AND BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Home improvement contractors — See Ch. 93.
Sewers — See Ch. 123.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 133.
Tourist and mobile home parks — See Ch.
141.
Water — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 78-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
this Village. This chapter is adopted pursuant to section 10 of the Municipal
Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform Code, other
state law, or other section of this chapter, all buildings, structures, and
premises, regardless of use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of
this chapter. This chapter specifically updates Chapter 78, Fire Prevention
and Building Construction, of the Code of the Village of Warsaw. Any portion
of Chapter 78 unaffected by this chapter remains in full force and effect.
§ 78-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 78-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued pursuant to
Subsection B of § 78-7 of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to Subsection B of § 78-3 of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — Includes the Code Enforcement
Officer and all Inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to Subsection A of § 78-15 of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — An inspector appointed pursuant to Subsection D of § 78-3
of this chapter.
§ 74-2 WARSAW CODE § 78-2
1:72
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 78-10 of this chapter.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — Includes an individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association,
or any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 78-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to Subsection
D of § 78-7 of this chapter.
VILLAGE — The Village of Warsaw.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 78-3. Code Enforcement Officer and inspectors.
A. The office of Code Enforcement Officer is hereby created. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To receive, review, and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and
construction documents submitted with such applications;
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates and operating
permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits such
terms and conditions as the Code Enforcement Officer may
determine to be appropriate;
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, fire safety and property maintenance
inspections, inspections incidental to the investigation of
complaints, and all other inspections required or permitted under
any provision of this chapter;
(4) To issue stop-work orders;
(5) To review and investigate complaints;
(6) To issue orders pursuant to Subsection A of § 78-15 (Violations) of
this chapter;
(7) To maintain records;
§ 78-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-3
1:73
§ 78-4. Building permits.
(8) To collect fees as set by the Village Board of the Village;
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings;
(10) In consultation with this Village's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, or to abate or
correct conditions not in compliance with the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code or this chapter; and
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be proposed by the Mayor and
appointed by the Village Board. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
possess background experience related to building construction or fire
prevention and shall, within the time prescribed by law, obtain such
basic training, in-service training, advanced in-service training and
other training as the State of New York shall require for code
enforcement personnel, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain
certification from the State Fire Administrator pursuant to the
Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Code Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as
such for any reason, an individual shall be proposed by the Mayor and
appointed by the Village Board to serve as Acting Code Enforcement
Officer. The Acting Code Enforcement Officer shall, during the term of
his or her appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill all duties
conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more Inspectors may be proposed by the Mayor and appointed
by the Village Board to act under the supervision and direction of the
Code Enforcement Officer and to assist the Code Enforcement Officer in
the exercise of the powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer by this chapter. Each Inspector shall,
within the time prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service
training, advanced in-service training and other training as the State of
New York shall require for code enforcement personnel, and each
Inspector shall obtain certification from the State Fire Administrator
pursuant to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Officer and Inspectors
shall be fixed from time to time by the Village Board of this Village.
A. Building permits required.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section, a
building permit shall be required for any work which must conform
to the Uniform Code and/or the Energy Code, including, but not
§ 78-3 WARSAW CODE § 78-4
1:74
limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration, improvement,
removal, relocation or demolition of any building or structure or
any portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuel-burning
heating appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No person
shall commence any work for which a building permit is required
without first having obtained a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) Exemptions. No building permit may be required for work in any of
the following categories:
(a) Installation of swings and other playground equipment
associated with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses);
(b) Installation of swimming pools associated with a one- or twofamily
dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses) where such pools are designed for a water depth
of less than 18 inches and are installed entirely above ground;
(c) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and
theater stage sets and scenery;
(d) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall
of a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings (townhouses);
(e) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet
nine inches in height;
(f) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting, or other similar finish
work;
(g) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances;
(h) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does
not alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with
the equipment's original specifications; or
(i) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
[1] The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall,
partition, or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or
load-bearing component;
[2] The removal or change of any required means of egress, or
the rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner
which affects egress;
[3] The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of
any building system; or
§ 78-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-4
1:75
[4] The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
B. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection A of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code or the Energy Code.
C. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made in writing on a form provided by or otherwise acceptable
to the Code Enforcement Officer. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property where the work is to be performed or by an
authorized agent of the owner. The application shall include such
information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to permit
a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that the intended
work complies with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Code
and the Energy Code. The application shall include or be accompanied
by the following information and documentation:
(1) A description of the proposed work;
(2) The tax map number and the street address of the premises where
the work is to be performed;
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure;
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code; and
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which:
(a) Define the scope of the proposed work;
(b) Are prepared by a New York State-registered architect or
licensed professional engineer where so required by the
Education Law;
(c) Indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent
of the work proposed;
(d) Substantiate that the proposed work will comply with the
Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(e) Where applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location
of any existing or proposed well or septic system, the location
of the intended work, and the distances between the buildings
and structures and the lot lines.
D. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
§ 78-4 WARSAW CODE § 78-4
1:76
requirements set forth in Subsection C(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Code Enforcement Officer
in writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer, and one set of the
accepted construction documents shall be returned to the applicant
to be kept at the work site so as to be available for use by the code
enforcement personnel. However, the return of a set of accepted
construction documents to the applicant shall not be construed as
authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that a building
permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and unless a
building permit is issued.
E. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code and Energy
Code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit if the
proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Uniform Code and Energy Code.
F. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
G. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Code Enforcement Officer of
any change occurring during the course of the work. The building
permit shall contain such a directive. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that such change warrants a new or amended building
permit, such change shall not be made until and unless a new or
amended building permit reflecting such change is issued.
H. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has become invalid or which has expired
pursuant to this Subsection H may be renewed upon application by the
permit holder, payment of the applicable fee, and approval of the
application by the Code Enforcement Officer.
I. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code or the
Energy Code, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that:
§ 78-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-4
1:77
§ 78-5. Construction inspections.
(1) All work then completed is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code; and
(2) All work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code.
J. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 78-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time of approval of an application for a building permit, for an amended
building permit, or for renewal of a building permit.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or by an Inspector authorized by the Code Enforcement Officer.
The permit holder shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when any
element of work described in Subsection B of this section is ready for
inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected made, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit;
(2) Footing and foundation;
(3) Preparation for concrete slab;
(4) Framing;
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in;
(6) Fire-resistant construction;
(7) Fire-resistant penetrations;
(8) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents;
(9) Energy Code compliance; and
(10) Final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code or
Energy Code. Work not in compliance with any applicable provision of
the Uniform Code or Energy Code shall remain exposed until such work
shall have been brought into compliance with all applicable provisions
of the Uniform Code and the Energy Code, reinspected, and found
satisfactory as completed.
§ 78-4 WARSAW CODE § 78-5
1:78
§ 78-6. Stop-work orders.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 78-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue
stop-work orders pursuant to this section. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a stop-work order to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code or Energy
Code, without regard to whether such work is or is not work for
which a building permit is required, and without regard to whether
a building permit has or has not been issued for such work; or
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not been issued for such work; or
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired, or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause
the stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by registered mail. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work
order, or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their agents,
or any other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the
stop-work order, personally or by registered mail; provided, however,
that failure to serve any person mentioned in this sentence shall not
affect the efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
§ 78-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-6
1:79
§ 78-7. Certificates of occupancy; certificates of compliance.
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in
Subsection A of this section, and the authority to issue a stop-work
order shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or limitation of,
the right and authority to pursue any other remedy or impose any other
penalty under § 78-15 (Violations) of this chapter or under any other
applicable local law or state law. Any such other remedy or penalty may
be pursued at any time, whether prior to, at the time of, or after the
issuance of a stop-work order.
F. Other method of relief. It is acknowledged that Chapter 78, § 78-21 of
the Code of the Village of Warsaw offers another similar form of relief
for stop-work orders.22 Chapter 78, § 78-21 of the Code of the Village of
Warsaw is not repealed or amended by the adoption of this chapter and
is independently subject to enforcement if utilized by the Village.
G. 23Additional relief for stop-work orders. Whenever any authorized code
enforcement official has reasonable grounds to believe that work on any
building or structure is proceeding without a building permit or is
otherwise in violation of provisions of any applicable laws, codes,
ordinances, rules or regulations, or not in conformity with the
provisions of an application, plans or specifications on the basis of
which a building permit was issued, or in an unsafe or dangerous
manner, he may notify the owner of the property or the owner's agent,
or the person performing the work, to suspend all work, and any such
persons must forthwith stop such work and suspend all building
activities until the stop-work order has been rescinded. Such order and
notice must be in writing, must state the conditions under which the
work may be resumed and may be served upon a person to whom it is
directed either by delivering it personally to him or by posting it upon a
conspicuous portion of the building under construction and sending a
copy of the same to the person, firm or corporation by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
A. Certificates of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy shall be
required for any work which is the subject of a building permit and for
all structures, buildings, or portions thereof, which are converted from
one use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another.
Permission to use or occupy a building or structure, or portion thereof,
for which a building permit was previously issued shall be granted only
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
22.Editor's Note: See now § 78-6G.
23.Editor's Note: This Subsection G was adopted 11-15-1993 by L.L. No. 7-1993 and was
included as § 78-21. It was saved from repeal pursuant to § 78-6F of L.L. No. 2-2006,
adopted 12-4-2006.
§ 78-6 WARSAW CODE § 78-7
1:80
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the work which was the subject
of the building permit was completed in accordance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code and, if applicable, that
the structure, building or portion thereof that was converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and Energy Code.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In addition, where
applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be
designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer,
at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy, shall be
provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy:
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections; and
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall
contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any;
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any;
(3) The name, address and tax map number of the property;
(4) If the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an entire
structure, a description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate of occupancy is issued;
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure;
(6) The type of construction of the structure;
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any;
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required;
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit; and
(10) The signature of the Code Enforcement Officer issuing the
certificate of occupancy and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to issue a
temporary certificate allowing the temporary occupancy of a
§ 78-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-7
1:81
§ 78-8. Notification regarding fire or explosion.
The chief of any fire department providing fire-fighting services for a
property within this Village shall promptly notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural damage, fuelburning
appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 78-9. Unsafe building and structures.
Unsafe structures and equipment in this Village shall be identified and
addressed in accordance with the procedures established by Local Law
building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to completion of
the work which is the subject of a building permit. However, in
no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a temporary
certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines that:
(a) The building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely;
(b) Any fire- and smoke-detecting or fire-protection equipment
which has been installed is operational; and
(c) All required means of egress from the building or structure
have been provided.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may include in a temporary
certificate such terms and conditions as he or she deems necessary
or appropriate to ensure safety or to further the purposes and
intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate shall be
effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which shall
be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer and specified in
the temporary certificate. During the specified period of
effectiveness of the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall
undertake to bring the building or structure into full compliance
with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code and the Energy
Code.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy or a temporary
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within
such period of time as shall be specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such
certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 78-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy or for
a temporary certificate.
§ 78-7 WARSAW CODE § 78-9
1:82
Number 1 of 2007, as now in effect or as hereafter amended from time to
time.
§ 78-10. Operating permits.
A. Operating permits required. Operating permits shall be required for
conducting the activities or using the categories of buildings listed
below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1),
2703.1.1(2), 2703.1.1(3) or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled
"Fire Code of New York State" and incorporated by reference in 19
NYCRR section 1225.1;
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a byproduct, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling;
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies;
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more;
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Village Board of this Village; and
(6) Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to operate
any type of building listed in this Subsection A shall be required to
obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such activity or
operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Code Enforcement Officer deems
sufficient to permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer
that quantities, materials, and activities conform to the requirements of
the Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
tests or reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or
reports shall be performed or provided by such person or persons as
may be designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement
Officer, at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A of this section is to be conducted at a location, the
Code Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for
§ 78-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-10
1:83
§ 78-11. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections.
each such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, revoked, or suspended.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 78-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for an operating permit, for an
amended operating permit, or for reissue or renewal of an operating
permit.
A. Inspections required. Fire safety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or an Inspector designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer at the following intervals:
(1) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Fire safety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) or (2), and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) or (2), shall be performed at least once
every 24 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A of this section, a fire safety and property maintenance
inspection of any building, structure, use, or occupancy, or of any
dwelling unit, may also be performed by the Code Enforcement Officer
or an Inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer at any time
upon:
(1) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner;
(2) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a written statement
alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Code or Energy Code exist; or
§ 78-10 WARSAW CODE § 78-11
1:84
(3) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code or Energy Code
exist; provided, however, that nothing in this Subsection B shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection is
required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
C. OFPC inspections. Nothing in this section or in any other provision of
this chapter shall supersede, limit or impair the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the New York State Office of Fire Prevention and
Control ("OFPC") and the New York State Fire Administrator under
Executive Law Section 156-e and Education Law Section 807-b.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure which
contains an area of public assembly if OFPC performs fire safety
and property maintenance inspections of such building or structure
at least once every 12 months;
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a building or structure
occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs fire safety and property
maintenance inspections of such building or structure at least once
every 12 months;
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a multiple dwelling not
included in paragraphs (1) or (2) of subdivision (a) of this section if
OFPC performs fire safety and property maintenance inspections of
such multiple dwelling at intervals not exceeding the interval
specified in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of this section; and
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall not perform fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of a nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy not included in paragraphs (1) or (2) of
subdivision (a) of this section if OFPC performs fire safety and
property maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building,
structure, use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding the interval
specified in paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of this section.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 78-16 (Fees) of this chapter must be paid prior
to or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section.
This Subsection F shall not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
§ 78-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-12
1:85
§ 78-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail
to comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any
other local law, ordinance or regulation adopted for administration and
enforcement of the Uniform Code or the Energy Code. The process for
responding to a complaint shall include such of the following steps as the
Code Enforcement Officer may deem to be appropriate:
§ 78-13. Recordkeeping.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation, and documenting the results of such inspection;
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described in § 78-15
(Violations) of this chapter;
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order;
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by all code enforcement
personnel, including records of all:
(1) Applications received, reviewed and approved or denied;
(2) Plans, specifications and construction documents approved;
(3) Building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates,
stop-work orders, and operating permits issued;
(4) Inspections and tests performed;
(5) Statements and reports issued;
(6) Complaints received;
(7) Investigations conducted;
(8) Other features and activities specified in or contemplated by
§§ 78-4 through 78-12, inclusive, of this chapter, including; and
(9) Fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
§ 78-12 WARSAW CODE § 78-13
1:86
§ 78-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 78-15. Penalties for offenses.
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained
for at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Village
Board of this Village a written report and summary of all business
conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Inspectors,
including a report and summary of all transactions and activities
described in § 78-13 (Recordkeeping) of this chapter and a report and
summary of all appeals or litigation pending or concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excerpts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of this Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to order in writing the
remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about
any building, structure, or premises in violation of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter. Upon finding that any such
condition or activity exists, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a compliance order. The compliance order shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(c) Specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter;
(d) Specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, or this chapter which is/are violated by the
specified condition or activity;
(e) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance;
(f) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period
of time; and
§ 78-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-15
1:87
(g) State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may
be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified
period of time.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the compliance order, or
a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property
personally or by registered mail. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the compliance order,
or a copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant,
contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent, or their
agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work being
performed at the affected property personally or by registered
mail; provided, however, that failure to serve any person mentioned
in this sentence shall not affect the efficacy of the compliance
order.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer and each Inspector
are authorized to issue appearance tickets for any violation of the
Uniform Code.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties proscribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code or this chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit,
certificate of occupancy, temporary certificate, stop-work order,
operating permit or other notice or order issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this chapter, shall be
liable to a civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day or part
thereof during which such violation continues. The civil penalties
provided by this Subsection C shall be recoverable in an action
instituted in the name of this Village.
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter, or any term or
condition of any building permit, certificate of occupancy, temporary
certificate, stop-work order, operating permit, compliance order, or
other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant
to any provision of this chapter. In particular, but not by way of
limitation, where the construction or use of a building or structure is in
violation of any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this
chapter, or any stop-work order, compliance order or other order
obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code or this chapter, an
action or proceeding may be commenced in the name of this Village, in
the Supreme Court or in any other court having the requisite
jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the removal of the building or
structure or an abatement of the condition in violation of such
provisions. No action or proceeding described in this Subsection D shall
be commenced without the appropriate authorization from the Village
Board of this Village.
§ 78-15 WARSAW CODE § 78-15
1:88
§ 78-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Village Board of this
Village. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from time to time by
like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in accordance with, such
fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be changed and collected for
the submission of applications, the issuance of building permits, amended
building permits, renewed building permits, certificates of occupancy,
temporary certificates, operating permits, fire safety and property
maintenance inspections, and other actions of the Code Enforcement
Officer described in or contemplated by this chapter.
§ 78-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Village Board of the Village may, by resolution, authorize the Mayor of
this Village to enter into an agreement, in the name of this Village, with
other governments to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that such
agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable law.
§ 78-18. Supersession of less stringent provisions.
If any section of this chapter is more stringent than requirements set forth
in Chapter 78 of the Code of the Village of Warsaw, the same shall supersede
the applicable section.
§ 78-19. Repealer; interpretation of provisions.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code)
and the State Energy Conversion Construction Code (the Energy Code) in
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or penalty available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 78-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with, or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 78-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of Section
381 of the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this
section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously
with, or after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of
Section 381 of the Executive Law.
§ 78-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 78-19
1:89
the Village of Warsaw and all buildings, structures and premises, regardless
of use or occupancy, are subject to the provision of this chapter; and Part
1203 of Title 19 of the Official Compilations of Codes, Rules and Regulations
of the State of New York has been repealed and is amended by adding a new
Part 1203 as set forth herein. All ordinances, local laws and parts thereof
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed.
Chapter 82
(RESERVED)
Chapter 86
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 48. Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 56.
§ 86-1. Legislative authority; title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law of the State of New York and shall be known as the
"Games of Chance Law of the Village of Warsaw."
§ 86-2. Word usage.
The words and terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as such words and terms are used in Article 9-A of the General Municipal
Law unless otherwise provided herein or the context requires a different
meaning.
§ 86-3. License required; rules and regulations.
Authorized organizations may, upon obtaining a license from the Village
Clerk, conduct games of chance within the Village of Warsaw as provided
in Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law and as provided further in this
chapter. Such games of chance shall be conducted in accordance with the
laws of the State of New York and with the rules and regulations adopted
by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board and pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 86-4. Restrictions imposed by statute.
The conduct of games of chance shall be subject to the restrictions imposed
by § 189 of the General Municipal Law.
§ 78-19 WARSAW CODE § 86-5
1:90
§ 86-5. Conduct of games on Sundays and certain holidays.
Games of chance may be conducted on Sunday pursuant to this chapter.
However, no games of chance shall be conducted on Easter Sunday,
Christmas Day or New Year's Eve.
§ 86-6. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police of the Village of Warsaw Police Department shall
exercise control over and supervision of all games of chance conducted
under duly authorized licenses. The Chief of Police shall have all those
powers and duties set forth in and for the enforcement of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law.
§ 86-7. Effective upon approval at referendum.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the office of
the Secretary of State, following its approval by majority of the qualified
voters of the Village of Warsaw voting on a proposition therefor, at a general
election held pursuant to the provisions of § 24 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law.24
Chapter 88
GARAGE SALES AND YARD SALES
§ 88-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Garage Sales and Yard
Sales Law of the Village of Warsaw."
§ 88-2. Legislative intent and purpose.
The legislative intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish conditions
pursuant to which residents may conduct occasional garage sales and/or
yard sales at their premises within the Village of Warsaw. It has come to
the attention of the Village Board that a number of residents are having
frequent and/or repeated garage and yard sales at their homes, in effect
turning their residential premises into a site where retail business is
conducted in a residential area. The Village Board has determined that,
in order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
residents in the Village of Warsaw, it has become necessary to restrict such
garage sales and yard sales in residential zoning districts. Such sales, if
continued without limitation, tend to have the affect of establishing retail
businesses in residential areas, creating public nuisance, and altering and
compromising the residential character of the neighborhoods and otherwise
violating the spirit and intent of the Village Code.
24.Editor's Note: This chapter was approved at referendum by a majority of the qualified
electors voting thereon on 5-10-1983.
§ 86-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:91
§ 88-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE/YARD SALE — The general sale of personal property
conducted from or on residential premises at any one time for the sale of
tangible personal property. These sales shall include, but not be limited
to, all sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "estate," "barn," "porch," "inside,"
"attic," "basement," "tag," "tent," "rummage," "flea market," "moving," or
any similar casual sale.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Any such item, goods, clothing, furniture,
appliance or other tangible property which is owned, utilized and
maintained by the owner or tenant on a residential property and was
acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It
explicitly does not include any goods or merchandise which were obtained
or purchased for resale or consignment.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — Any real property, parcel, lot or building
thereon which is used for residential occupancy, regardless of the zoning
designation.
§ 88-4. Restrictions.
§ 88-5. Exemptions.
A. No more than two garage sales/yard sales may be held during the
calendar year for each residential premises, and they shall not last
longer than three consecutive calendar days each. Garage sales and
yard sales are also permitted during the weekend of the Village of
Warsaw sidewalk sales/community yard sales.
B. Garage sales/yard sales may only be conducted during daylight hours.
C. It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under the
authority granted by this chapter, property other than personal
property as defined herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, members of
more than one residence may join together in a single sale held at one
of the residences.
D. No personal property or goods to be sold at the garage sale/yard sale
shall be placed or stored outside except during the permitted duration
of the sale, and it shall cease from being stored outside within 24 hours
from the end of the sale.
A. Any public auction with a duration of no more than two days and
conducted by an auctioneer licensed by the State of New York.
B. Any church, civic, fraternal or charitable organization holding a sale of
the type described in this chapter shall be exempt from the rules and
regulations contained herein, provided that the sale is held upon
property owned or rented by that particular organization.
§ 88-3 WARSAW CODE § 88-6
1:92
§ 88-6. Signs.
Signs advertising a garage sale are to be restricted to the premises where
the sale occurs. Such signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in area and shall
not be located where they may interfere with the view of motorists and shall
not be posted earlier than one week before the sale commences and must
be removed immediately after the sale ceases.
§ 88-7. Traffic and parking.
Garage sales/yard sales shall be conducted so as not to impede nor disrupt
traffic or parking within the neighborhood.
§ 88-8. Responsibility.
The owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or person otherwise in charge, control
and or possession of residential premises where the garage sale/yard sale
is held shall be responsible for compliance with the regulations set forth in
this chapter.
§ 88-9. Enforcement and enforcement alternatives.
§ 88-10. Penalties for offenses.
A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable
by:
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Village Code Enforcement Officer,
Village Police Department, Village Fire Marshal and any other persons
who are authorized by resolution of the Village Board.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
the payment of a fine. Such person shall include, but not be limited to,
the owner, occupant, or tenant of the premises on which the sale occurs
and all persons participating in and all premises used for the garage
sale/yard sale.
C. Any alleged violation of any of the provision of this chapter may be
pursued by appropriate remedy, whether by injunctive, declaratory or
other civil relief or criminal sanction, in court at the option of the
Village Board.
A. A fine not exceeding $150 for conviction of a first offense;
B. For conviction of a second offense, both of which were committed
within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350;
and
C. Upon conviction for a third or subsequent offense, all of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $750.
§ 88-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-10
1:93
Chapter 90
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 96.
Parks — See Ch. 108.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 129.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
D. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate additional
violation.
§ 88-10 WARSAW CODE § 88-10
1:94
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 90-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Garbage and Refuse Local Law."
§ 90-2. Intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health and, for the
public good, to preserve the property values, to create a more attractive
economic and business climate and to reduce the risk of disease, vermin and
other unhealthy consequences associated with garbage, trash, refuse and
waste. All of these laws have the purpose of promoting the public health and
safety and placing an affirmative obligation on the individual to safeguard
the environment.
§ 90-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings indicated. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
ASHES — The residue of the combustion of any type of solid fuel, such as
wood, coal, coke, charcoal and like substances.
BIOMEDICAL WASTE — All solid waste generated by a medical facility
related to any medical use, including but not limited to the following: tongue
depressors, cotton swabs, medical gloves, surgical gowns, table paper,
hypodermic needles, intravenous tubing with needles attached, syringes,
test tubes, blood samples, pipettes, lances, scalpels, smears, bloody gauze
wraps, pathological waste, human blood, cultures, etc.
CASUAL TRASH — Single newspapers, food, gum, candy wrappers, ice
cream bags and sticks, individual sheets of paper, empty paper or plastic
bags or like food items that a passer-by might carry and discard, such
as tissues or food containers from which the discarding person consumed
food. "Casual trash" does not include commercial, business or household
garbage, trash or waste.
DUMPSTER — A waste receptacle, publicly or privately owned, for the
disposal of litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish and casual trash.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, as well as all
household waste.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish and casual trash, as defined herein,
and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited, tend to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other
public area in the village, owned or used by the village and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-3
1:95
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC LITTER RECEPTACLES — Waste receptacles placed by the Village
of Warsaw in the Business District and parks for the convenient disposal of
casual trash.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any of the following materials intended to be
collected and transferred to a licensed recycling agent:
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, litter, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VILLAGE — The Village of Warsaw.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Consists of corrugated cardboard
packaging material which is flattened and bundled and which is free
from all other packaging material.
A.
GLASS BOTTLES — Consist of whole bottles and jars, made of clear
glass only and free from cookingware, plate glass, safety glass, and
nonglass materials. Labels are not acceptable.
B.
MIXED METALS — Consist of aluminum and bimetal (steel and
aluminum) beverage cans and tin-steel food cans. Tin-steel cans must
have organics removed.
C.
NEWSPAPERS — Consist of bagged (paper bags only) or tied dry
newspapers, free from magazines and paper other than newsprint.
D.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Consist of No. 1 and No. 2 empty and
cleaned plastic containers without caps.
E.
§ 90-3 WARSAW CODE § 90-4
1:96
§ 90-4. Enforcement.
Enforcement shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, who is hereby given
the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter personally
and by his delegates.
§ 90-5. Presumptive evidence of violation.
§ 90-6. Penalties for offenses.
A person who violates a provision of this chapter, or who fails to perform an
act required of him by this chapter, commits an offense. A person is guilty
of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the
violation is committed, continued or permitted. Punishment for each offense
shall be a fine not less that $25 and not exceeding $250 for each twentyfour-
hour period of violation.
A. If litter is found on public places, private premises or vacant lots and
the owner or custodian of such material is identifiable from such
material, a rebuttable presumption of such person's intent to violate
this chapter shall arise.
B. If nonpermitted material is found in a public litter receptacle or in a
public or private dumpster and the owner of such material is
identifiable from such material, a rebuttable presumption of person's
intent to violate this chapter shall arise.
§ 90-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-6
1:97

ARTICLE II
Litter
§ 90-7. Throwing or depositing in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the village, except that those items defined as
casual trash may be deposited in public litter receptacles.
§ 90-8. Throwing or depositing on private premises.
A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter on any occupied
private premises within the village, whether owned by the person or not,
or in or on any gutter, parkway, sidewalk or alley adjacent to the private
premises; except that the owner, occupant or person in control of the
private premises may maintain private receptacles for collection in such a
manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, gutter, parkway, sidewalk, alley or other public
place or upon any private premises.
§ 90-9. Throwing or depositing on vacant lots.
A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter on any open or
vacant private property within the village, whether owned by the person
or not, or in any gutter, parkway, sidewalk or alley adjacent to the private
property.
§ 90-10. Disposal and accumulation on private property.
§ 90-11. Sweeping into streets and public places prohibited;
sidewalks to be kept clean by abutting property owners or
occupants.
A. No owner, occupant or person in control of a private premises shall
place, deposit or throw, permit to accumulate, or permit or cause to be
placed, deposited or thrown any litter on the premises, unless the litter
has been deposited in a private receptacle for collection.
B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any
person or householder from disposing of garbage and refuse in the
home by means of household incinerators or other garbage disposal
devices, provided that the devices produce no smoke or odor and that
they do not become or are not nuisances or hazards.
A. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the village the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front
of their premises free of litter.
§ 90-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-11
1:99
§ 90-12. Throwing from vehicles prohibited.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the village or upon private
property.
§ 90-13. Truckloads to be contained.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the village
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load or
contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other private or public property.
§ 90-14. Posting of notices on poles, trees or structures.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized or required by law.
§ 90-15. Use of public litter receptacles restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause, direct, suffer or allow his employee, agent
or contractor to deposit any material other than casual trash in a villageowned
public litter receptacle in the Business District and village parks, and
such material shall not exceed 1/2 cubic foot of volume or two pounds of
weight within any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 90-16. Proper placement in public litter receptacles required.
Persons placing litter in public litter receptacles shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried on or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 90-17. Deposit dumpsters restricted.
No person shall throw or deposit or cause, direct, suffer or allow his
employee, agent or contractor to throw or deposit litter or other waste
material (garbage, refuse, rubbish or casual trash) in, upon or adjacent to
B. No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the village the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business within the village shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter.
C. A person doing construction work within the village shall at all times
keep the sidewalk, street, alley and public or private property abutting
the construction site free of construction trash, litter and debris.
§ 90-11 WARSAW CODE § 90-17
1:100
any dumpster located within the village without the permission of the owner
of said dumpster.
§ 90-18. Proper placement in dumpsters required.
Persons placing litter in their own dumpsters shall do so in such a manner
as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 90-19. Registration of dumpsters; sticker.
The owner of a private dumpster must register with the village and obtain a
sticker from the Village Clerk and shall place said sticker on the dumpster.
Said sticker shall contain the name of the owner and shall read "No
unauthorized person may place litter in this dumpster. Violators are subject
to a fine of not less than $25 and not to exceed $250 by order of the Village
of Warsaw Board."
§ 90-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-19
1:101

ARTICLE III
Garbage, Refuse and Rubbish Collection
§ 90-20. Board to provide for collection.
The Village Board shall have the right from time to time to hire or contract
with one or more persons, firms or corporations, upon such terms and
conditions as such Board shall provide, for the collection and disposal of
garbage, refuse and rubbish. The Village Board may at any time establish
a municipally-operated collecting service for garbage, refuse and ashes and
may purchase such equipment as may be necessary for the proper operation
of the same.
§ 90-21. Collection service to be limited.
Any collection service established by the village pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be for the collection and disposal of household garbage,
refuse and ashes and that produced by retail stores and businesses and
hospitals and schools. Manufacturing and industrial establishments
producing considerable quantities of waste materials shall dispose of their
own waste at their own cost and expense.
§ 90-22. Waste material excluded from pickup.
The Village of Warsaw will not be responsible for the disposal of any or all
hazardous, toxic, infectious or bulky material, including but not limited to
the following:
§ 90-23. Receptacles.
Every owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any building, premises or place
of business in the Village of Warsaw where garbage, refuse or ashes are
made or accumulated shall provide or cause to be provided and at all
A. Asbestos waste.
B. Batteries.
C. Biomedical waste.
D. Carpets and carpeting.
E. Large appliances.
F. Large chairs and couches.
G. Medical waste.
H. Paint.
I. Oil.
J. Tires.
§ 90-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-23
1:103
times hereafter keep within such building or upon the premises or place of
business suitable and sufficient receptacles, with tight covers, for receiving
and holding, without leakage, all garbage, refuse and ashes that may
accumulate from said building, place of business or upon said premises,
or any portion thereof, of which said person may be owner, tenant, lessee
or occupant. Said receptacles shall not be of greater capacity than 40
gallons and shall not be used for any purpose other than as receptacles
for garbage, refuse and ashes, and shall be kept tightly covered and in a
sanitary condition at all times; provided, however, that ash receptacles may
be uncovered, provided that the same are tight and provided with handles.
Also, rubbish may be tied in bundles so as to be easily handled by one man
or may be securely sacked.
§ 90-24. Placing material for collection.
§ 90-25. Fees.
A. All garbage, refuse and ashes must be placed in receptacles or
containers as herein specified, except articles and materials too bulky
to be so removed. Materials which are too bulky to be placed in
containers shall be tied in bundles or so secured as to be conveniently
carried by one man.
B. Garbage cans, bags and other receptacles containing garbage, refuse
or ashes, and bundles of refuse to be disposed of, shall be deposited on
the premises at such place or places and at such a time or times as shall
be designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. A bag user fee is hereby adopted to be implemented for the collection of
garbage commencing on or about November 1, 1991. The bag user fee
system will operate as follows:
(1) In order for garbage to be picked up within the village, such
material must be placed within officially designated bags
authorized by the Village of Warsaw.
(2) The officially designated bags will be distributed at the Village
Office Building and through commercial outlets. The program and
distribution shall be coordinated by the Village Treasurer's Office.
(3) The cost of the bags shall be established by resolution of the Village
Board and on an annual basis reviewed and modified according to
increased/decreased collection and disposal costs.
(4) Only garbage as herein defined shall be placed in the bags.
Garbage shall specifically exclude those items listed in § 90-22 of
this chapter.
(5) All officially designated bags must be securely tied or fastened
when placed on the curb for collection, and no officially designated
bag shall contain more than 50 pounds in weight of garbage.
§ 90-23 WARSAW CODE § 90-25
1:104
§ 90-26. Transfer station designated; rules and regulations.
The Village Board shall designate, establish and maintain a municipal
transfer station either within or without the village limits and may designate
such rules and regulations to apply to the use thereof as it shall from time
to time deem necessary.
§ 90-27. Collection of recyclables.
(6) Bags not officially designated or which fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall not be collected by the village.
B. Dumpster collection fees are hereby adopted commencing on or about
November 1, 1991, for all privately owned dumpsters which are
collected by the village. The dumpster collection fees will operate as
follows:
(1) In order for a dumpster to be collected by the village, the owner of
the dumpster or his designee must be enter into a contract with the
village for collection. The dumpster must also contain an official
sticker.
(2) Dumpster fees will be determined by the volume (cubic yards) of
the dumpster and will differ according to whether the owner is or is
not tax-exempt.
(3) Dumpster fees shall be established by resolution of the Village
Board and on an annual basis reviewed and codified according to
increased/decreased collection and disposal costs.
(4) Only garbage, litter, refuse and casual trash may be placed in
dumpsters, and those items listed in § 90-22 of this chapter shall be
specifically prohibited from being deposited in dumpsters.
(5) Private dumpsters that are without official stickers, that contain
prohibited items, that are not contracted for or whose fees are not
paid within 45 days from the date of billing will not be collected by
the village.
A. A system is hereby adopted to be implemented for the collection of
recyclables commencing on or about September 15, 1991.
B. The system for the collection of recyclables shall be as follows:
(1) Only recyclables as defined in this chapter will be picked up by the
village.
(2) In order for recyclables to be picked up within the village, such
material must be placed in officially designated boxes or in such
containers as are approved of by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
§ 90-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-27
1:105
(3) Recyclables to be disposed of shall be deposited on the premises at
such place or places and at such time or times and in such a
manner as shall be designated by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
(4) It is a violation of this chapter for any person to deposit recyclable
material except in such a manner, place and time as shall be
designated by the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 90-27 WARSAW CODE § 90-27
1:106
Chapter 93
(RESERVED)
Chapter 96
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 90.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 96-1. Purposes.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, control and license those
activities or businesses known as "automobile graveyards," junkyards,
secondhand parts collection areas, the processing of used metals for resale
and the dumping, storage and disposal of waste or used materials of
whatever composition. Without regulation and control, such activities and
businesses can constitute a hazard to persons and property and can create
a public nuisance. Stored materials may be highly flammable or even
explosive. Gasoline tanks on automobiles often contain gasoline in some
quantity and engines and other parts of stored automobiles are frequently
covered with grease and oil. Tires, plastic seats, tops and other parts of
automobiles are also flammable. Batteries and other parts of automobiles
can contain acids and other material potentially harmful to humans.
Vehicles frequently contain sharp metal or glass edges or points from
which people could receive serious cuts and abrasions, and can constitute
attractive nuisances to children and adults. Even in commercial or
industrial areas, the presence of such junkyards is unsightly and tends to
detract from the value of the surrounding land and property unless such
areas are properly maintained and operated.
§ 96-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber debris, waste or junked, scrapped, ruined, dismantled or wrecked
motor vehicles or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or
nonferrous material, tires, lumber, pallets and other wood debris.
JUNKYARD — Outside storage or deposit, whether in connection with
another business or not, where two or more unregistered, old or
secondhand motor vehicles, no longer intended or in condition for legal use
on the public highways, are held, whether for the purpose of resale or sale
of used parts therefrom or the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all
§ 90-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-2
1:107
of the materials therein, whether metal, glass, fabric or otherwise or for
the purpose of disposing of the same or for any other purpose. Such term
shall include any place of storage or deposit for any such purposes of used
parts or waste materials from motor vehicles and/or material defined as
junk which, taken together, equal in volume 100 cubic feet; also any land
or structure used for collection, storage, sale or disposal of junk, scrap
metal or other discarded materials. Excluded from this definition are motor
vehicles maintained and used on a seasonal basis (i.e., motorcycles and
winter or summer cars).
MOTOR VEHICLE — Passenger automobile, truck, tractor-truck trailer,
bus, motorcycle or other vehicle, however propelled, as well as tractors,
bulldozers, machinery and equipment.
PERSON — An individual, association, partnership or corporation.
§ 96-3. License required.
No person may engage in or conduct, individually or as an agent or
employee, any activity or business which involves the collection, storage,
burning, dumping, disassembly, dismantling, salvage or otherwise handling
or arranging for sale or resale of bodies, engines or parts of motor vehicles,
or junk or any waste material, whether composed of wood, paper, cloth,
cardboard, plastics, metals, stone, cement or otherwise, without first
obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 96-4. Location restriction.
Junkyards may be located only in an Industrial (I) District of the Village of
Warsaw and must be considered a special use in that district.
§ 96-5. Application for license.
§ 96-6. License fee; display of license; bond; term of license;
nontransferability of license; revocation.
A. Each applicant for a license hereunder shall execute an application
therefor on forms to be supplied by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The applicant must agree that if granted the license applied for, he or
she will conduct the activity or business pursuant to the regulations
hereinafter set forth, and that, upon failure to do so, the license may be
revoked.
C. Hearings on the application will be held subject to the provisions
detailed in Chapter 163, Zoning, of the Village of Warsaw Code, after
which the license may be granted by the Village Board.
A. The Village Board may, by resolution, determine the fee for the license,
which sum will include not only the cost of issuance of the license itself,
but also the cost of making the necessary inspections of the premises to
ascertain compliance as hereinafter prescribed.
§ 96-2 WARSAW CODE § 96-6
1:108
§ 96-7. Regulations for operation.
B. Such license must be displayed in a conspicuous place at the licensee's
place of activity or business for which the license is issued.
C. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the
licensee must provide the Village of Warsaw with a performance bond
in an amount to be determined by the Village Board.
D. The license will be effective from the date of its issuance until the 31st
day of December of the year of such issuance. Application must be
made annually on forms provided by the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. The license is personal to the licensee and does not attach to the
premises where the activity is conducted. The license must not be sold,
assigned or transferred.
F. The license may be revoked by the Village Board after a public hearing
thereon, at which hearing the licensee must have an opportunity to be
heard. Should the license be revoked, the Village Board may require at
the licensee's expense the removal of automobiles, parts and materials
remaining on the site for which the license is granted.
A. The licensee must personally manage or be responsible for the
management of the activity or business for which the license is granted.
B. The business area must be completely enclosed by a fence at least eight
feet in height which substantially screens the business area. Said fence
shall contain a suitable and substantial entrance gate, which gate shall
be kept closed and locked except during the working hours of such
junkyard or when the licensee or his agent shall be within. Such fence
shall be erected not nearer than 50 feet from a public highway.
However, where the topography or natural growth of timber or other
considerations accomplish the purpose of this chapter in whole or in
part, the fencing requirements hereunder may be reduced by the
Village Board, provided that such natural barrier conforms to the
purpose of this section.
C. All motor vehicles, parts or other materials stored or deposited by the
licensee and all wrecking or other work on such motor vehicles or
material stored must be kept within the enclosure of the junkyard,
except as removal may be necessary for the transportation of the same
in the reasonable course of business.
D. The burning of autos, parts and materials is strictly prohibited, unless
with the express written permission of the Chief of the Warsaw Fire
Department.
E. There must be maintained at each location for which a license is issued
a sufficient number of fire extinguishers for fire protection as
determined by the Fire Marshal or Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 96-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-7
1:109
Chapter 102
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult bookstores, cabarets and
theaters — See Ch. 36.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 56.
Curfew — See Ch. 62.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 66.
Firearms — See Ch. 74.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 78.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 129.
§ 102-1. Findings; legislative intent.
F. When neither the licensee nor any employees are upon the premises,
the entrance gate shall be securely locked.
G. Suitable sanitary facilities must be available, connected to approved
public sewers or septic tanks, for the use and convenience of the
licensee as well as for the general public visiting the area.
H. The area of the licensee's activity or business must not be used as a
dump area, nor as a place for the burning and disposal of junk or trash,
except as hereinabove provided.
I. Such place of business may not be located within 500 feet of a church,
school, hospital or other public building.
J. At least twice a year, the Code Enforcement Officer must be granted
access to the area of activity or business of the licensee at all
reasonable hours to inspect the same for compliance herewith.
A. The Board of Trustees finds that:
(1) Unnecessary noise degrades the environment of the village to a
degree which:
(a) Is harmful and detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of
its inhabitants.
(b) Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and
recreation and with the conduct and cooperation of business
and industry.
(c) Causes nuisances.
(2) No one has any right to create unnecessary noise.
§ 96-7 WARSAW CODE § 102-1
1:110
§ 102-2. Restrictions.
(3) Effective control and elimination of unnecessary noise is essential
to the furtherance of the health and welfare of the village's
inhabitants and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life,
recreations, commerce and industrial activity.
B. The Board of Trustees recognizes that many inhabitants of the Village
of Warsaw must sleep during the daylight hours in order that they may
be employed in the nighttime and that infants, invalids and illness
require that unnecessary noise be eliminated; and the Board of
Trustees is mindful of the fact that a busy village creates sufficient
noise by its own activity which cannot be eliminated. Therefore, it is in
the public interest that unnecessary noise, especially unnecessary
recreational noise, be eliminated within the corporate limits.
C. It shall be an expression of the legislative intent of this Board of
Trustees that the proliferation of portable radios and tape players being
played outside of dwellings, upon the public way, on public sidewalks
and in parks and plaza areas and on porches and steps of building be
discouraged. Individuals that find it necessary to operate these devices
out of doors at loud levels should operate them with headsets or
headphones attached so that the persons who desire to listen to these
devices may enjoy them in comfort and that they not be permitted to
create a nuisance in the neighborhood. It is also an expression of the
legislative intent of this Board of Trustees that commercial
establishments which provide live entertainment or jukebox
entertainment or entertainment through some sound amplifications
system be discouraged from having such entertainment audible outside
of said premises and on the public ways and streets and be specifically
discouraged from loud or noisy entertainment being conducted with
their doors open to the public way.
D. It shall also be an expression of the legislative intent of this Board of
Trustees to discourage the use of any horn or signaling device on any
automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle, except as a danger warning,
especially to discourage the use of a vehicle horn in closely settled
neighborhoods to signal a resident to come down or out of a building,
except in a situation where the driver of the vehicle, due to disability, is
incapable of leaving the vehicle to go to the door of the residence to be
addressed.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village of Warsaw to make
or continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the village.
B. The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this section:
(1) Vehicles.
§ 102-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-2
1:111
(a) Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or any other
vehicle on any street or public place in the village, except as a
danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling
device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding
of any such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time; the use of any horn, whistle or other device
operated by engine exhaust; and the use any such signaling
device when traffic is for any reason held up. Authorized
emergency vehicles may use warning sounds. Wedding,
parades and other organized events which customarily use
motor vehicle and sound their horns during the event are
excepted from the operation of this chapter.
(b) Engine exhaust. The discharge into the open air within the
village of the exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine or any other type of
engine, motorboard or motor vehicle, except through a muffler
or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises therefrom.
(c) Squealing tires. The making, aiding or assisting in making any
improper noise or disturbance or operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle in such a manner as to cause excessive squealing
or other excessive noise of the tires or motor of said vehicle or
motorcycle on the streets of the Village of Warsaw.
(2) The construction or repairing of buildings. The creation of noise
associated with an excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of
any building within the city, other than between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in the case of urgent necessity or in the
interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer, which permit may be renewed
for periods of three days while the emergency continues.
(3) Loudspeakers, amplifiers, paging systems, portable radios and
portable tape players; sound on the streets. The playing, using or
operating of or the permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio receiver, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker,
audio amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of any sound which is cast upon the public streets,
sidewalks, parks, plaza areas or any public areas of the village.
Permits for the operation of these devices may be obtained for the
conduct of any approved event or celebration. Practice sessions by
school bands or loudspeakers used at organizations, athletic or
scholastic events are exempt from the operation of this chapter.
(4) Radios and phonographs; use on private property. Playing, using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, tape player,
television receiving set or other machine or device for the
§ 102-2 WARSAW CODE § 102-2
1:112
§ 102-3. Permits.
The permits authorized by this chapter may be obtained from the office of
the Village Clerk, who shall promulgate the necessary regulations relating
thereto.
§ 102-4. Standards for determining violation.
§ 102-5. Penalties for offenses.
producing or reproducing of sound is prohibited if such sound is
loud enough to be clearly heard 25 feet from the boundary of the
property on which the sound is produced or reproduced.
(5) Yelling and shouting. Yelling, shouting, loudly conversing, hooting
or singing on the public streets of the village or at any time or place
so as to annoy the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any
office or in any dwelling or any other type of residence or of
persons within the vicinity, within the limits of the village.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud or unnecessary or unusual noises,
hereinabove defined, which disturb the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or which cause discomfort or annoyance to any
reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area.
B. The standard which may be considered in determining whether a
violation of the provisions of this section exist may include but not be
limited to the following:
(1) The level of the noise.
(2) Whether the nature of the noise is natural or unnatural.
(3) Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
(4) The level and intensity of the background noise, if any.
(5) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
(6) The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
(7) The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates.
(8) The time of the day and night of the noise occurs.
(9) The duration of the noise.
(10) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
A. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the
Penal Law of the State of New York punishable by a fine not exceeding
§ 102-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-5
1:113
Chapter 108
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 42.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 66.
Firearms — See Ch. 74.
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 90.
Noise — See Ch. 102.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112.
Trees — See Ch. 145.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 153.
§ 108-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish rules and regulations governing
the use of publicly owned active and passive recreational areas within the
Village of Warsaw. These rules and regulations are designed to provide the
maximum recreational benefit to the residents of the village consistent with
safety and the best interests of the community.
§ 108-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
PARK — A park or any other area owned or used by the Village of Warsaw
and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERMIT — Any written license issued by or under the authority of the
Village of Warsaw permitting the performance of a specified act or acts or
the conduct of a particular function, program or activity.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, company, association, jointstock
association, firm, copartnership or other entity or form of association.
VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled by power other than muscular power.
§ 108-3. Hours.
Unless otherwise permitted by the Village Board, village parks shall be
opened at 7:00 a.m. and shall close at 11:00 p.m.
$250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
B. The Police Department may, in its discretion, confiscate the offending
device at the scene of the offense, and the return of said device shall be
in the sound discretion of the court.
§ 102-5 WARSAW CODE § 108-4
1:114
§ 108-4. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are prohibited within the village parks, and no person
shall:
§ 108-5. Use of vehicles and roadways.
A. Cut, break or in any way injure or deface grass, shrubs, flowers, trees,
plants, posts, railings, chains, lamps, lampposts, benches, signs, tree
guards, buildings, structures or any other property in or upon any
village park or of any paths, roads or roadways upon or across the
same.
B. Distribute or display any commercial advertising material or post any
sign or placard of any type whatsoever in village parks without consent
of the Village Board.
C. Operate any snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, minibikes, trail bikes,
motor scooters or similar vehicles except at such places as may be
designated therefor.
D. Permit any animal owned, kept or harbored by him to soil, deface or
commit any nuisance in village parks.
E. Have in his possession any explosives, fireworks or firearms except as
specifically authorized by the Village Board.
F. Sell or offer for sale any items on or within village park property
without the specific approval of the Village Board.
G. Bathe, wade, swim or wash clothes in any waters or fountains.
H. Deposit garbage, refuse matter or any other materials except in
designated trash receptacles.
I. Kindle, build or use a fire in any place except fireplaces or grills
provided for such use.
J. Carry into and/or have possession of any glass beverage container in
the village park.
K. Use loud or boisterous language or interfere with any officer of the
village, town, county or state in the performance of his duty.
L. Loiter or remain within the park or any part thereof after the posted
closing hours at such park without general or special permission.
A. The village shall have the authority to regulate vehicular traffic around
village park areas.
B. The speed limit on all driveways and parkways designated for vehicular
use is restricted to a maximum of 15 miles per hour.
§ 108-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-5
1:115
§ 108-6. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall bring into, sell, give away, display, drink or cause, permit or
procure to be sold, given away or drunk any alcoholic or spirituous liquors
or beverages in any park, except such alcoholic or spirituous liquors or
beverages as may be specifically permitted by the village, and only at such
places and at such times specifically permitted by the village and only at the
places specifically designated and approved by the village.
§ 108-7. Enforcement; police powers.
§ 108-8. Promulgation of additional rules.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Warsaw shall, by resolution, make
such rules and regulations governing the use of said park as it deems
advisable, and all existing rules and regulations now in effect are hereby
ratified and confirmed, except as the same are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 108-9. Penalties for offenses.
C. Unless otherwise specified by the Village Board, traffic on the
perimeter road in the village park is restricted to one-way flow in a
clockwise direction.
D. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village Board, no person shall drive,
operate or cause to remain in a park any vehicle during any part of the
period between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except at a village-approved
function and no later than 30 minutes after the closing of such function.
A. Members of the Village of Warsaw Police Department and of the
Wyoming County Sheriffs Department and any other police agency
shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Chief of Police, or his designated representative, shall in the
interest of public safety, have the authority to close a park to the public
in the event of an emergency.
C. Members of the Village of Warsaw Police Department and the Wyoming
County Sheriffs Department and any other police agency shall have the
authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this
chapter.
D. Any police officer, auxiliary police officer or police officer acting under
authority of the Village of Warsaw Police Department shall have the
power to seize and confiscate any property, contraband, thing or device
in a park which is used in violation of this chapter.
A. Violation of any provision or regulation of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or by imprisonment for not
more than 15 days, or both. Further, where appropriate, those found
§ 108-5 WARSAW CODE § 108-9
1:116
Chapter 112
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 102.
§ 112-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Peddling and
Soliciting Local Law."
§ 112-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating itinerant
merchandising in order that the peace, health, safety, welfare and good
order of the village and its inhabitants shall not be endangered or unduly
disturbed.
§ 112-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ESTABLISHED OFFICE OR PLACE OF BUSINESS — A permanent building,
store or depository in which or where the person transacts business and
deals in the goods, wares, commodities or services or peddles in the
ordinary and regular course of business.
MERCHANDISING — The selling, bartering or trading or offering to sell,
barter or trade any goods, wares, commodities or services or soliciting for
the sale, trade or barter of wares, goods, commodities or services.
PEDDLER OR SOLICITOR — Includes, unless otherwise herein provided,
any person who engages in merchandising any goods, wares, commodities
or services by going from house to house, place of business to place of
business or in any public street or public place or by temporarily occupying
a room, building or other premises therefor.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association and principal or agent thereof.
guilty of committing acts of defacement or vandalism may be required
to restore the property so damaged.
B. In addition, a violation of this chapter shall constitute disorderly
conduct, and the person violating the same shall be a disorderly person
or persons.
§ 108-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-3
1:117
TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY — The occupancy of a store, room, building,
tent, enclosure or structure of any kind for no longer a period of time
than is necessary to peddle his service or services or merchandise or
products therein housed, without an intent to supply continuous service or
to replenish or restock the goods, wares or merchandise sold therein. In all
prosecutions for a violation of this chapter, the intent of the defendant to
conduct an established place of business shall be a material fact, and the
burden of furnishing proof of such intent shall be upon the defendant in
such prosecution.
§ 112-4. License required for certain activities.
Merchandising any goods, wares, commodities or services within the Village
of Warsaw without first having obtained a license therefor from the Clerk
of the village is hereby prohibited, unless such merchandise or service is
furnished at the personal request of the person buying the same or unless
such license is not required under any of the provisions of § 112-5 of this
chapter.
§ 112-5. Exemptions from licensing requirements.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Dealers, merchants, tradesmen or members of a profession having
an established office or place of business within the village.
(2) Any person serving an established customer or soliciting at the
express invitation of the person solicited.
(3) A wholesaler selling articles to dealers or merchants within the
village.
(4) A village resident who is a truck gardener or farmer or, through his
or her employees, vends, sells or disposes products of his or her
own farm or garden.
(5) A child regularly attending any public or parochial or private school
located within the Village of Warsaw, or a representative of any
established church maintaining a place of worship within the
village, or a member of a veterans' organization, provided that such
organization has and maintains a chapter, post, lodge, camp or
other group within the Village of Warsaw or a member of a fraternal
organization or civic group, provided that such fraternal
organization or civic group maintains a chapter or local
organization within the Village of Warsaw and further provided that
any persons coming within the provisions of the exemption shall
only peddle in connection with an authorized activity of the
organization of which they are a member or of the school which
they attend.
(6) Auction sales held pursuant to law by a sheriff or other officer
authorized by law to conduct such sale or auction held by a licensed
§ 112-3 WARSAW CODE § 112-5
1:118
§ 112-6. Application requirements.
auctioneer for a private individual or for an established business
or organization permanently doing business or operating in the
Village of Warsaw.
B. This chapter shall not apply so as to interfere unlawfully with interstate
commerce.
C. This chapter shall not apply to persons holding New York State
veterans' licenses for peddling and soliciting as provided by the laws of
the State of New York, provided that such persons are duly licensed by
the State of New York under such acts and laws applicable thereto.
A. Every applicant for a license is required to submit to the Village Clerk a
written application supplying, under oath, the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) Permanent home residence.
(3) The name and address of the firm represented, if any.
(4) The length of time for which the license is required.
(5) A description of the goods, wares or commodities to be offered for
sale, together with a true invoice of amount, quality and value.
(6) The number of arrests or convictions for crime and the nature
thereof.
B. The application must be appended by a letter of authorization from the
firm which the applicant purports to represent.
C. Every applicant for a peddling license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall submit a photograph ID card that has been taken within the past
year. The ID card is to have the applicant's full name and date of birth.
The photograph shall be two inches by two inches, taken within 30 days
of the date of the application for such license. Such photograph shall
show the head, full face and shoulders of the applicant and shall be
submitted in triplicate. One copy of the photograph shall be attached to
the license application, one copy of the photograph to the license and
the third shall be delivered to the Chief of Police of the Village of
Warsaw.
D. Each applicant for a peddling license shall have a fingerprint
impression of the fingers and thumbs on both hands taken by the Police
Department of the Village of Warsaw, and the photograph delivered to
the Chief of Police shall be attached to the fingerprint identification
card and shall remain on file in the Village of Warsaw Police
headquarters.
§ 112-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:119
§ 112-7. License requirements.
Upon receipt of the approved police records search from the Chief of
Police, the application and the license fee, if reasonably satisfied with the
applicant's qualifications, the Village Clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant, specifying the particular business authorized and the location
wherein it may be conducted. This license shall be nontransferable and shall
be in continuous possession of the licensee while engaged in the business
licensed. The license shall be produced upon demand of any village official
or prospective buyer. Such license shall be countersigned by the Chief of
Police of the Village of Warsaw and shall be invalid until such signature is
obtained.
§ 112-8. Records to be kept; duration of license.
§ 112-9. Fees.
The license fees for all licenses hereunder are hereby fixed as follows: $100
a year or $25 per day.
§ 112-10. Rules and regulations.
E. All applicants and their employees are subject to personal background
search, conducted by the Warsaw Police Department. A records search
will include any past or outstanding misdemeanor or felony charges by
any law enforcement agency.
A. The Village Clerk shall keep a record of the application and the
determination thereon and all licenses issued in accordance with this
chapter. The record shall contain the name and residence of the person
licensed, the location of the business, the amount of the license fee paid
and the date of revocation of all licenses revoked.
B. All licenses hereunder shall expire one year from the date of issuance,
except that a license issued for a shorter period than one year shall
expire at the expiration of the period for which it is issued.
A. A licensed peddler shall:
(1) Not willfully misstate the quantity or quality of any article or
service offered for sale.
(2) Not willfully offer for sale any article of an unwholesome or
defective nature.
(3) Not call attention to his goods by blowing a horn, by ringing a bell
other than a house doorbell, by shouting or crying or by making a
loud, unusual noise.
(4) Provide adequate off-street parking.
§ 112-6 WARSAW CODE § 112-10
1:120
§ 112-11. Revocation of license.
A license may be summarily revoked by the Village Clerk by reason of a
violation of the terms of the license, the violation of any municipal ordinance
or state or federal statute or falsification in applying for a license. Written
notice of such revocation, stating the terms thereof, shall be personally
served upon the licensee or mailed to the address given in the application.
Upon the filing of such notice of revocation in the Village Clerk's office, with
affidavit of service by mailing, such license shall be revoked. A hearing upon
the revocation of the license shall be granted the licensee if said licensee
shall request such a hearing as hereinafter provided.
§ 112-12. Hearing.
In the event of the revocation of licenses pursuant to the provisions of
§ 112-11 hereof or in the event of the denial of a license to any applicant
by the Clerk or the refusal of the Chief of Police to countersign a license,
the applicant may request a hearing within a period of 30 days after such
revocation, refusal or denial. Such request shall be in writing and shall be
made to the Village Board of the Village of Warsaw and filed with the Village
Clerk within the period provided herein. The Village Board shall hear such
applicant's request for a review of the determination of the Village Clerk or
the Chief of Police at the next regularly scheduled meeting of said Village
Board following the filing of the application for review with the Village
Clerk. The Village Board may grant a license to the applicant if it should
determine that the refusal on the part of the Clerk or Chief of Police was
arbitrary or otherwise in error. If the Village Board, after such hearing, shall
determine that the decision of the Village Clerk or Chief of Police was not
arbitrary and was justified under the circumstances, the Board shall refuse
such license. The decision on any hearing shall be rendered by the Village
Board, in writing, within 45 days after the hearing thereof and shall be
entered in the minutes of the Village Board.
(5) Not frequent any street in such a manner as to create a private or
public nuisance or breach of the peace.
(6) Keep the vehicle and/or receptacles used by him in the furtherance
of his licensed business in a sound, clean and sanitary condition.
(7) Keep his edible articles offered for sale well protected from dirt,
dust and insects.
B. A licensed peddler or solicitor shall:
(1) Not stand or permit the vehicle used by him to stand in one place in
any publicway or street for more than 10 minutes or in front of any
premises for any time if the owner or the lessee of the grounds
objects.
(2) Not sell confectionary or ice cream within 250 feet of any school
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days.
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-13
1:121
§ 112-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 117
RECORDS
§ 112-13 WARSAW CODE § 112-13
1:122
ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
§ 117-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to set forth the methods and procedures
governing the availability, location and nature of those records of the Village
of Warsaw subject to the provisions of Article 6 of the Public Officers Law,
known as the "Freedom of Information Law."25
§ 117-2. Designation of records access officer.
§ 117-3. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the village
offices, 15 South Main Street, Warsaw, New York.
§ 117-4. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records shall be
produced during the hours that the Village Clerk's office is regularly opened
for business.
§ 117-5. Requests for access to records.
A. The Board of Trustees is responsible for ensuring compliance with the
regulations herein and designates the following person as records
access officer: the Village Clerk, 15 South Main Street, Warsaw, New
York.
B. The records access officer is responsible for ensuring appropriate
agency response to public request for access to records pursuant to the
provisions of the Freedom of Information Law.26 The designation of the
records access officer shall not be construed to prohibit officials who
have, in the past, been authorized to make records or information
available to the public from continuing to do so.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted
when records are readily available.
B. A response shall be given within five business days of the receipt of any
request reasonably describing the record or records sought.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Whenever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
25.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 117-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-5
1:123
§ 117-6. Fees.
The fee for copies of records shall be $0.25 per page not exceeding nine
inches by 14 inches in size or the maximum fee permitted under the
Freedom of Information Law27 as it may from time be amended. The fees
for other types of copies or transcripts and for certificates shall be the
reasonable amounts as the records access officer shall establish. The fees
charged by the records access officer for records shall not exceed the actual
cost of reproducing such record, except when a different fee is otherwise
prescribed by law.
§ 117-7. Grant or denial of access to records.
The records access officer shall, in accordance with this Article, make
available for public inspection and copying all records, except that the
records access officer may deny access to records or portions thereof
which are not subject to disclosure in accordance with the provisions of
Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public Officers Law or any other applicable
state or federal statute or unless the public access officer determines that
to grant the application would adversely affect the public interest.
§ 117-8. Denial of access to records; appeals.
D. If the records access officer does not provide or deny access to the
records sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of the receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied.
E. If the request is granted, the records access officer shall provide a copy
of such record to the person requesting the same upon payment of the
fee prescribed therefor and shall certify to the correctness of such copy
if requested to do so. Alternatively, the records access officer shall
certify that he or she does not have possession of such record or that
such record cannot be located after a diligent search.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing.
B. Within 30 days after the written denial of access, any person denied
access to a record may appeal, in writing, such denial to the Mayor, who
shall hear such appeals under the Freedom of Information Law.28
C. Within 10 business days of the receipt of such appeal, the Mayor shall
explain, in writing, to the person requesting the record the reasons for
further denial or provide access to the record sought.
27.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See Public Officers Law § 84 et seq.
§ 117-5 WARSAW CODE § 117-8
1:124
ARTICLE II
Records Management
§ 117-9. Definitions.
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
Officer and Advisory Committee to have sufficient historical or other value
to warrant their continued preservation by the local government.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound records,
microforms or any other materials, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or in connection with the
transaction of official Village of Warsaw business.
RECORDS CENTER — An establishment maintained by the Village of
Warsaw primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not
be retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial use and records
disposition, including records preservation, records disposal and records
centers or other storage facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any Village of
Warsaw agency for official use or to the public.
§ 117-10. Program established; records management officer.
There shall be a records management program established under the aegis
of the Village Board of Trustees and headed by a records management
officer (RMO). The officer will be responsible for administering the
noncurrent and archival public records and storage areas for the Village of
Warsaw in accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
The removal by the Village of Warsaw, in accordance with approved
records control schedules, of records no longer necessary for the
conduct of business by such agency through removal methods which
may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation.
The transfer of records to the record center/archives for temporary
storage of inactive records and permanent storage of records
determined to have historical or other sufficient value warranting
continued preservation.
(2)
A.
The transfer of records from one village agency to any other village
agency.
B.
§ 117-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-11
1:125
§ 117-11. Powers and duties.
The records management officer shall have all the necessary powers to
carry out the efficient administration and determination of value, use,
preservation, storage and disposition of the noncurrent and archival public
records kept, filed or received by the offices and departments of the Village
of Warsaw. The records management officer shall:
A. Continually survey and examine public records to recommend their
classification so as to determine the most suitable methods to be used
for the maintaining, storing and servicing of archival material:
(1) Obsolete and unnecessary records, according to New York State
records retention and disposition schedules, thereby subject to
disposition;
(2) Information containing administrative, legal, fiscal, research,
historical or educational value which warrant their permanent
retention; or
(3) Records not subject to disposition according to state law.
B. Establish guidelines for proper records management in any department
or agency of the Village of Warsaw in accordance with local, state and
federal laws and guidelines.
C. Report annually to the chief executive official and the governing body
on the powers and duties herein mentioned, including but not limited to
the cost/benefit ratio of programs effectuated by the department.
D. Operate a records management center for the storage, processing and
servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for all Village of
Warsaw departments and agencies.
E. Establish a Village of Warsaw archives and perform the following
functions:
(1) Advise and assist Village of Warsaw departments in reviewing and
selecting material to be transferred to the Village of Warsaw
archives for preservation.
(2) Continually survey and examine public records to determine the
most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining,
storing and servicing of archival materials.
(3) Establish and maintain an adequate repository for the proper
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of archival records.
(4) Promulgate rules governing public access to and use of records in
the archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory
Board.
§ 117-11 WARSAW CODE § 117-11
1:126
§ 117-12. Records Advisory Board established; duties.
There shall be a Records Advisory Board designated to work closely with
and provide advice to the records management officer. The Board shall
consist of the Village Board of Trustees. The Board shall meet periodically
and have the following duties:
§ 117-13. Custody of records; removal.
(5) Develop a confidentiality policy for archival records designated
confidential, provided that such policy does not conflict with any
federal or state statutes.
(6) Provide information services to other Village of Warsaw offices.
(7) Collect archival materials which are not official Village of Warsaw
records but which have associational value to the Village of Warsaw
or a close relationship to the existing archival collection. Such
collecting shall be subject to archive space, staff and cost
limitations and to the potential endangerment of such materials if
they are not collected by the archives.
(8) Develop a procedure whereby historically important records are to
be identified at the point of generation.
A. Provide advice to the records management officer on the development
of the records management program.
B. Review the performance of the program on an ongoing basis and
propose changes and improvements.
C. Review retention periods proposed by the records management officer
for records not covered by state archives' schedules.
D. Provide advice on the appraisal of records for archival value and be the
final sign-off entity as to what is or is not archival.
A. The Village Board of Trustees is the legal custodian of its records and
shall retain custody of records deposited in the records center. Records
transferred to or acquired by the archives shall be under the custody
and control of the archives, rather than the department which created
or held them immediately prior to being transferred to the archives.
B. Records shall be transferred to the archives upon the recommendation
of the RMO, with the approval of the head of the department which has
custody of the records and the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
C. Records may be permanently removed from the archives at the request
of the RMO or the head of the department which had custody of the
records immediately prior to the transfer of those records to the
archives, subject to the approval of the Records Advisory Board.
§ 117-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-14
1:127
§ 117-14. Replevin.
The legal department may take steps to recover local government records
which have been alienated from proper custody and may, when necessary,
institute actions of replevin.
§ 117-15. Disposal of records.
No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by a department of
the Village of Warsaw unless approval has been obtained from the records
management officer. No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of
by the records management officer without the express written consent of
the department head having authority.
§ 117-14 WARSAW CODE § 117-15
1:128
Chapter 123
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 78.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 129.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 133.
Water — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 117-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-15
1:129

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Definitions
§ 123-1. Purpose.
In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the Village of Warsaw and for the purpose of protecting the environment,
the potable water supply sources, lateral and trunk sewers and the village
wastewater treatment plant and pump stations and all other appurtenances
which are used in connection with the treatment and disposal of sewage
and to provide for collection and treatment of domestic waste and such
industrial waste as permitted by this chapter and to ensure that the users
of the sewer system fairly and reasonably share the cost thereof, the rules
and regulations contained in this chapter have been adopted by the Village
Board of Trustees of the Village of Warsaw.
§ 123-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASTM — American Society for Testing and Materials.
BOD ("BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory conditions in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per
liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer pipe beginning five feet outside of the inner face of
the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sanitary sewer or other place of disposal.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine
added to water, wastewater or industrial wastes and the amount of
residual chlorine remaining at the end of a fifteen-minute contact
period.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — BOD, total suspended solids (TSS), pH,
fecal coliform bacteria, chlorine demand, phosphorus and phosphorus
compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin, if the
wastewater treatment system was designed to treat such pollutants
and does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree, except as
prohibited herein or identified in the village's state pollution discharge
elimination system permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample consisting of several effluent
portions collected during a specific time period and combined to make
a representative sample.
§ 123-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-2
1:131
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant
added to the water is heat.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DOMESTIC WASTES — The wastewater from the noncommercial
preparation, cooking and handling of food or waste containing human
excrement and similar matter from the sanitary facilities of dwellings,
commercial dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FLOW RATE — The quantity of waste or liquid that flows in a certain
period of time.
FLOW VOLUME — The quantity of wastes or liquid.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, dispensing, handling, storage and sale of food.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a
compatible pollutant.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial or commercial establishment with
a classification as designated in the most recent standard Industrial
Classification Manual as published by the Executive Office of the
President, and which utilizes the wastewater treatment system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Wastewater resulting from the processes
employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business
establishments as distinct from domestic wastes.
MASS EMISSION RATE — The weight of material discharged to the
wastewater treatment system during a given time interval and, unless
otherwise specified, means pounds per day of a particular constituent
or combination of constituents.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or any other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, group or municipality.
PH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any waste, impurity or other additive, such as heat or
radioactivity, that changes the quality and character of water delivered
to the user, so that the discharged wastewater violates the standards as
set in Article V of this chapter.
PRETREATMENT — The application of physical, chemical and
biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants or to alter the
§ 123-2 WARSAW CODE § 123-2
1:132
nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharging
such wastewater into the publicly owned wastewater treatment system.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal rules and
regulations implementing Section 307 of the Act, including any
amendments thereto, as well as any nonconflicting state or local
standards. In cases of conflicting standards or regulations, the most
stringent must be applied. In some cases these "pretreatment
standards" may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the
wastewater treatment system or may make it unable to comply with the
terms of the SPDES permit. In such cases, the Superintendent reserves
the right to impose more stringent "pretreatment standards" than those
specified in the EPA regulations.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility, either sanitary or storm.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid- and water-carried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater, stormwater or
drainage water.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user of the publicly owned
wastewater treatment system that:
(1) Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday;
Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the wastewater
treatment system;
(2)
Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under Section 307(a) of the Act;
(3)
Is found by the Superintendent under the SPDES permit to have
a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, upon the wastewater treatment system or
upon the quality of effluent from the treatment works;
(4)
Has in its wastewater any of the prohibited substances or
characteristics in Article IV, § 123-17, Prohibitions on wastewater
discharges; or
(5)
Has in its wastewater any concentrations or characteristics in
excess of those stipulated in Article IV, § 123-18, Limitations on
wastewater discharges.
(6)
§ 123-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-2
1:133
SLUG — Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which
exceeds (in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of
flow), for any period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation and adversely affects the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment system.
SPDES — The State Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER — A sewer which carries storm and
surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes,
other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER — Any flow resulting from any form of natural
precipitation. This flow can occur during, immediately following or
substantially after (such as snow melt) the precipitation event.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works responsible
for the wastewater treatment system of the Village of Warsaw or any
authorized representative of the Village of Warsaw.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids
and is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to
as "nonfilterable residue."
THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act and amendments
to it.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance which constitutes a hazard
to human beings or animal or plant life or inhibits aquatic life or
creates a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent
from a wastewater treatment plant. See Article IV, § 123-17B, Toxic
substances, for further definition.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited
or prohibited by this chapter and/or the effluent standards in effect, or
water whose discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water
quality standards.
USER — The owner of any property from which wastewater is
discharged into the wastewater treatment system.
VILLAGE — The Village of Warsaw, County of Wyoming, State of New
York, acting through its Board of Trustees.
WASTE — Wastewater and any and all other impurities or waste
substances associated with human habitation or of human or animal
origin or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation
of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of
whatever nature prior to and for purposes of disposal.
WASTEWATER (OR "SEWAGE") — The liquid- and water-carried
industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater,
§ 123-2 WARSAW CODE § 123-2
1:134
surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter the village
wastewater treatment system.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological
parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters
that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality, quantity
and strength of wastewater.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEM — Any devices, facilities,
structures, equipment or works owned by the village for the purpose
of the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
industrial and domestic wastes or necessary to recycle or reuse water
at the most economical cost over the estimated life of the system,
including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, wastewater collection
systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their
appurtenances; extensions, improvements, additions and alterations
thereof; elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply, such
as standby treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works,
including site acquisition of the land, that will be an integral part of
the treatment process or is used for the ultimate disposal of residues
resulting from such treatment.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WPCF — The Water Pollution Control Federation.
B. Terms not otherwise defined herein are defined as set forth in the latest
edition of Glossary — Water and Wastewater Control Engineering,
published by the American Public Health Association, the American
Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
§ 123-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-2
1:135

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewer Required
§ 123-3. Unsanitary deposit of waste prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Village of
Warsaw or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other waste, except as provided by Chapter
IV, Subchapter B, Part 364, of the Codes, Rules and Regulations of the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
§ 123-4. Discharge of untreated wastes prohibited.
It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said village any wastes, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions and
requirements of applicable federal, state, county and local laws.
§ 123-5. Construction of privies or septic tanks restricted.
Except as herein provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of wastewater when the property served is within 100 feet of a
village sanitary sewer.
§ 123-6. Connection to public sewer required.
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes requiring sanitary or wastewater
facilities situated within the village is hereby required to install wastewater
facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the proper public
sanitary sewer, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the
property line. The connection must be in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter. The owner must connect within 90 days after the date of
official notice to do so.
§ 123-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-6
1:137

ARTICLE III
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 123-7. Permit required.
No unauthorized person may uncover, connect to, use, alter or disturb
any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written
permit from the Superintendent.
§ 123-8. Installer to be agent of owner; registration required.
The registered installer employed by the owner of the premises is the agent
of said owner while installing a sewer line from the premises and is not
the agent of the village. The village is not responsible for the acts of said
installer. Any installer employed to work on sewer lines must be registered
by the village to perform installation work.
§ 123-9. Cost of replacement lines and taps.
If a new sewer line is to replace an existing sewer line and a new tap is to be
installed in a public sewer, all necessary material must be paid for by owner.
§ 123-10. Permit fees; application.
§ 123-11. Costs to be borne by owner.
All costs and expenses of the installation, connection, operation and
maintenance of the building sewer must be borne by the owner. The owner
must indemnify the village from any loss or damage it sustains that may,
directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
A. The permit fee for new connections established by the village is on file
at the Village Office and must be paid at the time of application. The
cost of all village required labor and materials must be paid upon
completion of the village work. A permit fee is not required for any
structure in existence and served by the public sanitary sewer [within
100 feet of the property line] at the time of completion of the public
sanitary sewers. However, all such structures must comply with all
other requirements of this chapter.
B. The connection fee includes: permit processing; the village materials
(saddle) necessary for the physical tap into the public sewer; the field
location of the connection; consultation on building sewer location;
inspection of building sewer construction; and testing of the building
sewer.
C. The owner must make applications on a form furnished by the village.
The permit application must be supplemented by construction plans,
construction specifications and other information required by the
Superintendent.
§ 123-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-12
1:139
§ 123-12. Separate sewer for each building; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer must be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another or on an
interior lot and no private building sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear of the building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway.
Then, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the
village is not responsible for damage caused by or resulting from any such
single connection.
§ 123-13. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found by the Superintendent to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
§ 123-14. Construction rules and regulations.
A. The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavation must conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the village. In the absence of code provisions or
in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures are subject to the
approval of the Superintendent, but in no event may the internal
diameter of the building sewer be less than four inches. The slope of
such four-inch pipe may not be less than 1/4 inch per foot except where
unusual circumstances establish a proven hardship in the opinion of the
Superintendent. All building sewers must be installed to uniform grade
and in straight alignment insofar as possible, and changes in direction
may be made only with properly curved pipe fittings. The depth of the
sewer must be sufficient to afford protection from frost. Building
sewers must be service weight cast-iron soil pipe, or D-3034-72 ring
title joint PVC plastic, and must be surrounded by sand or select earth
compacted to at least one foot above the pipe. If PVC plastic pipe is
used it must be sleeved through the wall of any building. All such
connections must be watertight.
B. Road crossings. All road crossings must be bored in accordance with
New York State Department of Transportation specifications.
C. No footing drains, roof drains or other drains carrying surface or
ground water may be connected to the building or sanitary sewer. A
sump pump will be provided wherever required to carry ground- and
surface water to a natural outlet or storm sewer.
D. Where any work is performed in a street or highway right-of-way, the
owner must first obtain a permit from the proper state, county, village
or town highway authority. Notice or request for inspection or final
approval by highway authorities will be the responsibility of the owner.
Utility companies are to be notified if work may affect their facilities.
§ 123-12 WARSAW CODE § 123-14
1:140
E. All building sewers must be air-tested for leakage after installation. The
test must be conducted on all joints that would be exposed to infiltration
of groundwater, surface water or other extraneous sources of
unpolluted waters. The tests to the building plumbing system must be
conducted from a point as close to the connection to the public sewer as
possible and must be completed prior to backfilling the building sewer.
Testing may also be completed after backfilling if deemed necessary by
the Superintendent. The tests must be conducted by the contractor.
F. No backfill may be placed until the work has been inspected by the
Superintendent. In the event of unstable soil conditions, special
construction methods may be required but must be approved by the
Superintendent, who must be notified upon completion of the work for
final inspection.
G. Each building sewer must be provided with a cleanout at the house wall
end; at bends greater than 45°; at a road crossing; and at least at every
100 feet of length. The openings must be a minimum of three inches
above the cellar floor or ground surface outside the building. Single
hand traps shall be installed outside buildings. Double hand traps are
required when the trap is in the wall or inside the building. No trap or
vent may be placed less than five feet from any window, door or
ventilation intake unless approved by the Superintendent.
H. Each installation must have suitable traps.
I. Connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer must
be:
(1) Plastic, reinforced concrete, cast iron, ductile iron or ABS truss
cement Y-branch and/or riser installed at the time of construction of
the sanitary sewer. All Y-branches or risers must comply with
appropriate pipe specifications referenced elsewhere in this
chapter. Joints must be compatible with the above-referenced
specifications for the type of pipe used and must be approved by
the Superintendent. All damaged branches must be replaced. All
connections must be watertight. Concrete encasement of branches
and mortar joints may not be deemed watertight. Risers must be
braced against trench walls or supported otherwise.
(2) Saddle-type connections to the sanitary sewer (main sewer) may
only be used with the approval of the Superintendent. The village
will furnish the connection material. All other material and
equipment must be supplied by the property owner. These
connections must be made in a smooth, machine-drilled, round
hole. The fitting must be made so it does not protrude into the main
sewer. The fitting must match the contour of the inside of the main
sewer and be designed for the size of pipe into which it is installed.
J. All excavations for building or sanitary sewer installations must be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the
public from hazard. No roadway may be left open overnight without
§ 123-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-14
1:141
authorization from the Superintendent. Unless authorized by the
Superintendent, one-lane traffic must be maintained.
K. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work must be restored in a manner satisfactory to the
Superintendent. Sidewalks must be restored only with concrete.
Ditches and culvert pipes for storm- and surface water or other utilities
disturbed during installation must be replaced. All driveways and
parking areas must be backfilled with select fill.
L. Upon connection to the public sewer, any septic tank, cesspool and
similar private wastewater disposal facility must be cleaned of sludge
and filled with material approved by the Superintendent.
M. If any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain must be lifted by
an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 123-14 WARSAW CODE § 123-14
1:142
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers
§ 123-15. Discharge of certain waters prohibited.
No person may discharge any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process water to any sanitary sewer.
§ 123-16. Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage water.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage must be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet.
With approval of the Superintendent and DEC, industrial cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
§ 123-17. Prohibitions on wastewater discharges.
No person may discharge or deposit into the wastewater treatment system
any wastewater which contains the following:
A. Explosive mixtures. Liquids, solids or gases which may, either alone or
by interaction with other substances, cause fire or explosion or be
injurious in any way to the wastewater treatment system or to the
operation of the system. At no time may two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the public sewer
system, be more than 5%, nor may any single reading be over 10% of
the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
B. Toxic substances. Toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards
promulgated by the Administrator of EPA pursuant to Section 307(a) of
the Act and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other taste- or
odor-producing substances or any other substances which, singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are not susceptible to treatment or which
may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the
wastewater treatment system or that will pass through the system
without being treated to the required degree.
C. Corrosive wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration
of the wastewater treatment system. All wastes discharged to the public
sewer system must have a pH value in the range of six to nine standard
units.
D. Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment
system. This prohibition includes any wastewater which, by interaction
with other waters or wastes in the public wastewater treatment system,
forms suspended solids which obstruct the flow in the sewer or create a
§ 123-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-17
1:143
§ 123-18. Limitations on wastewater discharges.
condition that interferes with the proper operation of the wastewater
treatment system.
E. Oil and grease. Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° and 150° F. [0° and 65° C.].
F. Excessive temperature. Any wastewater having a temperature higher
than 150° F. [65° C.] or in such quantities that the temperature at the
treatment works influent exceeds 104° F. [40° C.].
G. Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been ground or
commuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in
suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the public
sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
H. Noxious materials. Noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard or may be sufficient to prevent
entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.
I. Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders issued
by the appropriate authority having control over their use and/or which
may cause damage to the wastewater treatment system or danger to
personnel operating the system.
J. Excessive discharge rate. Quantities of wastewater flow or
concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug as defined herein.
K. Discolored material. Wastes with color, such as but not limited to dye
water or vegetable tanning solution, that are not removable by the
treatment process.
L. Any substance which may cause the wastewater treatment system
effluent or any other product of the wastewater treatment system, such
as residues, sludge or scums, to be unsuitable for a reclamation process
where the wastewater treatment system is pursuing a reuse and
reclamation program. No substance discharged into the wastewater
treatment system may cause the system to be in noncompliance with
sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting
sludge use or development pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
A. General limitations on incompatible pollutants. No person may
discharge or convey or permit or allow to be discharged or conveyed to
a public sanitary sewer any wastewater containing incompatible
pollutants of such character or quantity that will:
§ 123-17 WARSAW CODE § 123-18
1:144
(1) Violate pretreatment standards.
(2) Cause the wastewater treatment works to violate its SPDES permit
requirements.
(3) Violate the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws, rules
or regulations.
(4) Not be susceptible to treatment or interfere with the process or
efficiency of the treatment system.
B. Specific limitations on certain compatible pollutants. The following are
the maximum concentrations of pollutants allowable in wastewater
discharges to the wastewater treatment system as established by the
DEC. This chapter includes by reference any future revisions or
additions to this list as promulgated by the DEC or the EPA. Dilution of
any wastewater discharge for the purpose of satisfying these
requirements is a violation of this chapter.
Parameter
Thirty-Day Average Effluent
Concentration Limits
(milligrams per liter)
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 0.4
Hexavalent chromium 0.2
Total chromium 4.0
Copper 0.8
Lead 0.2
Mercury 0.2
Nickel 4.0
Zinc 1.2
Arsenic 0.2
Available chlorine 50.0
Cyanide, free 0.4
Cyanide, complex 1.6
Selenium 0.2
Sulfide 6.0
Barium 4.0
Manganese 4.0
Gold 0.2
Silver 0.2
Fluorides:
§ 123-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-18
1:145
Parameter
Thirty-Day Average Effluent
Concentration Limits
(milligrams per liter)
To fresh water 4.0*
To saline water 36.0
Phenol 4.0
* NOTE: May be multiplied by a factor of 1.5 if the municipal water
supply is not fluoridated.
C. Limitations on compatible pollutants. In cases where the effluent
characteristics of an industrial or commercial discharge exceed the
permissible limits for the compatible pollutants listed below, the
acceptability of such waste will be left to the engineering judgment of
the village or any other federal, state or local agencies having
jurisdiction. The primary judgment criteria for the determination of
acceptability by the village and responsible authorities will be whether
the admission of such waste will overload the wastewater treatment
system. If it is determined that it will not overload the system,
permission to discharge said compatible pollutants may be granted.
However, the village will require (in accordance with Article IX and any
resolutions adopted thereunder) the payment of an additional industrial
operation and maintenance surcharge for the additional cost and a user
charge for the additional capital construction costs to cover the cost of
treating the excessive strength wastewater. This charge is in addition to
any sewer charges for the nonexcessive waste discharge. "Excessive
strength wastewater" is defined as:
(1) Concentrations of inert suspended solids which exceed 250
milligrams per liter, such as but not limited to Fuller's earth, lime
slurries and lime residues or dissolved solids, such as but not
limited to sodium chloride in concentrations greater than 10,000
milligrams per liter and sodium sulfate in concentrations greater
than 500 milligrams per liter.
(2) Concentrations of BOD which exceed 200 milligrams per liter.
(3) Chlorine demand requirements exceeding nine milligrams per liter.
(4) Concentrations of free ammonia which exceed 25 milligrams per
liter.
§ 123-18 WARSAW CODE § 123-18
1:146
ARTICLE V
Control of Prohibited and Limited Wastes
§ 123-19. Regulatory actions.
If wastewater containing any prohibited substance or any concentration in
excess of those allowed by this chapter is discharged or proposed to be
discharged into the wastewater treatment system or to any system tributary
thereto, the Superintendent must enforce the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with Article X and must take any action necessary to:
§ 123-20. Submission of plans; approval; alterations.
Where pretreatment, equalization or holding (storage for scheduled
discharge) of wastewater flows prior to discharge into any part of the
wastewater treatment system is required, construction plans and other
pertinent information relating to such pretreatment or flow control facilities
must first be submitted to the Superintendent for approval. Such approval
may not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with the
Act (in particular, Section 307) and any other applicable code, ordinance,
rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority. Any subsequent
alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow control facilities must
not be made without notice to and approval of the Superintendent.
§ 123-21. Pretreatment facilities operations.
If pretreatment or control of wastewater flow is required, such facilities
must be maintained in good working order and operated as efficiently as
possible by the owner and/or operator at his own cost and expense, subject
to the requirements of these rules and regulations and all other applicable
codes, ordinances and laws.
A. Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
B. Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will
reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with
this chapter.
C. Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow equalization
necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or
substances so that the discharge will conform to the pretreatment
standards and will not violate this chapter.
D. Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay
any additional cost, expenses or damages incurred by the village due to
the prohibited or limited discharge.
E. Take such other remedial actions as may be deemed to be desirable to
achieve the purpose of this chapter.
§ 123-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-22
1:147
§ 123-22. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors must be provided by the owner when,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors may not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors must be of a type and capacity approved by the
Superintendent and must be so located as to be readily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
§ 123-23. Control manhole.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial waste must install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer, to facilitate observations, sampling, measurement and
recording of the discharged wastewater. Such manhole must be accessible
and safely located and must be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Superintendent. The manhole must be installed by the
owner at his expense and must be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
§ 123-24. Protection from accidental discharge.
Each industrial user must provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Facilities
to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials must be provided
and maintained at the owner's or operator's own cost and expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
must be approved by the Superintendent before construction of the facility.
Approval of such plans and operating procedures will not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary
to meet the requirements of this chapter.
§ 123-25. Reporting of accidental discharge.
If a facility does not comply with or will be unable to comply with any
prohibition or limitation in this chapter, the facility must immediately notify
the Superintendent so that corrective action may be taken to protect the
wastewater treatment system. In addition, a written report addressed to
the village detailing the date, time and cause of accidental discharge, the
quantity and characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to
prevent future discharges must be filed by the facility within five days of the
occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
§ 123-26. Improper use of sewers; inspections.
The Superintendent may inspect and/or test any building sewer and
building drain and appurtenances or private sewer that discharges
wastewater to the village's wastewater treatment system. In the case of
§ 123-22 WARSAW CODE § 123-26
1:148
basement inspection, the Superintendent must give prior notice of no less
than 12 hours nor more than 48 hours if requested by the owner. If such
sewers or drains are used or maintained in such a way as to cause discharge
of any wastewater that violates this chapter, groundwater, debris which
exceeds the design criteria of said sewer or any other waste deemed
objectionable by the Superintendent, the Superintendent will initiate
enforcement action under Article X.
§ 123-27. Costs to be borne by user.
All costs incurred in reviewing and implementing the control actions
specified in this Article shall be the responsibility of the actual or proposed
user.
§ 123-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-27
1:149

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Wastewater Monitoring and Reporting
§ 123-28. Discharge reports.
§ 123-29. Records and monitoring.
A. Every significant industrial user must file periodic discharge reports at
such intervals as are designated by the Superintendent. The
Superintendent may require any users who pretreat their wastewater
to file such periodic reports.
B. The discharge monitoring report may include:
(1) The nature of the process.
(2) The flow volume (daily, weekly or annual).
(3) The time and duration of discharge.
(4) The average and peak wastewater discharge rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(5) The mass emission rates.
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details
to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation.
(7) A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials, processes and types of materials
which are or could be discharged.
(8) Each product, by type, amount and rate of production.
(9) The number and type of employees and hours of work.
(10)Wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(11) Other information which relates to the generation of waste.
(12) Records of pretreatment data, such as chemicals added or dates
and methods of cleaning and disposing of grease from grease
interceptors.
C. Such reports may also include the chemical constituents and quantity of
liquid or gaseous materials sorted on site, even though they may not
normally be discharged. The Superintendent will evaluate the data
furnished by the user. Additional information must be supplied as
required by the Superintendent.
A. All significant industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge
wastewaters to the wastewater treatment system must maintain such
records of production and related factors, effluent (discharge) flows
§ 123-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-29
1:151
§ 123-30. Inspection sampling and analysis.
and pollutant amounts or concentrations as are necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any
applicable state or federal pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Such records shall be made available upon request by the
Superintendent. All such records relating to compliance with
pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the DEC
or the EPA. A summary of such data indicating the industrial user's
compliance with this chapter must be prepared at intervals as
requested by the Superintendent and submitted to the village.
C. The owner or operator of any premises or facility discharging industrial
wastes into the system must, when required by the Superintendent,
install, at his own cost and expense, suitable monitoring equipment to
facilitate the accurate observation, sampling and measurement of
wastes. Such equipment must be maintained in proper working order
and kept safe and accessible at all times. The sampling, analysis and
flow measurement procedures, equipment and results are subject at
any time to inspection by the village.
D. The monitoring equipment must be located and maintained on the
industrial user's premises outside of the building. When such a location
would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the
Superintendent may allow such facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area, with the approval of the public agency having
jurisdiction over such street or sidewalk, and located so that it will not
be an obstruction to public utilities, landscaping or parked vehicles.
E. Whether on public or private property, the monitoring facilities must be
constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Superintendent
and all applicable standards and specifications as required in this
chapter.
A. Compliance determination. Compliance determinations under Article IV
may be made on the basis of either instantaneous grab samples or
composite samples of wastewater, as determined necessary by the
Superintendent. Composite samples may be taken over a twenty-fourhour
period or over a longer or shorter time span as required to meet
the needs of specific circumstances.
B. Analyses of industrial wastewaters. Laboratory analyses of industrial
wastewater samples must be performed in accordance with the current
edition of Standard Methods, Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water
and Waste, published by the EPA, or the Annual Book of Standards, Part
23, Water, Atmospheric Analysis, published by ASTM. Analyses of
pollutants not covered by these publications must be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the DEC.
§ 123-29 WARSAW CODE § 123-30
1:152
§ 123-31. Confidentiality of information.
§ 123-32. Special agreements.
Special agreements and arrangements between the Superintendent and
any persons or agencies may be established when, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special
terms and conditions.
C. Sampling frequency. Sampling of industrial wastewater for the purpose
of compliance determination with respect to Article IV must be done at
such intervals as the Superintendent requires.
A. All information and data obtained from reports, questionnaires and
monitoring programs and from inspections must be available to the
public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Superintendent that the release of such information would
divulge information, processes or methods which would be detrimental
to the user's competitive position.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes must not
be made available for inspection by the public, but must be made
available to governmental agencies for use in making studies; provided,
however, that such portions of a report will be available for use by the
state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
§ 123-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-32
1:153

ARTICLE VII
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 123-33. Right of entry.
The Superintendent, representatives of the EPA and representatives of the
DEC must be permitted to enter the property of all industrial users for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. These representatives
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
wastewater treatment system watercourses.
§ 123-34. Observance of safety rules; liability.
While performing the necessary work on the properties referred to in
§ 123-33, the Superintendent, representatives of the EPA and
representatives of the DEC must observe all safety rules applicable to the
premises established by the owners and operators, and the owners and
operators will be held harmless for injury or death to these representatives,
unless such injury is due to the negligence and/or fault of the owner or
operator. The village, EPA or DEC will indemnify the owner or operator
against liability claims and damages for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the owner or operator and growing out of gauging and
sampling operations except as such may be caused by negligence, fault or
failure of the owner or operator to maintain safe conditions.
§ 123-35. Entry on easements.
The Superintendent is permitted to enter all private properties through
which the village holds an easement for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the wastewater treatment system lying within said easement.
All entry and subsequent work on said easement must be completed in
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private
property involved.
§ 123-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-35
1:155

ARTICLE VIII
Sanitary Sewer Extensions
§ 123-36. Application to construct.
An application to construct extensions or additions to any sanitary sewers
must be made to the Superintendent on forms prescribed by the village
and must be approved by the village before submission to the DEC. Two
sets of detailed construction plans showing the proposed construction must
be submitted to the village for preliminary review. Following preliminary
review and approval, the applicant must submit three sets of applications
to construct a sanitary sewer, along with eight sets of detailed construction
plans and specifications showing the proposed construction. Five sets of
the applications and approved plans and specifications will be forwarded
with a letter of approval to the DEC. Evidence of DEC approval, as well as
other required local, state and/or federal approvals, is required prior to final
acceptance.
§ 123-37. Inspection during construction.
Inspection during construction will be made by the Superintendent. No
sanitary sewers are to be covered until such inspection has been made. The
Superintendent will send a letter to the applicant certifying that inspection,
testing and acceptance have been completed. Acceptance by the
Superintendent does not relieve the owner of the responsibility to keep the
sewer operating in accordance with these regulations. A complete set of
plans showing the final construction, Y or T locations and other information
must be submitted prior to final acceptance. The cost of the inspection and
review will be the responsibility of the extension applicant.
§ 123-38. Construction standards.
Extensions or additions to the sanitary sewer system must be designed
and constructed in accordance with the latest revisions of the New York
State Standards for Waste Treatment Works, the Water Pollution Control
Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 Design and Construction of Sanitary
and Storm Sewers, the Wyoming County Health Department Regulations
and ASTM Specifications for Sanitary Sewer Construction.
§ 123-39. Sanitary sewer connection to public sanitary sewers.
A. Connection of sanitary sewer extensions to the public sanitary sewer is
prohibited until completion of the procedures outlined in this Article.
B. Existing private or sanitary sewers may be connected to the public
sanitary sewer only when they are found by the Superintendent to meet
all standards set by this chapter. Any testing costs will be the
responsibility of the sewer extension applicant.
§ 123-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-40
1:157
§ 123-40. Bond.
Any person installing a sanitary sewer extension must post a maintenance
bond with the village (to be approved by the Superintendent) for 25% of the
full value of the sewer construction cost guaranteeing the sewer for a period
of two years from the time of acceptance by the Superintendent. During this
period, any defects in the sewer or appurtenances must be corrected at the
applicant's expense.
§ 123-41. Excavations.
§ 123-42. Extensions beyond existing village boundaries.
Extensions of the sanitary sewer system outside of the village boundaries
must comply with this chapter, as well as all appropriate village, state
and federal laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and other rules and
regulations the village may adopt.
A. Whenever pipe installation is not in progress, the end of the pipe shall
be securely closed with a tight-fitting cover or plugs. Any earth or other
material entering the main sewer due to operations of the installer or
building owner must be removed at his expense. All trenches must be
protected by sufficient sheeting and bracing.
B. Within the highway right-of-way, backfilling and restoration of surface
must be in accordance with the requirements of the highway agency
having supervision and Article III of this chapter.
§ 123-40 WARSAW CODE § 123-42
1:158
ARTICLE IX
Sewer Charges
§ 123-43. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established for all users of the village wastewater treatment
system a system of sewer charges which will be used for payment of the
cost of management, maintenance, operation, repair and amortization of the
capital construction costs of the wastewater treatment system.
§ 123-44. Sewer rates.
A. The village, by resolution, will establish rates and charges for sewer
services and equipment. Rates and charges may differ for use outside
the village limits. The rates and charges may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the village and may include, but are not limited to:
meter rates; minimum rates; flat rates; bulk rates; equipment; testing,
installations; late charges; discontinuance of service; maintenance;
repairs; and penalties as set forth elsewhere in this Article.
B. Sewer charges will be billed quarterly or at such other time as
determined by resolution of the village.
C. The user may not claim any credit towards a sewer bill unless granted
by resolution of the village.
D. All rates and charges are due and payable at the office of the Village
Clerk within 30 days of the date of the quarterly bill. If a quarterly bill is
not received, the user must inquire with the Village Clerk. The absence
of a bill does not excuse quarterly payment of sewer rates. If the bill is
not paid when due, a penalty of 10% will be added to the bill. If it is not
paid within 60 days, water and sewer service may be terminated until
the bill is paid in full. An additional service charge must be paid to
resume the water and sewer service. All charges for materials furnished
or work completed by the village in connection with the sewer service
will be billed as sewer charges.
E. All charges, rates, penalties, service charges and fines described in this
Article will become a lien upon the real property serviced until paid. If
said sums are not paid when demanded, water service may be
terminated and a reconnection charge imposed for resumption of
service. The Village Clerk will maintain records of nonpayment, and any
person may receive a certificate indicating the status of payment of
water and sewer bills affecting any particular premises serviced by the
village sewer systems. A conveyance of real property subject to an
unpaid sewer bill will result in the new user being responsible for all
amounts due. Nothing herein contained will prevent the village from
using any other means of collecting unpaid sewer charges. The village
may assess said amount against the property, together with the annual
village tax, and may collect it with the village tax in the same manner as
any other local assessment.
§ 123-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-45
1:159
§ 123-45. Charges to industrial cost recovery users.
Provisions of this Article covering user charges shall not pertain to
industrial recovery users, which shall be charged according to the terms of
their specific agreement with the village.
§ 123-45 WARSAW CODE § 123-45
1:160
ARTICLE X
Liability and Penalties
§ 123-46. Liability for loss or damage.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is liable to the village
for any and all losses, damages and expenses incurred by the village or for
which the village may be held liable as a result of said violation.
§ 123-47. Notice of violation.
§ 123-48. Penalties for offenses.
Any person found in violation of Article IV, § 123-17 or 123-18, of this
chapter or any person who continues or fails to satisfactorily correct any
violation within the time limit set forth in the notice provided for in § 123-47
above is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine of
not more than $250 or to imprisonment for a period of not more than 15
days, or both. Each day in which any violation of Article IV, § 123-17 or
123-18, continues is a separate offense. The failure to satisfactorily correct
or discontinue any violation contained in each notice served, whether for
the same or a different violation, is a separate offense.
§ 123-49. Other remedies.
Nothing contained herein prevents the village or Superintendent, either
alone or in conjunction with the foregoing penalties, from maintaining an
action or proceeding in the name of the village or Superintendent in any
court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain
by injunction the violation of any provision of this chapter. In addition, the
village or Superintendent reserves the right to obtain reimbursement for
any loss, damage or expense incurred by it as a result of any violation of this
chapter.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter will be served by the
Superintendent with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a time limit of seven days for the satisfactory correction
thereof.
B. Service of the notice of violation is sufficient if directed to the owner or
operator of a residence, commercial or industrial facility violating this
chapter. Service of said notice of violation must be made personally
upon the alleged violator, if possible; otherwise, said notice of violation
is sufficient if served by delivering the same to a person of suitable age
or discretion at the actual residence, commercial or industrial facility at
which said violation is occurring and by mailing the notice to the person
to be served at his last known residence or business address; or, where
service cannot otherwise be made with due diligence, by affixing said
notice of violation to the door of the residence, commercial or industrial
facility at which said violation is occurring and by mailing said notice to
such person at his last known residence or place of business.
§ 123-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-49
1:161
Chapter 129
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 42.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 56.
Curfew — See Ch. 62.
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 90.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112.
Sewers — See Ch. 123.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 133.
Trees — See Ch. 145.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 153.
Water — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 123-49 WARSAW CODE § 123-49
1:162
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 129-1. Intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish rules and regulations governing
the use of public streets and sidewalks within the Village of Warsaw in
order to ensure the maximum benefit of access to all areas of the village
consistent with the safety and best interests of the community.
§ 129-2. Penalties for offenses.
Except as otherwise specifically provided for herein, a violation of any
provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or
by imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 129-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-2
1:163

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 129-3. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AWNING — A structural element affixed to the face of a building which
projects over a street, roadway, sidewalk or public place, and is wholly
supported by the building to which it is attached. Awnings are intended
to provide protection from weather, identity or decoration. Regulations
governing awnings are included in § 163-82T.[Amended 2-5-2007 by L.L.
No. 1-2007]
CURB CUT — The creation of access to a public street across a curb, terrace
or land adjacent to a public street.
PERSON — An individual(s), partnership, association or corporation.
PUBLIC STREET — Any public street, avenue, roadway, highway, lane or
alley, including the entire paved and improved surface thereof from curb to
curb, where curbs exist, including gutter areas.
SEASONAL LIMITED-USE STREET — Those village streets or roadways
without occupied residences or commercial buildings dependent upon such
streets for access.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform mounted on wheels designed or suitable
or in fact used for riding underfoot, or a board with roller skate wheels
or other similar wheels attached to the underside, without a mechanism or
other device for steering while being used, operated or ridden.
SKATEBOARD RAMP — All ramps, platforms, manufactured or contrived
surfaces of any and every pattern or configuration and other similar devices
designed for use for riding a skateboard upon or above any area.
TERRACE — That area abutting a public street or roadway between the
sidewalk and the curb or paved edge of the street or roadway or, in the
absence of a sidewalk, that area extending 15 feet away from the curb or
paved edge of the street or roadway.
§ 129-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-3
1:165

ARTICLE III
Use; Maintenance; Conduct
§ 129-4. Responsibility for maintenance.
Every owner, tenant, occupant or other person having charge or control of
any building or lot of land abutting upon any street or public place where
the sidewalk is flagged, concreted, paved or laid must keep the sidewalk in
front of the premises clean and free from papers, rags, scraps, sticks, earth,
rubbish, refuse, snow and ice.
§ 129-5. Injuring pavement prohibited.
No person may throw, drop or project any heavy object upon the sidewalks
or pavements of the village so as to injure the same.
§ 129-6. Grass and weeds.
Every person must cut the grass and weeds on the terrace adjoining his or
her lot twice each summer or when notified to do so by the Superintendent
of Public Works. Any person neglecting or refusing to cut such grass or
weeds within 48 hours after being so notified is liable to a penalty not to
exceed twice the expense of cutting.
§ 129-7. Vehicles on sidewalks.
No person may drive or propel any vehicle, horse, wagon, bicycle or
skateboard on any sidewalk or crosswalk, except to cross the same.
§ 129-8. Hydrants.
No person may cover or obstruct any fire hydrants.
§ 129-9. Fires on streets.
No person may burn any waste, leaves or other materials on any public
street, terrace or sidewalk.
§ 129-10. Issuance of special permits.
The Village Board may grant permits or licenses for any special or general
use of any street, sidewalk or terrace.
§ 129-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-10
1:167

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 129-11. Duty to keep sidewalk clear.
Each owner and occupant (jointly and severally) of every parcel of real
estate adjoining a public sidewalk (whether the parcel of real estate is
occupied by a structure or not) must keep the sidewalks adjoining the
property free from snow and ice for the full paved width of the sidewalk.
§ 129-12. Time limit for removal.
Snow and ice must be removed within 24 hours after the end of a snowfall.
Sidewalks in front of commercial establishments and commercial parking
lots must be kept free of snow and ice at all times between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 129-13. Severe icing.
In case snow and ice on any sidewalk is frozen so hard that it cannot be
removed without injury to the sidewalk, it must (within the time specified
in § 129-12 above) be treated with ashes, sand, sawdust or other suitable
material so as to be no longer dangerous to pedestrian traffic. As soon as
practical thereafter, the sidewalk must be completely cleared of snow and
ice.
§ 129-14. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings.
The owners and occupants of buildings adjacent to public sidewalks must
prevent snow, ice or water from falling from their buildings onto said
sidewalks.
§ 129-15. Deposit of snow and ice in streets.
No person may deposit, throw, place or strew any snow or ice upon any
public street.
§ 129-16. Piling on streets and private land restricted.
No person may:
A. Pile, gather up, plow up or in any way force any snow or ice upon any
public street or from one public street onto any other public street.
B. Plow up or in any way force any snow or ice upon any terrace or parcel
of land within six feet of any public street in such a manner as to cause
the height of the snow and ice so piled, gathered, plowed or forced to
exceed three feet six inches in height above the existing natural grade
of said terrace or parcel of land within six feet of said street.
C. Remove snow or ice from any parcel of real estate and place it upon
another parcel of real estate without the express permission of the
§ 129-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-16
1:169
§ 129-17. Failure to comply.
owner of the parcel of real estate upon which the snow or ice is to be
placed.
A. Any person violating the rules in this Article must immediately correct
the violation at his expense upon the request of the Superintendent of
Public Works. If such person fails to comply with said request within
four hours, the Superintendent of Public Works may correct the
violation and charge the expense incurred for labor, equipment and
materials used to such person.
B. The Village Clerk will promptly present to the owner or occupant of
each parcel a bill for the correction of the violation as certified by the
Superintendent of Public Works. If not paid within 30 days, the cost
thereof may be levied, enforced and collected in the same manner, by
the same proceeding, at the same time and having the same lien upon
the property assessed as the general village tax and as a part thereof.
The imposition of any fine or penalty hereunder will not bar the right of
the village to collect the cost of removal.
§ 129-16 WARSAW CODE § 129-17
1:170
ARTICLE V
Obstructions and Encumbrances
§ 129-18. Prohibited acts.
No person may obstruct or encumber any public street, sidewalk, square or
public place by erecting, placing or maintaining within the lines and upon
the surface of any such public street, sidewalk, square or public place any
sign, poster, billboard or other advertising or display device or any other
article, material or thing whatsoever unless permission is first obtained
from the Village Board.
§ 129-19. Portable signs on sidewalks.
§ 129-20. Exception for construction.
Any person erecting or repairing a building on or within 12 feet of the
line of any public street or sidewalk may, upon written permission of the
Superintendent of Public Works, for a reasonable time not to exceed 60
days while such building is being so erected or repaired, use and occupy
the street or sidewalk immediately in front of such building up to 1/3 the
width of such public street or sidewalk on the side nearest to such building
for storing materials and for other purposes directly connected with such
erection or repairing.
A. Permit required. No person may place portable signs on sidewalks
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Village Board.
B. Application procedure. An applicant for the placement of a portable
sign on a public sidewalk must submit an application containing all
information set forth in Chapter 163, Zoning, of the Village of Warsaw
Code. The application must also contain the following information:
(1) A statement of a specific hardship which requires the placement of
said sign on a village sidewalk.
(2) The amount of liability insurance carried by the applicant for the
property in question as well as the name of the insurance carrier
and agent.
(3) The approval of the Village Planning Board regarding the
construction, appearance, size, graphic design and content of the
sign.
(4) Such other information as the Village Board may from time to time
require.
C. The permit. Upon approval of the Village Planning Board, the Village
Board may issue a permit setting forth the times during the day a
portable sign may be displayed and the location of the sign as it may
obstruct a portion of the sidewalk.
§ 129-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-21
1:171
§ 129-21. Placement of merchandise on sidewalks.
No person may place upon any public street or sidewalk any goods, wares,
merchandise or containers except when engaged in the loading or
unloading of vehicles. Merchants in the Commercial District (as defined in
the Chapter 163, Zoning) may conduct sidewalk sales upon prior approval
of the Village Board.
§ 129-22. Parking on terraces prohibited.
No person may park any motor vehicle on any terrace.
§ 129-23. Coasting or playing games in streets.
§ 129-24. Utility poles and wires.
No person may erect any telegraph, telephone or electric line pole upon the
public streets, terraces or grounds except at such place or places as the
Village Board may, by resolution, authorize or direct. No person may string
any wire upon or over any public street, sidewalk, terrace or grounds except
at such places as the Village Board may, by resolution, authorize or direct.
The Superintendent of Public Works will issue permits for the erection of
such poles and/or wires.
§ 129-25. Curb cuts.
No person may create a curb cut without a permit from the Village Board.
Upon application, the Village Clerk will refer the request to the
Superintendent of Public Works to determine if the curb cut would interfere
with current traffic flow, density, safety and the convenience of neighboring
properties.
A. No person may use or occupy public streets or sidewalks for playing
ball or any other game or amusement.
B. No person may use or occupy public streets or sidewalks for coasting or
sliding on a sled, wagon, skateboard, toy or other device.
C. No person may place, locate or leave a skateboard ramp in any public
street or sidewalk in any manner which constitutes a traffic hazard or
which endangers or creates a risk to any person or property.
D. The Village Board may, by resolution, authorize the impoundment or
confiscation of articles or materials used in violation of this section.
§ 129-21 WARSAW CODE § 129-25
1:172
ARTICLE VI
Street Construction Specifications
§ 129-26. Design standards.
Any public street proposed for dedication to the Village of Warsaw must
conform to the applicable design standards detailed in the Village of
Warsaw Code.
§ 129-27. Acceptance procedures.
A. When an owner believes that a proposed street will meet specifications,
a letter requesting the acceptance of the street, together with a legal
description of the proposed street, must be submitted to the Village
Board.
B. The Village Board will notify the owner in writing:
(1) Whether the proposed street or any part is acceptable.
(2) If it is not acceptable, what conditions must be satisfied.
(3) The amount of fee set by the Village Board to cover engineering
and legal expenses in connection with acceptance of the street.
C. Once the street is acceptable, the owner must dedicate the street by
furnishing a full covenant warranty deed for the street, a proposed
resolution of acceptance by the village, a proposed order laying out the
street by the Village Superintendent of Public Works, any easement or
bond required and any fee required.
D. Upon acceptance, the Village Clerk will notify the owner in writing.
§ 129-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-27
1:173

ARTICLE VII
Openings and Excavations
§ 129-28. Permit required.
No person, public service company or municipality other than the Village of
Warsaw may make any excavation in any public street, terrace or sidewalk
for any purpose without first obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk as
hereinafter provided.
§ 129-29. Application for permit.
§ 129-30. Permit fees.
Each applicant (except those for utility poles) must pay a permit fee to
the Village Clerk in an amount to be established by resolution of the
Village Board for each excavation. However, no additional permit fee will be
charged under this chapter for any initial water tap or initial sewer tap; and
no permit fee will be charged in connection with new construction where a
building permit has been obtained.
§ 129-31. Liability insurance.
A. An application for a permit must be filed with the Village Clerk. The
application must state the nature, location, extent and purpose of the
proposed excavation.
B. Applications by public service companies must be accompanied by a
general undertaking in such form as may be approved by the Village
Board. Said general undertaking is tendered to assure that after
completing the excavation, said applicant will leave the street, highway,
sidewalk, pavement, curb or gutter in the same condition as it was prior
to the excavation.
C. Applications by persons other than public service companies must be
accompanied by a minimum cash deposit of $400 (or such greater
amount as the Village Board may by resolution establish) or, in the
alternative, a surety bond, to be approved by the Village Attorney, to
assure that after completing the excavation, said applicant will leave
the surface in the same condition as it was prior to excavation. In the
event that the applicant fails to repair or replace such surface in the
time provided in the permit, the deposit will be forfeited to the extent
necessary to repair such surface.
A. The applicant must file with the application a general liability insurance
policy or a certificate of insurance naming the Village of Warsaw as an
additional insured. The Village Board will approve the policy as to form.
B. The policy must insure the Village of Warsaw and the applicant and
must cover all operations relative to the excavation and reconstruction.
Said policy must have minimum limits of liability of at least $100,000
§ 129-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-31
1:175
§ 129-32. Notice of excavation.
The Superintendent of Public Works may require any person making a
sidewalk or street excavation pursuant to a permit granted hereunder to
give notice of such excavation to public service companies or municipal
districts having lines, mains or other property in the streets, and, when such
notice is required, no work may be commenced under such permit until
such required notice has been fully complied with to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 129-33. Safety requirements.
§ 129-34. Permit regulations.
for bodily injury to each person and aggregate liability of at least
$500,000 for each accident, and property damage liability of at least
$25,000 for each accident and aggregate property damage of at least
$100,000. The Village Board may, by resolution, from time to time
establish greater minimum limits.
C. In lieu of the aforesaid liability insurance, public service companies may
submit a general undertaking in such form as may be approved by the
Village Board.
A. Any person making an excavation covered by this Article must erect
suitable barriers or guards for the protection of persons using the
streets or sidewalks and must set up and maintain during the hours of
darkness sufficient lights or flares to properly illuminate the area. Such
person must also take all necessary precautions for the protection of
the property of the village, of public service companies or multiple
districts and of others which may be endangered by such excavation or
the work incident thereto, and he or she must comply with all directions
given by the Superintendent of Public Works or his designee with
respect to such barriers, lights, flares and protective measures.
B. Open excavations used for commercial or industrial purposes must be
enclosed with a substantial fence with suitable gates.
A. Work under the permit must be commenced within 30 days of the date
of the issuance of the permit and continued in an expeditious manner
unless extension of this period is approved by the Village Board.
B. Construction.
(1) When work is being performed on any village street or sidewalk, no
pavement cuts or trenches are to be left unfilled overnight except
in emergencies and with the approval of the Superintendent of
Public Works. In such cases adequate precautions must be
exercised to protect traffic. When working on any sidewalk or
street, contractors must complete final backfilling of any open
trench within 14 days from the time of its opening.
§ 129-31 WARSAW CODE § 129-34
1:176
(2) All pipes or mains crossing street pavement must, whenever
possible, be driven beneath the roadway without disturbance from
the edge of the pavement. Such crossover pipes must, whenever
possible, be enclosed in sleeves or larger pipes so that repairs or
replacements may be made in the future without disturbance of
highway pavement.
(3) In the event that a trench is opened, the trench must be compacted
to within four inches of the road surface after completion of the
necessary work and construction. The existing asphalt surface
must then be cut back at least 12 inches on either side of the
undisturbed grade.
(4) At the discretion of the Superintendent of Public Works, the contact
surfaces, the packed surfaces and/or adjacent pavement edges
must be painted and sealed with approved bituminous and/or
bluestone material before or after placing the course of asphalt,
which must be four inches of New York Specification 6-8 hot plant
mix. This course must be rolled with an eight-to-ten ton roller, and
surface variations in excess of 1/4 inch must be eliminated or the
pavement relaid.
(5) If the trench is in the earthen shoulder of the roadway, the proper
compaction, as outlined above, must apply with the addition of a
covering of sod or grass seeding as specified by the Superintendent
of Public Works.
C. A free flow of traffic is to be maintained at all times during the progress
of the work. Adequate signs, barricades and lights necessary to protect
the public must be provided. Flagmen must be employed continuously
during periods when only one-way traffic can be maintained or when
equipment is operated back and forth across the pavement area. No
construction equipment or materials must be left on the pavement after
working hours, nor may any construction equipment or materials be
placed in such manner or location that will obstruct the highway or
railroad warning signs. Barricades, whether in sidewalk or roadway
areas, must have prominently displayed the address and telephone
number of someone available 24 hours a day who must reestablish the
same in an emergency. Access to adjacent property must be maintained.
D. The applicant is responsible for notifying the Superintendent of Public
Works 24 hours prior to street or sidewalk opening and street or
sidewalk closing.
§ 129-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-34
1:177

ARTICLE VIII
Sidewalk Construction
§ 129-35. Responsibility of owner to construct or replace sidewalk.
All new sidewalks constructed within the Village of Warsaw must be
constructed by the owner of the adjoining property at the expense of said
owner. The replacement of an existing sidewalk is considered new sidewalk
construction to which the terms of this Article apply. This Article does not
apply to walkways or pass-through walks which do not run along highways
but which lead from one highway to another.
§ 129-36. Option to share a portion of the expense of sidewalk
construction.
The Village Board may annually, by resolution, compensate a homeowner
for a portion of the expense of reconstruction of sidewalks. At the time of
the resolution, the Village Board must fix the proportionate amount to be
paid by the village. The proportionate amount must apply to all sidewalks of
the same kind which may be constructed within the time designated by the
resolution and may not exceed 1/2 of the actual and necessary expense of
the construction of the sidewalk.
§ 129-37. Permit required; application; issuance and duration of
permit.
No sidewalk may be constructed or work commenced until the owner of
said premises has obtained a permit. Applications must be submitted to the
Village Clerk in such form as required by the Village Board. The permit will
be issued by the Superintendent of Public Works and will be valid for 60
days from the date of the final approval.
§ 129-38. Specifications.
Unless the sidewalk in the immediate area is flagstone or bituminous
concrete, and then only if the specifications approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works for such materials are followed, new
sidewalks must be constructed according to the following specifications:
A. All sidewalks must be at least four feet in width, except that repairs or
replacements may conform to the width of the existing sidewalk.
B. All sidewalks must be at least four inches thick, except that where such
sidewalks are crossed by driveways, said sidewalks must be at least six
inches thick through the width of the driveway.
C. The individual blocks of the sidewalk must be no more than four feet in
length. There must be at least one one-fourth-inch expansion joint
between every other block of the sidewalk. In the alternative, sidewalks
may have traverse construction joints of one-half-inch premolded
bituminous material to the full depth of the concrete, spaced 20 feet
§ 129-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-38
1:179
§ 129-39. Notice of work to be done; inspection.
The Superintendent of Public Works must be notified no less than 24 hours
in advance of the construction of new sidewalks or the reconstruction of
existing sidewalks. The Superintendent of Public Works must be given the
opportunity to inspect the work both during its progress and upon its
completion to verify that such work conforms to specifications contained in
this chapter.
§ 129-40. Assessment of cost of construction done by village.
The Village Board may, by resolution, require owners of property adjoining
village streets to construct sidewalks. If the owner does not construct the
sidewalk as required by this notice, the Village Board may cause the same
apart and the top surface must be scored at intervals of three to
five feet so that the finished walk will be marked in squares both
longitudinally and transversely.
D. Joints and edges must be finished with an edging tool of 1/4 inch radius.
Premolded bituminous joint filler must be placed between the sidewalk
and the curb, pavement or buildings.
E. Sidewalks must have a mixture of not less than one part cement to two
parts clean sand and four parts clean gravel or broken stone. Said
coarse aggregate must be both No. 1 and No. 2 crushed stone, New
York State approved. The proportions must be such that there is a
minimum of 3,500 pounds per square inch.
F. All sidewalks must be struck off to grade and finished with a wooden
float, leaving a smooth but nonslippery surface. After the sidewalk is
finished and the surface is hard, it must be covered for at least two days
to keep moisture in the sidewalk.
G. The grade and location of the sidewalk will be determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
H. The water used during the construction must be free from oil, alkali,
acid or vegetable matter.
I. Ingredients of concrete must be separately measured loose, in
approved receptacles. The mixing of concrete must be done in a manner
satisfactory to the Superintendent and subject at all stages to his
approval. Batch making only will be approved, and hand-mixing will be
permitted only in case of necessity. A minimum of water, accurately
measured, must give the necessary plasticity. After the materials are
first wetted, the work must proceed without delay until the whole batch
is in place. The mass in place will be carefully and thoroughly worked to
expel air, fill voids and secure perfect and continuous contact with
forms.
J. The mixtures herein set forth are minimum requirements.
§ 129-38 WARSAW CODE § 129-40
1:180
to be constructed and assess the cost to such adjoining landowner. All work
by the owners must be done in accordance with the specifications made
for sidewalk construction. All assessments will be made and collected, and
taxes levied, as provided by law.
§ 129-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-40
1:181

ARTICLE IX
Seasonal Limited Use Streets
§ 129-41. Designation.
The Village Board may designate a village street as a seasonal limited use
street.
§ 129-42. Posting.
Seasonal limited use streets must be appropriately posted.
§ 129-43. Discontinuance of maintenance.
The village may temporarily discontinue snow and ice removal and
maintenance from the first of December until the first of April on any street
designated as a seasonal limited use street.
§ 129-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-43
1:183

ARTICLE X
Prior Notice of Defects
§ 129-44. Notice of defects and snow and ice in streets and other
property required.
No civil action may be maintained against the Village of Warsaw or the
Superintendent of Public Works or against any improvement district in the
village for damages or injuries to persons or property (including those
from the operation of snowmobiles) sustained by reason of any highway,
bridge, culvert, highway marking, sign or device or any other property
owned, operated or maintained by the village, or any property owned,
operated or maintained by an improvement district therein, being defective,
out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed unless written notice of
such defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of such highway,
bridge culvert, highway marking, sign or device or any other property
owned, operated or maintained by the village, or any property owned,
operated or maintained by any improvement district, was actually given
to the Village Clerk or the Superintendent of Public Works and there was
a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after giving of such notice
to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of; and
no such action may be maintained for damages or injuries to person or
property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or ice
upon any highway, bridge, culvert or any other property owned by any
improvement district in the village unless written notice thereof, specifying
the particular place, was actually given to the Village Clerk or the
Superintendent of Public Works and there was a failure or neglect to cause
such snow or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise reasonably
safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 129-45. Notice of defects and snow and ice in sidewalks required.
No civil action may be maintained against the village and/or the Village
Superintendent of Public Works for damages or injuries to persons or
property sustained by reason of any defect in the sidewalks of the village
or in consequence of the existence of snow or ice upon any of its sidewalks
unless such sidewalks have been constructed or are maintained by the
village or the Superintendent of Public Works of the village pursuant to
statute, nor may any action be maintained by reason of such defect or in
consequence of such existence of snow or ice unless written notice thereof,
specifying the particular place, was actually given to the Village Clerk or the
Superintendent of Public Works and there was a failure or neglect to cause
such defect to be remedied, such snow or ice to be removed or to make the
place otherwise reasonably safe within a reasonable time after receipt of
such notice.
§ 129-46. Transmission of notices of defects; corrective action.
The Superintendent of Public Works must transmit, in writing, to the Village
Clerk, within three days after receipt thereof, all written notices received by
§ 129-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-46
1:185
him pursuant to this Article, and he must take any and all corrective action
with respect thereto as soon as practicable.
§ 129-47. Record of notices.
The Village Clerk must keep an index record, in a separate book, of all
written notices which the Village Clerk receives of the existence of
defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed conditions in or upon, or of an
accumulation of ice or snow upon, any village highway, bridge, culvert or
sidewalk or any other property owned by the village or by any improvement
district, which record must state the date of the receipt of the notice,
the nature and location of the condition stated to exist and the name and
address of the person from whom the notice is received. The record of
such notice must be preserved for a period of five years from the date it
is received. The Village Clerk, upon receipt of such written notice, must
immediately and in writing notify the Superintendent of Public Works of the
receipt of such notice.
§ 129-48. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing contained in this Article may repeal or modify or waive any existing
requirement or statute of limitations which is applicable to these causes
of action, but, on the contrary, the provisions of this Article are additional
requirements to the rights to maintain such action. Nothing contained
herein modifies any existing rule of law relative to the question of
contributory negligence, nor imposes upon the village, its officers and
employees and/or any of its improvement districts any greater duty or
obligations than it must keep streets, sidewalks and public places in a
reasonably safe condition for public use and travel.
§ 129-46 WARSAW CODE § 129-48
1:186
Chapter 133
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 78.
Sewers — See Ch. 123.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 129.
Water — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 129-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-48
1:187

ARTICLE I
General Provisions and Policies
§ 133-1. Authority to approve plats.
The Village Board of the Village of Warsaw has, pursuant to §§ 7-728 and
7-730 of the Village Law of the State of New York and by resolution,
authorized and empowered the Planning Board to approve plats showing
lots, blocks or sites, with or without streets or highways, within the
incorporated limits of the Village of Warsaw.
§ 133-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Regulations of the Village of Warsaw."
§ 133-3. Approval required.
§ 133-4. Conformance required; review policies.
A. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any contract is
made for the sale of or any offer to sell any lots in such subdivision or
any part thereof is made, before any permit for the erection of a
structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted and before any
subdivision plan may be filed in the Office of the Wyoming County
Clerk, the subdivider or a duly authorized agent shall apply for and
secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the
following procedures.
B. The Wyoming County Clerk's Office shall not record a plat of any
subdivision within the village unless the plat has been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and contains all of the
appropriate signatures.
A. The subdivision of land shall conform to this chapter as well as to
appropriate laws, rules and regulations established by all governing
bodies having or claiming jurisdiction over various phases of the
proposed development.
B. It is declared to be the policy of the Planning Board to consider land
subdivision to be part of a planning process that provides for the
orderly, efficient and economical development of the village and in a
manner that is reasonable and in the best interest of the community. In
its consideration of an application for the subdivision of land, the
Planning Board shall be guided by the following general requirements:
(1) Land must be buildable and free of hazards. The physical
characteristics of the land to be subdivided shall be such that it can
be used for building purposes without danger to health and safety
or peril from fire, flood, erosion or other menace. Proper provision
shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access, stormwater
§ 133-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:189
drainage, water supply and sewage disposal as well as for other
needed improvements.
(2) Important community resources and natural features should be
preserved. Insofar as possible, all existing features of the
landscape, such as large trees, water- and flood courses, historic
sites and other significant community assets shall be preserved.
(3) Subdivisions shall be in conformance with all local legislative
requirements and consistent with the Village Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-4 WARSAW CODE § 133-4
1:190
ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions
§ 133-5. Word usage.
The following rules of construction of language shall apply to the text of this
chapter:
§ 133-6. Definitions.
The following words or phrases as used in this chapter are defined as
follows:
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A plan, prepared by the Village Board pursuant
to § 7-722 of the Village Law, which indicates the general locations
recommended for various functional classes of public works, places and
structures and for the general physical development of the village and
includes any unit or part of such plan separately prepared and any
amendment to such plan or parts therein.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL — Approval of a final plat subject to conditions
set forth in a resolution conditionally approving such a plat by the Planning
A. All words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. All words in the plural number include the singular number and all
words in the singular number include the plural number, except as to
the number of permitted structures, unless the natural construction of
the wording indicates otherwise.
C. The word "person" includes an association, partnership or corporation.
D. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally
along the ground.
E. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
F. "Lot" includes the words "plot," "parcel," "tract" or "site."
G. The word "premises" includes a lot and all buildings or structures
thereon.
H. "To erect," "to construct" and "to build" a building or structure each
have the same meaning and also include "to excavate" for a building
and "to relocate" a building by moving it from one location to another.
I. "Used" shall be deemed also to include "designated, intended or
arranged to be used or occupied."
J. "Shall" is mandatory and discretionary; "may" is permissive.
K. "He" shall include the feminine gender "she" as well.
§ 133-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-6
1:191
Board. Such "conditional approval" does not qualify a final plat for
recording, nor authorize issuance of any building permits, prior to the
signing of the plat by a duly authorized officer of the Planning Board and
recording of the plat in the Office of the Wyoming County Clerk.
DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS — The
specifications entitled "Design Criteria and Construction Specifications" for
the Village of Warsaw. These criteria and specifications are regulations
which have been adopted by the Village Board and include those
amendments, additions or deletions which the Village Board shall adopt
from time to time by resolution.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
EASEMENT — The authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of said property.
ENGINEER OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person
licensed as a professional engineer by the State of New York.
FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing a proposed subdivision,
containing all information or detail required by law and by this chapter, to
be submitted to the Planning Board for approval and which, if approved,
may be duly filed or recorded by the applicant in the Office of the Wyoming
County Clerk.
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL — The signing of a plat in final form by a duly
authorized officer of the Planning Board pursuant to a Planning Board
resolution granting final approval of the plat, or after conditions specified in
a resolution granting conditional approval of the plat are completed. Such
final approval qualifies the plat for recording in the Office of the Wyoming
County Clerk.
LOT — A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by a
legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal entity for the purpose of use or transfer of
title.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Village Board pursuant
to § 7-724 of the Village Law, showing existing and proposed streets,
highways, parks and drainage areas.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Warsaw.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A drawing or drawings clearly marked "preliminary
plat" showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, as specified in
Article V of this chapter, submitted to the Planning Board for the purposes
of consideration prior to submission of the plat in final form and of sufficient
detail to apprise the Planning Board of the layout of the proposed
subdivision.
§ 133-6 WARSAW CODE § 133-6
1:192
RESUBDIVISION — A change in a map of an approved or filed subdivision
plat if such change affects any street layout shown on such map or area
reserved thereon for public use, or any change of lot lines.
STREET — A way for vehicular traffic. A "street" may be designated as a
road, avenue, lane, alley or other similar term.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street, normally a state highway, which serves or
is designed to serve heavy flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a
route for traffic between communities and/or other heavy-traffic-generating
areas.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which serves or is designed to carry traffic
from minor streets to the arterial street system.
STREET, MINOR — A street used primarily to provide access to abutting
properties.
STREET, DEAD-END OR CUL-DE-SAC — A street or a portion of a street
with only one vehicular traffic outlet.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A minor street which is parallel to and
adjacent to an arterial street and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
STREET WIDTH — The width of the right-of-way, measured at right angles
to the center line of the street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof as defined herein, either
for oneself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or development, including resubdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision other than a minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision that does not involve the creation
of more than three lots from any one parcel of land following the date of
the enactment of this chapter. In addition, a "minor subdivision" shall not
involve the creation of any new public streets; the extension of any public
street, water or sewer line; or the installation of drainage improvements
through one or more lots to serve one or more other lots.
SURVEYOR — A person licensed as a land surveyor by the State of New
York.
TERRACE — The area between the curb and sidewalk or, if no sidewalk
exists, the area between the curb and the public right-of-way.
UNDEVELOPED PLAT — A plat existing at the time of the enactment of
this chapter that has been filed in the Office of the Wyoming County Clerk,
where 20% or more of the lots within the plat are unimproved.
§ 133-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-6
1:193
VILLAGE BOARD — The legislative body of the Village of Warsaw.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — The engineer designated to act on behalf of the
village by the Village Board.
§ 133-6 WARSAW CODE § 133-6
1:194
ARTICLE III
Subdivision Approval Process
§ 133-7. Sketch plan approval.
A. The purpose of the sketch plan phase is to provide the subdivider with
an opportunity to consult early and informally in the subdivision
process with the Planning Board in order to save time and money and to
improve the opportunity for more desirable development.
B. A sketch plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board for informal
review for all major subdivisions. The sketch plan should show the
location of the subdivision, all existing structures, wooded areas,
significant physical features, existing utilities and community resources
and the proposed pattern of lots, streets, drainage, open space and
water and sewer facilities.
C. The subdivider shall appear before the Planning Board to present the
proposed sketch plan and to receive information that may be necessary
to process the request. The subdivider may meet with the Planning
Board prior to preparing the sketch plan to discuss procedural matters
as well as pertinent development requirements and potential concerns,
including but not limited to the design of streets, reservations of land,
local development policies, drainage and erosion control and slope
stabilization measures, water retention facilities, sewerage, water
supply and fire protection.
D. Subdividers of land adjoining state or county highways are advised to
consult with the Resident Engineer of the New York State Department
of Transportation or the County Highway Department at the sketch
plan stage in order to resolve problems of street openings or
stormwater drainage at the earliest possible stage in the design
process.
E. Where public utilities are involved, the subdivider's engineer should
contact the appropriate agencies for connection specifications and
capacity requirements as well as other pertinent construction
standards.
F. The Planning Board shall determine whether the sketch plan meets the
purposes of this chapter and if the proposal is consistent with existing
or potential development of adjacent areas and the Village
Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Board shall inform the applicant of
the actions to be taken to meet the requirements of this chapter. The
requirements for compliance with SEQR shall also be discussed at this
stage. The Planning Board may, if it deems it appropriate, refer a copy
of the sketch plan to the Village Engineer or any other village official for
review and report.
G. Within 45 days following the receipt of a complete sketch plan, the
Planning Board shall transmit a written report to the applicant
§ 133-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-7
1:195
§ 133-8. Preliminary plat approval.
containing its comments concerning the design of the proposed project.
Copies of minutes of relevant meetings of the Planning Board shall be
considered a sufficient written report. The time frame within which the
Planning Board is required to act may be extended by mutual consent
of the Planning Board and the applicant.
A. A preliminary plat shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning
Board for all proposed subdivisions. The preliminary plat shall be
clearly marked "preliminary plat" and shall satisfy the requirements for
preliminary layouts as described in Article V of this chapter. Preliminary
plats for major subdivisions should comply with the recommendations
made by the Planning Board in its report on the sketch plan. A
completed environmental assessment form shall also be submitted at
this time.
B. Seven copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary materials
specified herein shall be submitted to the Planning Board.
C. The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a fee to cover
administrative and inspection costs in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the Village Board.29
D. One copy of the preliminary plat shall be returned to the applicant with
the notification of decision and one copy shall be retained by the
Planning Board. The other copies shall be used for necessary
coordination with other agencies or consultants.
E. The Planning Board shall study the preliminary plat, taking into
consideration the topography of the area, the requirements of the
community and the best use of the land proposed to be subdivided.
Particular attention shall be given to the arrangement, location and
width of streets, their relation to the topography of the land, water and
sewer services, drainage, lot sizes and arrangements, the future
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided and the
requirements of the village's zoning regulations30 and Comprehensive
Plan. In the review of the preliminary plat, the Planning Board shall
consult with the Village Engineer and such other officials or agencies as
may be appropriate. The Village Engineer shall report to the Planning
Board concerning the adequacy of the engineering features shown on
the preliminary plat.
F. Within 62 days following the receipt of a complete and satisfactory
preliminary plat and supporting documentation, including a completed
environmental assessment form, the Planning Board shall, pursuant to
Village Law, conduct a public hearing on the proposed subdivision. The
29.Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 163, Zoning.
§ 133-7 WARSAW CODE § 133-8
1:196
§ 133-9. Final plat approval.
notice of hearing shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village not less than five days before such
hearing.
G. Within 62 days following the public hearing, the Planning Board shall
approve, with or without modification, or disapprove such preliminary
plat. The grounds for a modification or disapproval, if any, shall be
stated upon the records of the Planning Board. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions, the time within which the Planning Board must
take action on such plat may be extended by mutual consent of the
subdivider and the Planning Board. When approving a preliminary plat,
the Planning Board shall state in writing any modification it deems
necessary prior to submission of the plat in final form.
H. Within five days of the decision on the preliminary plat, the Planning
Board shall file its decision in the Office of the Village Clerk. In addition,
the subdivider shall be provided with written notification of the action
by the Planning Board within five days of the decision. In the event that
the Planning Board fails to take action on a preliminary plat within the
time frame prescribed herein, such plat shall be deemed to have been
granted preliminary approval. The certificate of the Village Clerk as to
the date of submission and the failure to take action within such
prescribed time shall be issued on demand and shall be sufficient in lieu
of written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
A. Within six months of receiving approval from the Planning Board on a
preliminary plat, with or without modification, the applicant may
submit a final plat for approval by the Planning Board. The final plat
shall be accompanied by the remainder of the subdivision fees as
specified by the fee schedule adopted by the Village Board.31
B. If more than six months have elapsed between the time of the Planning
Board's decision on the preliminary plat and the submission of the final
plat, the Planning Board may require a resubmission of the preliminary
plat prior to accepting the proposed final plat if it determines that
conditions affecting the plat have changed significantly in the interim. If
the Planning Board determines that the preliminary plat shall be
resubmitted, the Planning Board shall conduct another public hearing
on the proposed subdivision.
C. A tracing on Mylar plus six copies of the tracing and other exhibits
required for approval, as specified herein and as described in the
village's Design Criteria and Construction Specifications, shall be
submitted with the application for final plat approval. When submitting
a final plat for Planning Board approval, the subdivider shall also file
formal offers of dedication to the village or other appropriate public
31.Editor's Note: A copy of said fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and
may be examined there during regular office hours.
§ 133-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-9
1:197
agencies of all streets, parks and playgrounds and other permanent
open spaces for community use as well as all utilities and storm
drainage facilities as shown in the final plat. The approval of the plat
does not constitute acceptance by the village of the dedication of such
facilities. Evidence of all necessary easements or easement documents,
if appropriate, as well as any other legal documents requested by the
Planning Board shall be submitted with the final plat.
D. The subdivider may choose to develop the subdivision in stages. If such
staging is proposed, the developer shall submit the final plat for a
portion of the area encompassed by the preliminary plat, provided that
the proposed development stages were indicated on the preliminary
plat approved by the Planning Board. A section shall include at least
25% of the total number of lots contained in the approved plat. No more
than two individual sections of a subdivision shall be in process or
under construction at the same time.
E. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat
approved by the Planning Board. It shall incorporate any modifications
or other features that may have been recommended by the Planning
Board at the preliminary plat stage. All such compliances shall be
clearly indicated by the subdivider on the submission.
F. Within 62 days of the receipt of a complete and satisfactory final plat
which the Planning Board deems to be in substantial agreement with
the preliminary plat approved pursuant to this Article, the Planning
Board shall, by resolution, conditionally approve, with or without
modification, disapprove or grant final approval and authorize the
signing of such plat.
G. When a final plat is submitted which the Planning Board deems not to
be in substantial agreement with the preliminary plat approved
pursuant to this Article, the following shall apply:
(1) Final plats not in substantial agreement with approved preliminary
plats may require further review under the State Environmental
Quality Review (SEQR) Act.32
(2) The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on such final plat
not later than 62 days after the receipt of the final plat. The hearing
shall be advertised at least once in a newspaper of a general
circulation in the village at least five days before such hearing.
(3) The Planning Board shall, by resolution, conditionally approve,
with or without modification, disapprove or grant final approval
and authorize the signing of such plat within 62 days after the date
of the public hearing. The grounds for a modification, if any, or the
grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the
Planning Board.
32.Editor's Note: See § 8-0105 et seq. of the Environmental Conservation Law.
§ 133-9 WARSAW CODE § 133-9
1:198
H. Written notice of the action by the Planning Board shall be mailed to the
applicant and filed in the Office of the Village Clerk within five days of
the date of the action by the Planning Board. The action of the Planning
Board shall be recorded in the Board's minutes. In the case of the
disapproval of a proposed final plat, the Planning Board minutes shall
specify the reasons for disapproval. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this chapter, the time within which the Planning Board
must take action on such plat may be extended by mutual consent of the
subdivider and the Planning Board. In the event that the Planning
Board fails to take action on a final plat within the time prescribed
herein, the plat shall be considered to be approved. A certificate of the
Village Clerk as to the date of submission and the failure to take action
within such prescribed time shall be issued on demand and shall be
sufficient in lieu of written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
I. No construction of any sort, site improvements or a building permit for
any structure within the proposed subdivision shall be issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer until the record sheet of the final plat has
been approved by the Planning Board and the subdivision is filed in the
Office of the Wyoming County Clerk and liber and page numbers have
been assigned by the County Clerk. If a permit is desired for the
occupancy of a building in the subdivision prior to the completion of all
of the improvements shown on the approved construction sheet of the
subdivision plat, the Village Engineer shall determine that the streets
and utilities serving the building are sufficiently completed to
adequately serve the proposed occupancy.
J. Every final plat submitted to the Planning Board for its approval shall
carry the following endorsement:
Approved by Resolution of the Planning Board of the Village of Warsaw,
New York, on the _____ day of _____, 19__, subject to all requirements
and conditions of said Resolution. Any change, erasure, modification
or revision of the plat, as approved, shall void this approval.
Signed this _____ day of _____, 19__, by _____ Chairperson or _____
Designee
K. If the Planning Board conditionally approves the final plat, the Planning
Board may authorize the Chairman, or designee, to sign the plat upon
the completion of the requirements specified in the approval resolution.
Within five days of granting conditional approval, the final plat shall be
certified by the Chairman of the Planning Board, or designee, as
conditionally approved. A copy of such action shall be filed in the Office
of the Village Clerk and a certified copy mailed to the subdivider,
including a certified statement listing those requirements which, upon
completion, would constitute approval of the final plat. Upon
completion of the requirements, the plat shall be signed by the
Chairman of the Planning Board, or designee. Conditional approval of a
final plat shall expire within 180 days following the date of the
resolution granting conditional approval unless all such requirements
§ 133-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-9
1:199
§ 133-10. Minor subdivision approval.
have been certified as completed. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this chapter, the Planning Board may extend the time
within which a conditionally approved plat must be submitted for final
approval. If the Planning Board determines that such an extension is
warranted, it may extend the date for no more than two periods of 90
days each.
L. No changes, erasures, modifications or revisions shall be made to any
final plat following approval and endorsement by the Planning Board on
the plat. In the event that a final plat, when recorded, contains any such
changes, the plat shall be considered null and void, and the Planning
Board shall institute proceedings to have said plat stricken from the
records of the County Clerk.
M. An approved plat shall be filed in the Office of the County Clerk within
62 days following the date the plat is signed by the Chairman of the
Planning Board, or designee, or the certificate of the Village Clerk as to
the date of the submission of the final plat and failure of the Planning
Board to take action thereon within the time prescribed is issued. If the
plat is not filed within this time period, the approval shall become null
and void. In the event that the owner shall file only a section of such
approved plat in the Office of the County Clerk, the entire approved plat
shall be filed with the Village Clerk within 30 days of the filing of such
section. Any section of the approved plat which is filed in the Office of
the County Clerk shall encompass at least 25% of the total number of
lots contained in the approved plat. The approval of the remaining
sections of the approved plat shall expire unless said sections are filed
before the expiration of the exemption period to which such plat is
entitled under the provisions of Village Law.
A. The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove minor subdivision final
plats in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Applicants for approval of minor subdivision plats are encouraged to
meet with the Code Enforcement Officer to determine whether the
approval process authorized by this section can and should be utilized.
The Code Enforcement Officer may require the applicant to submit
whatever information is necessary to make this determination,
including but not limited to a copy of a tax map showing the land
proposed to be subdivided and all lots previously subdivided from that
tract of land.
C. The Planning Board may require a series of submittals conforming to
those for major subdivisions, but may waive data requirements for good
cause.
D. Applicants for minor subdivision approval shall submit seven copies of
the final plat and supplementary materials specified herein to the
Planning Board not less than seven days prior to the regularly
§ 133-9 WARSAW CODE § 133-10
1:200
scheduled meeting at which time the applicant is seeking consideration
by the Planning Board.
E. The plat shall be accompanied by a fee to cover administrative and
inspection costs in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the
Village Board.33
F. Within 62 days of the receipt of a complete and satisfactory application
for approval of a plat for minor subdivision approval, including a
completed environmental assessment form, the Planning Board shall
conduct a public hearing on the proposed plat. Said hearing shall be
advertised in a newspaper of general circulation within the village at
least once not less than five days prior to the hearing.
G. Subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, not more than three lots
may be created out of one parcel using the minor subdivision approval
process, regardless of the time frame within which said lots are
proposed to be created.
H. The Planning Board shall approve, deny or conditionally approve the
proposed minor subdivision plat by signature on the plat by the
Chairman of the Planning Board or designee. Action by the Planning
Board shall be taken within 62 days following the public hearing. The
time period within which the Planning Board is required to act may be
extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and the Planning Board.
The applicant shall be notified in writing, and all decisions of the
Planning Board shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk within
five days. If the Planning Board fails to act within the sixty-two-day
period, the subdivision shall be deemed to be approved, and the Village
Clerk may issue a certificate of approval on demand.
I. If the subdivision is disapproved, the Planning Board shall furnish the
applicant with a written statement specifying the reasons for
disapproval.
J. If the subdivision is conditionally approved, the Chairman of the
Planning Board, or designee, may be authorized to sign the plat upon
the completion of the requirements specified in the approved
resolution.
K. Approval of any plat is contingent upon the plat being recorded in the
Office of the Wyoming County Clerk within 62 days following the date
the plat is signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board, or designee. If
such plat is not filed within this time period, the approval by the
Planning Board shall be null and void.
L. The construction of any improvements or the provision of guaranties for
such improvements shall be in accord with the procedures and
requirements specified herein for major subdivisions.
33.Editor's Note: Said fee schedule is on file in the office of the Village Clerk and may be
examined there during regular office hours.
§ 133-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-11
1:201
§ 133-11. Resubdivision; lot line adjustments.
For a resubdivision, the same procedure shall apply as for a subdivision.
If the proposed resubdivision consists solely of the simple alteration of lot
lines where no additional lots would be created, the Planning Board may
waive the normal subdivision procedures and merely require the filing of
an approved resubdivision plat. A statement indicating such shall be part
of the Board's record on the subdivision. Notification of the purpose for the
division (i.e. lot line adjustment) shall be shown on the plat and in the deeds.
Tax numbers shall be reassigned to the new legal descriptions.
§ 133-12. Coordination with State Environmental Quality Review
Act.
A. Preliminary plats and final plats where no preliminary plat was required
shall not be considered complete until a negative declaration has been
filed or until a notice of completion of the draft environmental impact
statement has been filed. The time periods for review of a preliminary
plat shall begin upon filing of such negative declaration or such notice
of completion.
B. When the Planning Board is lead agency under the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQR), any public hearing held by the Planning
Board on a preliminary plat, on a final plat where no preliminary plat
was required, or on a final plat which does not substantially conform to
an approved preliminary plat, shall be coordinated with the
environmental review process as follows:
(1) If the Planning Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement is not required, the public hearing
on the plat shall be held within 62 days after the receipt of a
complete preliminary plat; or,
(2) If the Planning Board determines that the preparation of an
environmental impact statement is required, and a public hearing
on the draft environmental impact statement is held, the public
hearing on the plat and the draft environmental impact statement
shall be held jointly within 62 days after the filing of the notice of
completion of such draft environmental impact statement. If no
public hearing is held on the draft environmental impact statement,
the public hearing on the plat shall be held within 62 days of filing
the notice of completion.
(3) The hearing on the plat shall be advertised at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village at least five days
before such hearing if held independently of the hearing on the
draft environmental impact statement, or 14 days before a hearing
held jointly therewith. The hearing on the plat shall be completed
within 120 days after it has begun.
§ 133-11 WARSAW CODE § 133-12
1:202
(4) If the Planning Board determines that an environmental impact
statement is required, and a public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental impact
statement shall be filed within 45 days following the close of such
public hearing. If no public hearing is held on the draft
environmental impact statement, the final environmental impact
statement shall be filed within 62 days following the close of the
public hearing on the plat. Within 30 days of the filing of such final
environmental impact statement, the Planning Board shall issue
findings on the final environmental impact statement and make its
decision on the plat.
C. If the Planning Board is not lead agency under the State Environmental
Quality Review Act, any public hearing held by the Planning Board on a
preliminary plat, on a final plat where no preliminary plat was required
or on a final plat which does not substantially conform to an approved
preliminary plat shall be coordinated with the environmental review
process as follows:
(1) The Planning Board shall, with the agreement of the lead agency,
hold the public hearing on the plat jointly with the lead agency's
hearing on the draft environmental impact statement. Failing such
agreement, the Planning Board shall hold the public hearing on the
plat within 62 days after the receipt of a complete plat by the Clerk
of the Planning Board.
(2) The hearing on the plat shall be advertised at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village at least five days
before such hearing if held independently of the hearing on the
draft environmental impact statement, or 14 days before a hearing
held jointly therewith. The Planning Board may provide that the
hearing be further advertised in such a manner as it deems most
appropriate for full public consideration of such plat. The hearing
on the final plat shall be completed within 120 days after it has
begun.
(3) The Planning Board shall act on the plat within 62 days after the
close of the public hearing on such plat.
§ 133-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-12
1:203

ARTICLE IV
Improvements and/or Guaranties
§ 133-13. Required improvements.
A. Prior to the approval of a final plat by the Planning Board, the applicant
shall complete all of the improvements deemed necessary by the
Planning Board to the satisfaction of the appropriate village
departments and the Planning Board.
B. All of the required improvements shall be made by the applicant
without reimbursement by the village. Unless alternatively provided for
in accord with the provisions of Village Law, said improvements shall
include the following, as well as those improvements listed in the
Village of Warsaw Design Criteria and Construction Specifications:
(1) Streets and streetlighting facilities.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Curbing and gutters.
(4) Terrace strips.
(5) Sidewalks.
(6) Street shade trees.
(7) Monuments.
(8) Storm drainage.
(9) Sanitary sewers or an approved alternate system.
(10)Water distribution lines and hydrants.
(11) Park and recreation facilities.
(12) Electrical, gas, telephone, television cable and utility lines.
(13) Plantings and ground cover.
(14) Driveway aprons.
C. The subdivider shall complete all the required improvements to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer, who shall file a letter with the
Planning Board signifying the satisfactory completion of all
improvements required by the Planning Board.
D. The required improvements shall not be considered to be completed
until the installation of the improvements has been approved by the
Village Engineer and a map satisfactory to the Planning Board has been
submitted indicating the location of monuments marking all
underground utilities as actually installed. Said map shall be submitted
§ 133-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-13
1:205
§ 133-14. Letter of credit alternative.
prior to the endorsement of the plat by the Chairman of the Planning
Board, or designee.
E. The Planning Board may waive, when reasonable, any requirements or
improvements for the approval, approval with modifications or
disapproval of subdivisions submitted for its approval. Any such waiver,
which shall be subject to appropriate conditions, may be exercised in
the event that any such requirements or improvements are found not to
be requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general
welfare or inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting
facilities adjacent or in proximity to the subdivision.
A. As an alternative to the completion of the required improvements, the
subdivider may file a certified check or irrevocable letter of credit to
cover the full cost of the required improvements deemed necessary by
the Planning Board with the Village Clerk. Any such letter of credit shall
comply with the requirements of § 7-730 of Village Law and shall be
satisfactory to the Planning Board, Village Board, Village Engineer and
Village Attorney as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety.
The Planning Board shall determine an appropriate period of time [not
to exceed three years] set forth within the letter of credit within which
the required improvements shall be completed. The term of the security
agreement may, however, be extended by mutual agreement of the
Planning Board and the subdivider.
B. If the subdivider elects to provide a certified check or letter of credit for
all required improvements, such guaranty shall not be released until a
map satisfactory to the Planning Board has been submitted indicating
the location of all monuments marking all underground utilities as
actually installed. The Village Engineer shall provide written
certification that the improvements have been completed as required
by the Planning Board.
C. In the event that the subdivider is authorized to file the approved plat in
sections, as provided herein, approval of the plat may be granted upon
the installation of the required improvements in the section of the plat
filed in the Office of the Wyoming County Clerk or the furnishing of
security covering the costs of such improvements. The subdivider shall
not be permitted to begin construction in any other section until such
section has been filed in the Office of the County Clerk and the required
improvements have been installed in such section or security covering
the costs of such improvements is provided.
D. The letter of credit shall continue in full force and effect until a request
is made to the Mayor for a release from the letter of credit. The Mayor
shall submit the request to the Village Engineer for a recommendation.
Upon receipt of the Village Engineer's recommendation, the Mayor may
authorize the release of up to 90% of the total letter of credit. Before
the Mayor may approve the release of 90% of the letter of credit, the
§ 133-13 WARSAW CODE § 133-14
1:206
§ 133-15. Construction of improvements.
Village Engineer shall prepare a signed statement to the effect that: the
job is complete according to plans and specifications; the job has been
inspected by a licensed professional engineer; and all improvements
have been successfully tested. Before the final 10% release can be
requested by the subdivider, a maintenance bond covering two years
and equal to 10% of the cost of the project shall be posted and any
public roads shall be dedicated to the Village of Warsaw. Upon the
receipt of such a reply from the Village Engineer, the Mayor shall
authorize the final release of said letter of credit.
E. In the event that the subdivider is in default of compliance with the
conditions of this chapter or any other applicable village laws, such
letter of credit shall be forfeited to the village and used for the
completion of the required improvements. The village shall return to
the applicant any amount that is not needed to cover any costs incurred
by the village as a result of the applicant's default.
A. The village shall employ an inspector to act as agent of the Planning
Board for the purpose of assuring the satisfactory completion of all
improvements required by the Planning Board. The village shall
determine an amount sufficient to defray the costs of inspection. The
applicant shall pay the village for the costs of inspection before the final
plat is signed for filing. If the Planning Board or its agent finds, upon
inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with Planning Board's recommendations or
the approved construction detail sheets, the applicant shall be liable for
the costs of completing said improvements according to the approved
specifications. No plat shall be approved by the Planning Board as long
as the subdivider is in default on a previously approved plat. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any lots for which the
subdivider is deemed to be in default.
B. If, at any time before or during the construction of the required
improvements, it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to
modify the location or design of such required improvements, the
Village Engineer may, upon approval by a previously designated
member of the Planning Board, authorize such modifications, provided
that such modifications are within the spirit and intent of the Planning
Board's approval and do not extend to the waiver or substantial
alteration of the function of any improvements required by the Board.
The Village Engineer shall issue any authorization in writing and shall
transmit a copy of such authorization under this section to the Planning
Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The final plat
construction sheets shall be modified to reflect the changes authorized
by this section and made part of the subdivision file.
C. At least five days prior to commencing the construction of the required
improvements, the subdivider shall notify the Village Board, in writing,
§ 133-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-15
1:207
§ 133-16. Reservation of parkland.
of the time when the construction of such improvements is to begin.
This will enable the Village Board to have inspection services on site to
assure that all village specifications and requirements are met during
the construction of required improvements and to assure that the
improvements required by the Planning Board are satisfactorily
completed.
A. Before the Planning Board may approve a subdivision containing
residential units, the final plat shall also show, when required by the
Planning Board, a park or parks suitably located for playground or
other recreational purposes.
B. Land for park, playground or other recreational purposes may not be
required until the Planning Board has made a finding that a proper case
exists for requiring that a park or parks be suitably located for
playgrounds or other recreational purposes within the village. Such
findings shall include an evaluation of the present and anticipated
future needs for park and recreational facilities in the village based on
projected growth to which the particular final plat will contribute.
C. In the event that the Planning Board makes a finding pursuant to
Subsection B of this section that the proposed plat presents a proper
case for requiring a park or parks suitably located for playgrounds or
other recreational purposes, but that a suitable park or parks of
adequate size to meet the requirement cannot be properly located
within such plat, the Planning Board may require a sum of money in lieu
thereof, in an amount to be established by the Village Board. In making
such determination of suitability, the Board shall assess the size and
suitability of land shown on the plat which could be possible locations
for park or recreational facilities, as well as practical factors, including
whether there is a need for additional facilities in the immediate
neighborhood. Any money required by the Planning Board in lieu of
land for park, playground or other recreational purposes, pursuant to
the provisions of this section, shall be deposited into a trust fund to be
used by the village exclusively for park, playground or other
recreational purposes, including the acquisition of property.
§ 133-15 WARSAW CODE § 133-16
1:208
ARTICLE V
Specifications for Layouts and Plats
§ 133-17. Specifications for sketch plans.
A sketch plan shall be drawn on paper or other suitable material at a
scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. Sketch plans shall include the
following information:
A. The name of the proposal, including the name and address of the
subdivider(s) and a written, clear statement of the subdivider's intent
and letter of disclosure.
B. North point, graphic scale, date and general location map.
C. If the subdivider intends to develop the tract in stages, the entire tract
shall be depicted on the sketch plan with anticipated stages and timing
of development indicated. All other lands contiguous to the proposal
owned by the subdivider shall be shown on the map with the
approximate acreage.
D. The names of the owners of adjacent lands or the names of adjacent
subdivisions.
E. A location map showing the boundaries of the tract in relation to
adjoining streets and the locations of the nearest utility services.
F. General topography and drainage patterns of the parcel to be
subdivided and parcels within 200 feet of the tract to be subdivided. All
pertinent topographic features within the site and adjoining tracts,
including existing buildings, watercourses, water bodies, wetlands and
wooded areas, should be shown. Features to be retained as well as
those to be removed should be indicated.
G. A statement as to the proposed source of water supply and method of
sewage disposal. (If the subdivision is not to be served by a public sewer
system, the subdivider is encouraged to contact the Wyoming County
Health Department for assistance in conducting on-site percolation
tests in order to get a general idea of potential subsurface problems).
H. The approximate lines of proposed streets and lots as well as lands
identified for recreation areas or other permanent open spaces.
I. A general statement as to how stormwater drainage is to be
accommodated.
J. An indication of existing zoning of the tract (both on and adjacent to the
site) and any other legal restrictions of use.
K. A statement as to the consistency of the proposal to the Village
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 133-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-17
1:209
§ 133-18. Specifications for preliminary plats.
The preliminary plat shall be drawn on one or more sheets of tracing
material and shall be clearly marked as "preliminary plat." The preliminary
plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch and not
less than 50 feet to the inch. If more than one sheet is required to show
an entire tract, an index map shall be provided. Proof of ownership shall
be submitted at this time. When the subdivider is someone other than the
owner, an affidavit by the owner of the land consenting to the application
shall be filed. The plat shall include the following information:
L. The general soil conditions of the entire site proposed for subdivision
and its location with respect to a floodway or the boundaries of any
areas of special flood hazard (one-hundred-year floodplain).
A. The items listed in § 133-17A through E.
B. Existing streets immediately adjoining and within the tract to be
subdivided and the distance to the nearest major street intersection.
C. A topographic map showing the entire site and all lands within 200 feet
of the property at a five-foot interval.
D. Existing drains, waterlines and sanitary sewers within the tract to be
subdivided and adjacent thereto. Such facilities should be identified by
location, size, type and approximate elevations and gradients, using
mean sea level as datum plan. Existing as well as proposed easements
for such facilities should also be shown.
E. The proposed source of water supply and method of sewage disposal. A
conceptual layout of each system should be delineated, including the
location of hydrants and the sizing of lines to be installed. Where water
mains are not looped, blow-off valves or hydrants shall be provided. If
waste disposal is to be provided on-site, the subdivider shall provide the
results of percolation tests in the approximate locations where
proposed disposal systems are to be located.
F. A tracing overlay showing all soils and their classification. Areas with
moderate to high susceptibility to erosion, if any, shall be highlighted.
The subdivider shall also include information about existing on-site
vegetation.
G. A separate drainage report, including calculations for runoff and pipe
and channel sizing, which clearly describes how runoff will be handled
during grading and development operations. The use of erosion and
sedimentation prevention measures, if any, should be described. The
report shall provide sufficient details to comply with the requirements
for stormwater management plans prepared by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and shall include the
preliminary design of bridges and culverts. The design of stormwater
retention facilities shall be as specified in the Design Criteria and
Construction Specifications.
§ 133-17 WARSAW CODE § 133-18
1:210
§ 133-19. Specifications for final subdivision plats.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on Mylar or material equally acceptable
for filing by the Wyoming County Clerk. Said plat shall contain sufficient
survey data to readily determine the location, bearing and length of all
lines shown thereon and to permit the reproduction of such lines upon the
ground. The final plat submission shall be composed of three parts, namely,
construction sheet, record sheet and drainage report, as described in the
subsections that follow:
H. The approximate lines and gradients of proposed streets and sidewalks
and the names of proposed streets.
I. A preliminary grading plan of the site at a contour interval of two feet,
showing the locations and approximate sizes of cuts and fills and cross
sections for any final grading steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical [three to one], or where the cut or fill will be more than five
feet.
J. The approximate lines of proposed lots, the acreage or square footage
contained in each lot and individual lot numbering. If a proposed lot
contains one or more existing buildings, the proposed yard dimensions
for such buildings shall be noted.
K. The locations and dimensions of areas proposed for permanent open
space.
L. The location of any municipal boundary lines and zoning district lines
within the tract.
M. Any nonconforming lots, showing the required and actual areas, yards
and setbacks.
N. Copies of any deed restrictions or covenants as they may apply to any or
all parts of the subdivision.
O. The location and type of any known potentially hazardous materials on
or adjacent to the site.
P. The location and quality of water bodies directly affected by and
adjacent to the site.
Q. An indication of any federal, state or county permits that may be
required.
R. The locations of any buffers to be provided either during or after the
completion of construction.
S. The location, size and type of proposed outdoor lighting.
T. Facilities for fire protection.
U. Facilities for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, circulation and parking.
§ 133-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-19
1:211
A. Final plat construction sheet. The construction sheet shall not be larger
than 34 inches by 44 inches in size, shall be drawn at a scale of 50 feet
to one inch and shall contain the information listed below. Where more
than one sheet is required to depict the entire subdivision, a key sheet
shall be provided. All data shown on the construction sheet shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the Village Engineer and the
Village's construction specifications and shall include:
(1) The items listed in § 133-17A through C.
(2) The lines of existing and proposed streets and sidewalks
immediately adjoining and within the subdivision.
(3) The names of existing and proposed streets.
(4) Typical cross sections of proposed streets.
(5) Profiles of proposed streets at suitable vertical scale showing
finished grades in relation to the existing ground elevation.
(6) The layout of proposed lots, including lot numbers.
(7) Provisions for water supply and sewage disposal, and, if applicable,
evidence that such provisions have received approval of the
Wyoming County Department of Health.
(8) The location and size of existing and proposed stormwater pipes,
sanitary sewer lines and water mains on the property or into which
any connection is proposed.
(9) Locations of survey monuments. Prior to the acceptance of the
dedication of new streets, a certificate by a licensed land surveyor
must be filed certifying that the above monuments have been
placed where indicated on the map, at the appropriate stage of
construction as determined by the Village Engineer.
(10) Plans and typical cross sections of proposed sidewalks, if any.
(11) Plans for any proposed neighborhood park or playground within
the subdivision, including landscaping.
(12) A planting plan for street trees, where required, indicating the
location, varieties and minimum size of trees to be planted and of
existing trees to be preserved as street trees.
(13) Brief specifications, or reference to village standards, for all
facilities to be constructed or installed within the subdivision.
(14) Certification by a licensed professional engineer or a licensed land
surveyor as evidence of professional responsibility for the
preparation of the construction sheet.
B. Final plat record map. Unless the Wyoming County Clerk specifies
otherwise, the record sheet shall be 17 inches by 22 inches, or 22
§ 133-19 WARSAW CODE § 133-19
1:212
inches by 34 inches, or 34 inches by 44 inches in size and shall be
drawn on linen at a scale of 50 feet to one inch and shall show the
information listed below. Where more than one sheet is required to
show the entire subdivision, an index map drawn to scale showing all
sections shall be provided. The final plat record map shall include:
(1) The items listed in § 133-17A and B.
(2) The boundaries of the subdivision and information to show the
location of the subdivision in relation to surrounding properties and
streets, including the names of owners of adjacent lands or the
names of adjacent subdivisions. The subdivision boundary shall be
referenced from two directions to establish U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey monuments or New York State Plan Coordinate
monuments. In the event that such monuments have been
obliterated, the subdivision boundary shall be referenced to the
nearest highway intersections or previously established
monuments of subdivisions or public lands. Any combination of
types of reference points may be accepted that would fulfill the
requirements of exact measurements from the subdivision
boundary to reference points previously established for or by a
public agency.
(3) The lines of existing and proposed streets and sidewalks within the
subdivision and their inter-connection with existing or proposed
streets and sidewalks on adjoining properties.
(4) The lines and dimensions of proposed lots, which shall be
numbered. If a proposed lot contains one or more existing
buildings, the yard dimensions for such buildings shall be
indicated. Existing buildings outside the limits of the plat but
within 75 feet of any proposed street or 30 feet of any proposed lot
line shall also be shown.
(5) The lines and purposes of existing and proposed easements
immediately adjoining and within the subdivision.
(6) The lines, dimensions and area in square feet of all property
proposed to be reserved by deed restriction or covenant for the
common use of property owners of the subdivision or for any other
reason.
(7) The location of monuments to be placed within the subdivision.
(8) The locations of existing and proposed water supply lines, storm
sewers and sanitary sewers within the subdivision.
(9) The locations of any municipal and zoning boundary lines within
the subdivision.
(10)Written statements as to:
(a) The zoning of the property within the subdivision.
§ 133-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-19
1:213
(b) Compliance of the proposed lots with zoning requirements. If
any lots do not comply but are covered by zoning variances, the
statement should include reference to such variance. If
variances are needed, the document shall specify the nature
and location of the variance(s).
(11) The seal and certification by a licensed professional engineer or a
licensed land surveyor as evidence of professional responsibility for
the preparation of the record map and a place for the liber and
page numbers when filed.
(12) Offers of dedication to the village of any open space, recreation,
street or other improvements and those facilities to be retained by
the subdivider, including the method of maintenance and
improvement thereof. Such offers shall be received and approved
by the Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
C. Subdivision drainage plan. This plan shall be on a separate sheet of the
same size and scale as the record map and shall contain the following
information:
(1) Plans, profiles and typical and special cross sections of proposed
stormwater drainage facilities.
(2) Supporting final design data and copies of computations used as
the basis for the design capacities and performance of the drainage
facilities.
(3) Subdivision grading plan developed to suitable contour interval,
with grading details to indicate proposed street grades and
building site grades and elevations through the subdivision. The
contour interval of the grading plan shall either be one, two or five
feet (vertical). The interval selected shall result in a horizontal
distance between contour lines of not more than 100 feet. All
grades shall be referenced to United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey datum.
(4) If the subdivision is within or adjacent to the boundary of a onehundred-
year floodplain, the subdivision drainage plan shall
contain a detailed analysis of the area with respect to floodplain
management and land use.
(5) The location of all buildings proposed.
(6) The number of each lot.
(7) The location and means of controlling erosion within the project
limits.
(8) Slope stabilization details.
(9) Stormwater detention basins.
§ 133-19 WARSAW CODE § 133-19
1:214
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 133-20. General provisions.
The Planning Board, in reviewing an application for approval, shall be
guided by the considerations and standards presented in this Article. The
Planning Board shall take into consideration the prospective character of
the development and require that improvements be designed to ensure
the reasonable protection of the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare. In addition, all designs and improvements shall be in accordance
with the Village's Design Criteria and Construction Specifications.
§ 133-21. Lot size and arrangement.
The dimensions and arrangements of lots shall be such that there will be no
foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography, reservations, dedications
or other conditions, in providing access to buildings on such lots or in
securing building permits in compliance with existing zoning regulations as
well as other village requirements. The following regulations shall govern
the layout of lots:
A. Land to be subdivided or developed shall be of such character that it
can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
B. Proper provisions shall be made for drainage, water supply, sewage and
other needed improvements.
C. All proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in
harmony with the development pattern of neighboring properties.
D. A safe and convenient street system, consistent with the Village's
Comprehensive Plan and conforming to the Official Map, if such exists,
shall be created. Streets shall be of such width, grade and location so as
to accommodate the type and volume of traffic that is anticipated, to
facilitate fire protection and to provide fire-fighting equipment with
access to buildings.
E. Provisions shall be made to reserve open spaces for parks and
playgrounds or to require recreation fees in lieu thereof, in order to
achieve the goals and objectives of the Village's Comprehensive Plan
and Official Map.
F. Insofar as possible, all existing features of the landscape, such as large
trees, rock outcrops, water sources, historic resources and other
significant assets that would add to the value of the site should be
preserved through effective subdivision design.
A. The lot size, width, depth, shape, orientation and the minimum building
setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and
for the type of development and use contemplated.
§ 133-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-21
1:215
§ 133-22. Streets.
B. All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum
requirements of Chapter 163, Zoning, as to area and dimensions for the
zone in which the subdivision is located.
C. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, where a plat
contains one or more lots which do not comply with the village's zoning
laws, application may be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an
area variance pursuant to § 7-712-b of the Village Law, without the
necessity of a decision or determination of an administrative official
charged with the enforcement of the zoning regulations. In reviewing
such application, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall request the
Planning Board to provide a written recommendation concerning the
proposed variance.
D. Each lot shall have access to a street built to the village's specifications.
E. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to comply with required
building setback lines on both streets as required by Chapter 163,
Zoning.
F. Where existing streets have been proposed for future widening, all
building setbacks shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way
line.
G. Side lines of lots shall generally be at right angles to straight streets
and radial to curved streets.
H. Block lengths and widths shall be appropriate to accommodate the size
of lots required by Chapter 163, Zoning, and to provide for convenient
access, circulation control and traffic safety.
I. Blocks intended for commercial or industrial use shall be designed
specifically for such purposes, with adequate space set aside for offstreet
parking and delivery facilities.
J. Double frontage lots will not, in general, be approved.
K. Where lots abut an existing state highway, either a system of marginal
access streets or a reverse frontage approach shall be used in order to
minimize the number of driveways and/or streets entering onto these
state highways.
A. Where the marginal access technique is employed, a nonaccess
easement shall be required along the rear portion of the lot next to and
parallel to the highway right-of-way line.
B. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the
street which provides access to the lot, provision shall be made for the
installation of a culvert or other drainage structure. Said culvert or
drainage structure shall be subject to the same design criteria and
review as all other stormwater drainage facilities in the subdivision.
§ 133-21 WARSAW CODE § 133-22
1:216
C. The following regulations shall govern the layout of streets:
(1) Subdivisions shall be designed so as to provide a street pattern
which is curvilinear in design. The design of the street pattern shall
be based upon a local residential or minor street pattern connected
to a residential collector street system.
(2) The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall provide for
the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas or to reserve
space for future street extensions where the adjoining land has not
been developed.
(3) Local residential streets shall be designed so as to discourage
through traffic.
(4) All right-of-way street widths and street pavements shall be
measured at right angles or radial to the center line of the street.
All streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 60 feet in width and a
pavement width of not less than 30 feet unless hereinafter
otherwise provided. All streets shall be of asphalt pavement as
specified in the Design Criteria and Construction Specifications
approved by the Village Board.
(5) Whenever possible, streets should intersect at right angles. Streets
should not intersect at angles of less than 75°.
(6) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Criteria
and Construction Specifications approved by the Village Board. In
conjunction with these specifications, all streets proposed to be
dedicated to the village shall require:
(a) All materials to be hauled away to a depth of 24 inches.
(b) The use of good crushed gravel or stone filled to a depth of 16
inches, rolled and compacted in layers.
(c) The installation of a five-inch hot binder over compacted gravel
or stone and rolled properly.
(d) The installation of a three-inch top of fine hot asphalt over the
binder and compacted by a roller of proper size.
(e) That curbing may be preformed or installed with forms. When
curbing is preformed, cement must be used to hold the curbs in
place.
(f) That sidewalks shall be installed in four-foot squares and four
inches deep.
(7) All proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide access to
adjacent properties. When a proposed subdivision abuts an existing
subdivision, the subdivider shall make every attempt to design the
§ 133-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-22
1:217
street system of the proposed subdivision to connect with dead-end
or stub streets of existing subdivisions.
(8) The following standards shall apply to cul-de-sac streets:
(a) If possible, all cul-de-sac streets should drain toward their
entrance.
(b) Unless there is the expectation of extending the street through
to the adjoining property, a cul-de-sac street should never be
brought to the property boundary line, but should be placed so
that lots can back onto the property line of the subdivision.
(c) No cul-de-sac shall exceed 500 feet in length.
(d) All cul-de-sac streets shall have a turnaround at the end of the
street with a right-of-way diameter of not less than 120 feet;
the outer curb at the turn shall have a minimum diameter of
100 feet, a twenty-foot pavement width and two thirty-inchwide
gutters that will permit a turning radius of 25 feet at the
inner curb.
(9) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround
shall be provided and provisions made for the future extension of
the street through to the adjacent property and reversion of the
excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
(10)New half or partial streets shall not be permitted, except that
whenever a proposed subdivision borders a half or partial street,
the Planning Board may require that the other part of the street be
platted in the proposed tract if it determines that such a
requirement would increase the effectiveness of the circulation
system in the area.
(11) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall not be permitted.
(12) Local residential streets and residential collector streets shall not
intersect with state highways less than 800 feet apart, measured
from center line to center line.
(13) The minimum distance between center line offsets at street jogs
shall be 150 feet.
(14)No street shall have a name which will duplicate, or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with, the names of existing streets. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
(15) The minimum radius of horizontal curves, minimum length of
vertical curves and minimum length of tangents between reverse
curves shall be in accordance with specifications established by the
Village Engineer. Said items shall be approved by the Village
§ 133-22 WARSAW CODE § 133-22
1:218
§ 133-23. Alleys.
The following provisions shall govern the layout of alleys:
Engineer prior to final approval of the final plat by the Planning
Board.
(16) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Planning Board may require special treatment of
the land areas bordering such street in order to protect residential
properties and to effectively separate through and local traffic.
(17) Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way,
the Planning Board may require a street or streets parallel to such
right-of-way in order to make appropriate use of the land adjacent
to such right-of-way.
(18) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius
of 10 feet, or with a greater radius if deemed necessary by the
Planning Board.
(19) Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 20 feet.
(20) Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following,
with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves and with not less
than 200 feet between changes of grade:
Street Type
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Arterial 4
Collector 6
Minor 8
Marginal access 8
(21) In order to facilitate drainage, no street grade shall be less than
0.4%.
A. Alleys may be permitted in business, commercial and industrial
districts, although it is recommended that other definite and assured
provisions be made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking that is adequate to serve the proposed use.
B. The width of an alley, if proposed, shall not be less than 20 feet.
C. Dead-end alleys shall generally not be allowed; however, if such is
unavoidable, such alleys shall be provided with adequate turnaround
facilities at the closed end, as required by the Planning Board.
§ 133-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-24
1:219
§ 133-24. Prevention of landlocked parcels.
No division of land shall result in any parcel not having at least one access
point to at least one street that can be improved to meet village standards.
Where the remainder of a parcel is located so that access to a public street
would be gained by a street extending from the main portion of the parcel,
there shall be enough land remaining to provide for the extension of a public
(or private) street from this parcel to an existing street.
§ 133-25. Buffers and berms.
Landscape buffers should be provided between marginal access streets and
state highways. Buffers may also be required in other areas, along with
berms, to reduce noise levels and undesirable vistas.
§ 133-26. Streams and drainageways.
Subdivision lots should be laid out as much as possible so that side or rear
lot lines follow the center line of a stream or drainageway that may be
within the subdivision. Thoroughfare crossings of streams shall be kept to a
minimum and shall generally be at right angles to the stream.
§ 133-27. Road intersections.
In general, all streets shall intersect in a manner so that, for a distance of
at least 100 feet from the intersection, each street shall be approximately
at right angles to the street it joins. No intersection of two streets shall be
within 200 feet of any other intersection.
§ 133-28. Provisions for future resubdivision.
If a tract is subdivided into lots which are more than two times as large as
the minimum size required in the zone district in which the subdivision is
located, the Planning Board may require that streets and lots are laid out
so as to permit future resubdivision in accordance with the requirements
contained in this chapter and Chapter 163, Zoning.
§ 133-29. Nonresidential subdivisions.
Standards for the design and construction of nonresidential subdivisions
shall be governed by sound engineering and planning practice. Utilities
shall be sized commensurate with the anticipated demand based upon the
full development of the subdivision.
§ 133-30. Self-imposed restrictions.
The owner of any property may impose greater restrictions on any
development than those required by the village's subdivision and zoning
regulations. Such restrictions, if any, shall be indicated on the preliminary
and final subdivision plats.
§ 133-24 WARSAW CODE § 133-31
1:220
§ 133-31. Easements.
A. An easement shall be provided for all natural drainageways and all
utility lines in those instances where such utility lines do not fall within
a dedicated right-of-way. All easements shall be plotted on the
preliminary plat and subdivision plat. A clause shall be inserted in the
deed of each lot affected by an easement indicating the existence and
purpose of the easement.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a drainageway, channel or stream,
a drainageway easement, conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourse, shall be provided. The easement shall be of such width as
will be adequate to preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient
width for maintenance.
§ 133-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-31
1:221
Chapter 137
TAXATION
§ 133-31 WARSAW CODE § 133-31
1:222
ARTICLE I
Utility Tax
[Adopted 2-17-1969 by L.L. No. 1-1969 (Art. I of Ch. 41 of the 1965
Code of the Village of Warsaw)]
§ 137-1. Tax on furnishing of utility services. [Amended 3-27-1995
by L.L. No. 6-1995]
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 5-530 of the Village Law of the State
of New York, a tax equal to 1% of its gross income from and after the
first day of April 1969 is hereby imposed upon every utility doing business
in the Village of Warsaw which is subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, which has a gross income for the 12 months
ending May 31 in excess of $500, except motor carriers or brokers subject
to such supervision under Article 3-B of the Public Service Law,34 and a
tax equal to 1% of its gross operating income from and after the first day
of May 1950 is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business
in the Village of Warsaw which has a gross operating income for the 12
months ending May 31 in excess of $500, which taxes shall have application
only within the territorial limits of the Village of Warsaw and shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes and fees imposed by any other provision
of law. Such taxes shall not be imposed on any transaction originating
or consummated outside the territorial limits of the Village of Warsaw,
notwithstanding that some act is necessarily performed with respect to such
transaction within such limits.
§ 137-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROSS INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason of any sale,
conditional or otherwise, (except sales hereinafter referred to with respect
to which it is provided that profits from the sale shall be included in gross
income) made or service rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the
purchaser in the Village of Warsaw, including cash, credits and property
of any kind or nature (whether or not such sale is made or such service
is rendered for profit), without any deduction therefrom on account of
the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or
services or other costs, interest or discount paid or any other expense
whatsoever; also profits from the sale of securities, profits from the sale of
real property growing out of the ownership or use of or interest in such
property, profits from the sale of personal property (other than property of
a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if
on hand at the cost of the period for which a return is made), receipts from
interest, dividends and royalties derived from sources within the Village of
Warsaw other than such as are received from a corporation, a majority of
34.Editor's Note: Article 3-B of the Public Service Law was repealed by Chapter 267, § 5, of
the Laws of 1970.
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-2
1:223
whose voting stock is owned by the tax-paying utility, without any deduction
therefrom for any expenses whatsoever incurred in connection with the
receipt thereof and profits from any transaction (except sales for resale and
rentals) within the Village of Warsaw whatsoever; provided, however, that
the words "gross income" shall include, in the case of a utility engaged in
selling telephony or telephone service, only receipts from local exchange
service wholly consummated within the Village of Warsaw and, in the case
of a utility engaged in selling telegraphy or telegraph service, only receipts
from transactions wholly consummated within the Village of Warsaw.
GROSS OPERATING INCOME — Includes receipts received in or by reason
of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for ultimate consumption or use
by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam, water, refrigeration, telephony or
telegraphy or in or by reason of the furnishing for such consumption or use
of gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph service
in the Village of Warsaw, including cash, credits and property of any kind
or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or services or other costs,
interest or discount paid or any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON — Persons, corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock
associations, copartnerships, estates, assignee of rents, any person acting
in a fiduciary capacity or any other entity and persons, their assignees,
lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever or by any
other means, except the state, municipalities, political and civil subdivisions
of the state or municipality and public districts.
UTILITY — Includes every person subject to the supervision of the State
Department of Public Service, except persons engaged in the business
of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of operating
railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated
railroads, and also includes every person, whether or not such person
is subject to such supervision, who sells gas, electricity, steam, water,
refrigeration or telephony delivered through mains, pipes or wires or
furnishes gas, electric, steam, water, refrigerator, telephone or telegraph
service by means of mains, pipes or wires, regardless of whether such
activities are the main business of such person or are only incidental thereto
or of whether use is made of the public streets.
§ 137-3. Utilities to keep records.
Every utility subject to tax under this article shall keep such records of
its business and in such form as the Village Treasurer may require, and
such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
Village Treasurer may consent to their destruction within that period or may
require that they be kept longer.
§ 137-4. Utilities to file returns.
Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall file annually, on or before the
25th day of March, a return for the 12 calendar months preceding such
§ 137-2 WARSAW CODE § 137-4
1:224
return date or any portion thereof for which the tax imposed hereby is
effective; provided, however, that in lieu of the annual return required
by the foregoing provisions, any utility may file quarterly, on or before
September 25, December 25, March 25 and June 25, a return for the three
calendar months preceding each such return date and, in the case of the
first such return, for all preceding calendar months during which the tax
imposed hereby was effective. Every return shall state the gross income
or gross operating income for the period covered thereby. Returns shall
be filed with the Village Treasurer on a form to be furnished by him for
such purpose and shall contain such other data, information or matter as
he may require to be included therein. The Village Treasurer, in order to
ensure payment of the tax imposed, may require at any time a further or
supplemental return, which shall contain any data that may be specified
by him, and he may require any utility doing business in the Village of
Warsaw to file an annual return, which shall contain any data specified by
him, regardless of whether the utility is subject to tax under this article.
Every return shall have annexed thereto an affidavit of the head of the utility
making the same, or of the owner or of a copartner thereof or of a principal
officer of the corporation if such business is conducted by a corporation, to
the effect that the statements contained therein are true.
§ 137-5. Tax payable with return.
At the time of filing a return as required by this article, each utility shall
pay to the Village Treasurer the tax imposed by this article for the period
covered by such return. Such tax shall be due and payable at the time of
filing the return or, if a return is not filed when due, on the last day on which
the return is required to be filed.
§ 137-6. Failure to submit acceptable return.
A. In case any return filed pursuant to this article shall be insufficient or
unsatisfactory to the Village Treasurer and if a corrected or sufficient
return is not filed within 20 days after the same is required by notice
from him or if no return is made for any period, the Village Treasurer
shall determine the amount of tax due from such information as he is
able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the tax on the basis of
external indices or otherwise. He shall give notice of such
determination to the person liable for such tax. Such determination
shall finally and irrevocably fix such tax unless the person against whom
it is assessed shall, within 30 days after the giving of notice of such
determination, apply to the Village Treasurer for a hearing or unless the
Village Treasurer, of his own motion, shall reduce the same. After such
hearing, the Village Treasurer shall give notice of his decision to the
person liable for the tax. Such decision may be reviewed by a
proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the
State of New York if application therefor is made within 90 days after
the giving of notice of such decision. An order to review such decision
shall not be granted unless the amount of any tax sought to be
reviewed, with interest and penalties thereon, if any, shall be first
§ 137-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-6
1:225
§ 137-7. Giving of notice; presumptive evidence.
Any notice authorized or required under the provisions of this article may
be given by mailing the same to the persons for whom it is intended, in a
postpaid envelope, addressed to such person at the address given by him
in the last return filed by him under this article or, if no return has been
filed, then to such address as may be obtainable. The mailing of such notice
shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same by the person to
whom addressed. Any period of time, which is determined according to the
provisions of this article by the giving of notice, shall commence to run from
the date of mailing of such notice.
§ 137-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person failing to file a return or corrected return or to pay any tax or
any portion thereof within the time required by this article shall be subject
to a penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due, plus 1% of such tax for each
month of delay or fraction thereof, except the first month, after such return
was required to be filed or such tax became due; but the Village Treasurer,
for cause shown, may extend the time for filing any return and, if satisfied
that the delay was excusable, may remit all or any portion of the penalty
fixed by the foregoing provisions of this section.
§ 137-9. Refunds. [Amended 3-27-1995 by L.L. No. 6-1995]
If, within one year from the payment of any tax or penalty, the payer thereof
shall make application for a refund thereof and the Village Treasurer or
the court shall determine that such tax or penalty or any portion thereof
was erroneously or illegally collected, the Village Treasurer shall refund the
amount so determined. For like cause and within the same period, a refund
may be so made on the initiative of the Village Treasurer. However, no
refund shall be made of a tax or penalty paid pursuant to a determination of
the Village Treasurer as hereinbefore provided unless the Village Treasurer,
after a hearing as hereinbefore provided or of his own motion, shall have
deposited with the Village Treasurer and an undertaking filed with him,
in such amount and with such sureties as a Justice of the Supreme
Court shall approve, to the effect that if such proceeding is dismissed
or the tax confirmed, the applicant will pay all costs and charges which
may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding, or, at the option of
the applicant, such undertaking may be in a sum sufficient to cover the
tax, interest, penalties, costs and charges aforesaid, in which event the
applicant shall not be required to pay such tax, interest and penalties
as a condition precedent to the granting of such order.
B. Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to
evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
expiration of more than three years from the date of the filing of a
return; provided, however, that where no return has been filed as
required by this article, the tax may be assessed at any time.
§ 137-6 WARSAW CODE § 137-9
1:226
reduced the tax or penalty or it shall have been established in a proceeding
under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of the State of New York
that such determination was erroneous or illegal. All refunds shall be made
out of moneys collected under this article. An application for a refund, made
as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed an application for the revision
of any tax or penalty complained of, and the Village Treasurer may receive
additional evidence with respect thereto. After making his determination,
the Village Treasurer shall give notice thereof to the person interested, and
he shall be entitled to an order to review such determination under said
Article 78, subject to the provision hereinbefore contained relating to the
granting of such an order.
§ 137-10. Tax to be part of operating costs.
The tax imposed by this article shall be charged against and be paid by the
utility and shall not be added as a separate item to bills rendered by the
utility to customers or others but shall constitute a part of the operating
costs of such utility.
§ 137-11. Action to enforce payment.
Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax or penalty imposed by this
article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the Village Treasurer,
bring an action to enforce payment of the same. The proceeds of any
judgment obtained in any such action shall be paid to the Village Treasurer.
Each such tax and penalty shall be a lien upon the property of the person
liable to pay the same, in the same manner and to the same extent that the
tax and penalty imposed by § 186-a of the Tax Law is made a lien.
§ 137-12. Power of Village Treasurer to make rules.
In the administration of this article, the Village Treasurer shall have the
power to make such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with
law, as may be necessary for the exercise of his powers and the performance
of his duties, to prescribe the form of blanks, reports and other records
relating to the administration and enforcement of the tax, to take testimony
and proofs, under oath, with reference to any matter within the line of his
official duty under this article and to subpoena and require the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents.
§ 137-13. Confidentiality of records; penalties, exceptions.
A. Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for the Village Treasurer or any
agent, clerk or employee of the Village of Warsaw to divulge or make
known in any manner the amount of gross income or gross operating
income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any return under this
article. The officer charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
required to produce any of them or evidence of anything contained in
them in any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
§ 137-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-13
1:227
§ 137-14. Disposition of moneys.
All taxes and penalties received by the Village Treasurer under this article
shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be credited to and
deposited in the general fund of the village.
Village of Warsaw in an action proceeding under the provisions of
this article or on behalf of the State Tax Commission in an action or
proceeding under the provisions of the Tax Law of the State of New
York or on behalf of any party to any action or proceeding under the
provisions of this article when the returns or facts shown thereby are
directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of which events
the court may require the production of and may admit in evidence so
much of said returns or of the facts shown thereby as are pertinent
to the action or proceeding and no more. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the delivery to a person, or his duly authorized
representative, of a copy of any return filed by him or to prohibit the
publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of
particular returns and the items thereof or the publication of delinquent
lists showing the names of persons who have failed to pay their taxes at
the time and in the manner provided for by this article, together with
any relevant information which, in the opinion of the Village Treasurer,
may assist in the collection of such delinquent taxes; or the inspection
by the Village Attorney or other legal representatives of the Village of
Warsaw of the return of any person who shall bring action to set aside
or review the tax based thereon or against whom an action has been
instituted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Any offense against the foregoing secrecy provisions shall be
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not
exceeding one year, or both, and if the offender is an officer, agent,
clerk or employee of the Village of Warsaw, he shall be dismissed from
office and shall be incapable of holding any office or employment in the
Village of Warsaw for a period of five years thereafter.
C. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, the Village Treasurer
may exchange with the Chief Fiscal Officer of any city or any other
village in the State of New York information contained in returns filed
under this article, provided that such a city or other village grants
similar privileges to the Village of Warsaw and provided that such
information is to be used for tax purposes only, and the Village
Treasurer shall, upon request, furnish the State Tax Commission with
any information contained in such returns.
§ 137-13 WARSAW CODE § 137-14
1:228
ARTICLE II
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 11-1-1993 by L.L. No. 6-199335]
§ 137-15. Legislative intent and purpose.
The Village Board finds that the real property tax burden on homeowners
who are retired and living on a fixed income is made more difficult as a
result of recent federal legislation resulting in an increased income tax
burden for those receiving social security benefits. Therefore, the Village
Board wishes to ease the burden somewhat so that homes within the village
are more likely to remain in individual ownership by providing for partial
real property tax exemptions to persons over 65 years of age who meet
certain income standards.
§ 137-16. Exemption granted.
Real property owned by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of
age or over, or real property owned by husband and wife, one of whom is 65
years of age or over, may be exempt from taxation by the Village of Warsaw
to the extent of 50% of the assessed valuation thereof, provided that no
exemption may be granted unless the applicant meets all the criteria for an
exemption under Subdivision 3 of § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, and
further provided that the income limitation is $10,000.
§ 137-17. Applications.
Applications may be obtained from the Board of Assessors.
§ 137-17.1. Changes in income limitation.
The income limitation set forth above in § 137-15 may be increased or
decreased by resolution of the Village Board after a public hearing.
35.Editor's Note: This local law also superseded former Art. II, Senior Citizens Tax
Exemption, adopted 10-1-1984 by L.L. No. 3-1984 (Art. III of Ch. 41 of the 1965 Code of
the Village of Warsaw).
§ 137-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-17.1
1:229

ARTICLE III
Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 10-1-1984 by L.L. No. 4-1984 (Art. IV of Ch. 41 of the 1965
Code of the Village of Warsaw)]
§ 137-18. Statutory authorization.
Chapter 525 of the Laws of 198436 amends the Real Property Tax Law to
provide a uniform real property tax exemption for veterans.
§ 137-19. Exemption granted. [Amended 2-4-1985 by L.L. No.
2-1985]
The Village of Warsaw hereby elects to adopt Chapter 525 of the Laws of
1984 as follows:
§ 137-19.1. Gold Star Parent. [Added 9-17-2001 by L.L. No. 3-2001]
Pursuant to § 458-a(7) of the New York State Real Property Tax Law, The
Village Board hereby amends Chapter 137, Article III, to include a Gold Star
Parent as a qualified veteran subject to the following limitations:
A. A qualified veteran receives an exemption equal to 15% of the assessed
value, but not to exceed $6,000; or the product of $6,000 multiplied by
the latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit or, in the special
assessing units, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
B. In addition, 10% of assessed value for a qualifying veteran who has
served in a combat theater or combat zone of operations. This
additional exemption is not to exceed $4,000; or the product of $4,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit or,
in special assessing units, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
C. In addition, an exemption based on the product of the assessed value
multiplied by 50% of the veteran's disability rating, where
compensation rating has been received from the Veteran's
Administration for a service-connected disability. This exemption shall
not exceed $20,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for
the assessing unit or, in special assessing units, the latest class ratio,
whichever is less.
A. A "Gold Star Parent" shall mean the parent of a child who died in the
line of duty while serving in the United States armed forces during a
period of war.
B. The definition shall not apply to § 137-19 C of this article.
36.Editor's Note: See §§ 458 and 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 137-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-19.1
1:231

ARTICLE IV
Collection of Delinquent Property Taxes
[Adopted 8-15-1994 by L.L. No. 1-1994]
§ 137-20. Continuation of enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Chapter 602 of the Laws of 1993, as amended by a
chapter of the Laws of 1994, as proposed in Legislative Bill No. S. 8560-A,
the Village of Warsaw hereby acts by local law, not subject to referendum,
to provide that the collection of property taxes shall continue to be enforced
pursuant to Title 3 of Article 14 of the Real Property Tax Law, as is in effect
on December 31, 1994.
§ 137-21. Filing required.
Upon adoption, and no later than October 1, 1994, a copy of this article shall
be filed with the New York State Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 137-22. When effective.
This Article shall take effect on the same day as a chapter of the Laws of
1994 takes effect as proposed in Legislative Bill No. S. 8560-A, except that
if S. 8560-A shall become a law prior to adoption of this article, this article
shall take effect immediately.
§ 137-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-22
1:233

ARTICLE V
Eligible Funds Veterans Exemption Adjustment
[Adopted 10-3-1995 by L.L. No. 7-199537]
§ 137-23. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Eligible Funds Veterans Adjustment
Law" of the Village of Warsaw.
§ 137-24. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this article to implement legislation,
S-8472-A,38 signed into law by the Governor of the State of New York, which
amends § 458, Subdivision 5, of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of
New York to direct the Village Assessor to adjust the amount of the eligible
funds veterans exemption based upon reassessment of property within the
village and to permit veterans who had converted from the eligible funds
veterans exemption to the alternative veterans exemption as a result of a
revaluation or update, to change back to eligible funds veterans exemption
and obtain the benefits of the amended provision of the Real Property Tax
Law.
§ 137-25. Revaluation; change in level of assessment.
The Village Board of the Village of Warsaw hereby recognizes that the
total assessed value of the real property for which an exemption has been
granted pursuant to Subdivision 1 or 2 of § 458 of the Real Property Tax
Law will be increased or decreased as a result of a revaluation or update
and a material change in the level of assessment will be certified for the
assessment roll of the Village of Warsaw pursuant to the rules of the State
Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 137-26. Owner application for eligible funds veterans exemption.
A. At any time within one year of the effective date of this article, any
owner of property who currently receives an exemption pursuant to
§ 458 of the Real Property Tax Law or who previously received an
exemption pursuant to § 458 of the Real Property Tax Law, but who
opted instead, as a result of a revaluation or update, to receive
exemption pursuant to § 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law, may apply
to the Village Assessor to again receive the exemption under § 458.
B. The Village Assessor shall recompute all exemptions granted pursuant
to § 458 in the manner set forth in § 458, Subdivision 5(b), of the Real
Property Tax Law.
37.Editor's Note: This local law also provided that in order for this exemption to be applied to
Village taxes for the year 1996, the owner must apply on or before 12-31-1995.
38.Editor's Note: L. 1994, c. 419.
§ 137-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-27
1:235
§ 137-27. Formula for increase or decrease in amount of exemption.
The Assessor of the Village of Warsaw is hereby directed, if the owner
applies in accordance with § 137-26 herein, or otherwise applied to the
Town of Warsaw, in which event the Village Assessor will make use of that
application for purposes of the village exemption, to increase or decrease
the amount of the Eligible Funds Veterans Exemption by multiplying the
amount of the exemption by the change in the level of assessment for the
Village of Warsaw as determined by and certified by the New York State
Division of Equalization and Assessment pursuant to the rules of the State
Board of Equalization and Assessment.
§ 137-27 WARSAW CODE § 137-27
1:236
ARTICLE VI
Cold War Veterans Tax Exemption
[Adopted 2-2-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
§ 137-28. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Cold War Veterans Tax Exemption" of the
Village of Warsaw.
§ 137-29. Statutory authority.
Chapter 655 of the 2007 Laws of the State of New York amended the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York, § 458-b, by giving a municipality
the option of adopting a local law to offer exemption from taxation for
residential property of veterans who served during the Cold War era as
defined by said section of law.
§ 137-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to allow a limited exemption from real property
taxes for residential real property owned by veterans who rendered military
service to the United States during the Cold War.
§ 137-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States Armed Forces, other
than active duty for training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force
and Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty in the United States Armed Forces during a period from September
2, 1945, to December 26, 1991, and was discharged or released therefrom
under honorable conditions.
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — The latest final equalization rate
established by the State Board pursuant to Article Twelve of the Real
Property Tax Law.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event any portion of such property is not used
§ 137-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-31
1:237
exclusively for residential purposes, but instead used for other purposes,
such portion shall be subject to taxation and only the remaining portion
used exclusively for residential purposes shall be subject to the exemption
provided for in this section. Such property shall be the primary residence
of the Cold War veteran or the unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War
veteran, unless the Cold War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is
absent from the property due to medical reasons or institutionalization.
SERVICE CONNECTED — With respect to disability or death, means that
such disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from
a disability incurred or aggravated, in the line of duty on active military,
naval or air service.
§ 137-32. Amount of exemption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 655 of the 2007 Laws of the State of
New York amending the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York, the
maximum veterans exemption from real property taxes allowable pursuant
to § 458-b of the Real Property Tax Law is established as follows:
§ 137-33. Limitations.
A. Qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of 10% of the assessed value of such property; provided,
however, that such exemption shall not exceed the lesser of $6,000 or
the product of $6,000 multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for
the Village of Warsaw.
B. In addition to the exemption provided in Subsection A of this section,
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Veterans Affairs or from the United States Department of
Defense because of a service-connected disability, qualifying residential
real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of the product
of the assessed value of such property, multiplied by 50% of the Cold
War veteran disability rating; provided, however, that such exemption
shall not exceed $20,000 or the product of $20,000 multiplied by the
latest state equalization rate for the Village of Warsaw, whichever is
less.
A. If the Cold War veteran received the exemption under any other section
of the Real Property Tax Law that provides for veterans exemption, the
Cold War veteran shall not be eligible to receive the exemption under
this section.
B. Duration of exemption.
(1) The exemption provided under this article shall be granted for a
period of 10 years. Where a qualified owner owns qualifying
residential property on the effective date of this article, such tenyear
period shall be measured from the assessment roll prepared
pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring on or after the
effective date of this chapter.
§ 137-31 WARSAW CODE § 137-33
1:238
(2) Where a qualified owner does not own qualifying residential real
property on the effective date of this chapter, such ten-year period
shall be measured from the assessment roll prepared pursuant to
the first taxable status date occurring at least 60 days after the
date of purchase of qualifying residential real property; provided,
however, that should the veteran apply for and be granted an
exemption on the assessment roll prepared pursuant to a taxable
status date occurring within 60 days after the date of purchase of
residential real property, such ten-year period shall be measured
from the first assessment roll in which the exemption occurs.
(3) If, before the expiration of such ten-year period, such exempt
property is sold and replaced with other residential real property,
such exemption may be granted pursuant to this Subsection B for
the unexpired portion of the ten-year exemption period.
C. Application for exemption.
(1) Application for exemption shall be made by the owner, or all of the
owners of the property, on a form prescribed by the State Board.
(2) The owner or owners shall file the completed form in the Assessor's
office on or before the first appropriate taxable status date.
(3) The exemption shall continue in full force and effect for all
appropriate subsequent tax years, and the owner or owners of the
property shall not be required to refile each year. Applicants shall
be required to refile on or before the appropriate taxable status
date if the percentage of disability percentage increases or
decreases or may refile if other changes have occurred which affect
qualification for an increased or decreased amount of exemption.
(4) Any applicant convicted of willfully making any false statements in
the application for such exemption shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed in the Penal Law.
§ 137-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-33
1:239

ARTICLE VII
Termination of Village's Status as Assessing Unit
[Adopted 4-5-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 137-34. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Termination of Village's Status as an
Assessing Unit."
§ 137-35. Statutory authority.
The intent of the Board of Trustees for the Village of Warsaw is to implement
§ 1402(3) of the Real Property Tax Law providing for the voluntary
termination of the Village's status as an assessing unit, as provided in the
Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also the intent of this
article to abolish the position of Assessor, the Board of Assessors and to
terminate any and all responsibility as provided by law for the review of the
assessments of real property located within the Village of Warsaw.
§ 137-36. Position of Assessor.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Warsaw is hereby abolished.
§ 137-37. Board of Assessment Review.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Warsaw is hereby
abolished.
§ 137-38. Levied taxes.
On or after the effective date of this article, taxes in the Village of Warsaw
shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll of the
Town of Warsaw with the taxable status date of such Town controlling for
Village purposes.
§ 137-39. Filing of article.
Within five days of the effective date of this article, the Board of Trustees
of the Village of Warsaw shall file a copy of such article with the Clerk and
Assessor of the Town of Warsaw and with the State Board of Real Property
Services.
§ 137-40. Permissive referendum.
This article is subject to permissive referendum, and the Village Clerk shall
forthwith proceed to notice such fact and conduct such referendum in
accordance with Article 9 of the Village Law if required by petition.
§ 137-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-40
1:241

ARTICLE VIII
Converted Mixed-Use Property Exemption
[Adopted 5-7-2012 by L.L. No. 1-2012]
§ 137-41. Purpose.
This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of § 485-a of the Real
Property Tax Law of the State of New York to grant a partial exemption from
taxation to certain real property located within the Town of Warsaw which
has been converted to a mixed use of commercial and residential use.
§ 137-42. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person obligated to pay real property taxes on the
property for which an exemption from real property taxes under this article
is sought.
COMMERCIAL CONSTRUCTION WORK — The modernization,
rehabilitation, expansion or other improvement of the portion of mixed-use
property to be used for commercial purposes.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE OR USE — The buying, selling or otherwise
providing of goods or services, including hotel services, or other lawful
business or commercial activities permitted in mixed-use property.
EXEMPTION BASE — The increase in the assessed value of real property
attributable to the amount invested, exclusive of the cost of ordinary
maintenance and repairs, to convert such real property to mixed-use
property, as hereinafter defined.
MIXED-USE PROPERTY — Property on which will exist, after completion of
residential construction work or a combination of residential construction
work and commercial construction work, a building or structure used for
both residential and commercial use.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, agency, trust, estate, foreign or domestic
government or subdivision thereof, or other entity.
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION WORK — The creation, modernization,
rehabilitation, expansion or other improvement of dwelling units, other than
dwelling units in a hotel, in the portion of mixed-use property to be used for
residential purposes.
§ 137-43. Exemption.
A. For a period of 12 years from the approval of an application, the
increase in assessed value of such property attributable to such
conversion shall be exempt as provided below. Such exemption shall be
computed with respect to the "exemption base." The "exemption base"
shall be determined for each year in which there is an increase in
§ 137-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-43
1:243
§ 137-44. Application.
Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner of such
real property on a form prescribed by the State Board of Real Property Tax
Services. Such application shall be filed with the Assessor on or before the
appropriate taxable status date of the Town.
§ 137-45. Approval of exemption.
If the Assessor is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this article, he or she shall approve the application, and such
real property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies as provided herein commencing with the assessment roll
prepared after the taxable status date referred to in § 137-44 of this article.
The assessed value of any exemption granted pursuant to this article shall
be entered by the Assessor on the assessment roll with the taxable property,
with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
assessed value so attributable from that of the previous year's assessed
value.
Years of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 through 8 100% of exemption base
9 80% of exemption base
10 60% of exemption base
11 40% of exemption base
12 20% of exemption base
B. No such exemption shall be granted unless:
(1) Such conversion was commenced subsequent to the effective date
of this article; and
(2) The cost of such conversion exceeds the sum of $15,000.
C. No such exemption shall be granted concurrent with or subsequent to
any other real property tax exemption granted to the same
improvements to real property, except where, during the period of such
previous exemption, payments in lieu of taxes or other payments were
made to the local government in an amount that would have been equal
to or greater than the amount of real property taxes that would have
been paid on such improvements had such property been granted an
exemption pursuant to this section. In such case, an exemption shall be
granted for a number of years equal to the twelve-year exemption
granted pursuant to this article less the number of years the property
would have been previously exempt from real property taxes.
§ 137-43 WARSAW CODE § 137-45
1:244
Chapter 141
TOURIST AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 78.
Sewers — See Ch. 123.
Water — See Ch. 157.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 141-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — A structure, whether occupied or not, transportable in
one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed as
a dwelling unit, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected
to the required utilities. For the purpose of this chapter, an unoccupied
"mobile home" shall be considered the same as an occupied unit.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel which has been improved for the rental
of two or more lots and the provision of services for mobile homes for
nontransient residential use.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular type portable structure without
permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily
designed as temporary living accommodation for recreation, camping and
travel use, and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes.
TOURIST PARK — Any parcel upon which more than one camp cottage,
cabin, tent or recreational vehicle is used or arranged to be used for the
purpose of living or sleeping.
§ 141-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to establish,
maintain, operate or conduct within the Village of Warsaw, New York, any
tourist or mobile home park, unless duly licensed as hereinafter provided.
§ 141-3. Location restrictions.
§ 141-4. Application for license; hearing.
A. No person shall use a mobile home or recreational vehicle as a
habitation except in a licensed park.
B. Mobile home and tourist parks shall be located only in a district of the
village zoned as a Planned Residential Development (PRD) and shall be
considered as a special use in that district.
§ 137-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:245
§ 141-5. License fee; display of license; bond; term; license
nontransferable; revocation.
§ 141-6. Licensee to manage park.
Each tourist park or mobile home park shall be under the management of a
licensee. It shall be the duty of the licensee of such park to:
A. Each applicant for a license hereunder shall execute an application
therefor on forms to be supplied to him or her by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
B. In the application, the applicant shall agree that, if granted the license
applied for, he or she will conduct the activity or business pursuant to
the regulations hereinafter set forth, and that, upon his or her failure to
do such, the license shall be revoked forthwith.
C. Hearings on the application shall be held subject to the provisions
detailed in § 163-161 of Article III of Chapter 163, Zoning, of the Village
of Warsaw Code, after which the license may be granted by the Village
Board.
A. The Village Board shall, by resolution, determine the fee for the license,
which sum shall cover not only the cost of issuance of the license itself,
but also the cost of making the necessary inspections of the premises to
ascertain compliance as hereinafter prescribed.
B. Such license shall be placed and at all times be displayed in a
conspicuous place at the licensee's place of activity or business for
which the license is issued.
C. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the
licensee shall provide the Village of Warsaw with a performance bond in
an amount to be determined by the Village Board.
D. Such license shall be effective from the date of its issuance until the
31st day of December of the year of such issuance, after which a
reapplication must be made yearly on forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer if the licensee desires to continue such activity or
business.
E. Such license is personal with the licensee and does not go with the title
of the land, nor may it be sold, assigned, transferred or disposed of.
F. Such license may be revoked by the Village Board after a public hearing
thereon, at which hearing the licensee shall have an opportunity to be
heard. Should the license be revoked, the Village Board may require, at
the licensee's expense, the removal of the mobile homes and/or
recreational vehicles remaining on the site for which the license is
granted.
§ 141-4 WARSAW CODE § 141-6
1:246
§ 141-7. Exceptions to provisions.
The foregoing provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a nonpaying
guest of a resident of the Village of Warsaw who parks a mobile home or
recreational vehicle upon the property of said resident for a period of time
not to exceed 72 hours in any month.
§ 141-8. Penalties for offenses.39
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 145
TREES
§ 145-1. Cutting and planting; supervision.
A. Provide for the collection and removal of garbage and any other waste
material.
B. Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of any
kind.
C. Provide for the cleaning, painting, repairing and disinfecting of all
buildings.
D. Report to the Wyoming County Health Bureau all cases of
communicable diseases or suspected cases of communicable diseases
affecting any inhabitant of the park.
E. Prevent the committing of any nuisance on the park premises and to
report immediately to the proper authorities all acts of disorderly
conduct committed by any person or persons inside the park, and to
that end to maintain proper policing thereof.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall cut, trim, mutilate, injure or
destroy any tree in any street or public place, between walk and road, in
the Village of Warsaw, except under the direction of an authority of the
Village Board of said village. The Superintendent of Public Works is
hereby authorized to permit, under his direction and supervision, the
cutting and trimming of such shade trees.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall plant a tree or trees in any street or
public place or village right-of-way except under the direction and
authority of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of
39.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 141-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-1
1:247
§ 145-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal
Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Chapter 149
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 96. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 153.
§ 149-1. Purpose.
The seriousness of the matter of the outdoor storage of abandoned, junked,
discarded and unlicensed motor vehicles upon privately owned properties
within the village increases with the passage of time. It is a source of
vexation and annoyance, not only to the members of the traveling public,
but to the owners and occupants of adjoining lands. The outdoor storage of
such vehicles upon residential lands is unsightly. It constitutes an attractive
nuisance to children and a peril to their safety, in case of fire and explosion,
whenever gasoline is left in the fuel tanks of such vehicles. It depreciates
the value of neighboring properties. The preservation of peace and good
order, the supression of vice, the benefit of trade, the preservation of public
health, the protection of property and the prevention and extinguishment
of fires and explosions compel the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Warsaw to legislate upon this subject matter. It is hereby declared that the
adoption of this chapter has for its purpose the effective termination of such
obnoxious practice.
§ 149-2. Outdoor storage restricted. [Amended 11-3-1969]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as owner,
occupant, lessee, agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit or cause
or permit to be stored or deposited an abandoned, junked, discarded or
unlicensed motor vehicle or motor vehicles upon any land or upon the rightof-
way of any public street or highway within the corporate limits of the
Village of Warsaw. Except a bona fide used car dealer or garage may store
Warsaw. Poplars, willows and such other varieties of trees as the village
shall decide undesirable shade trees shall not be planted. Trees that are
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works shall be planted far
enough apart to allow for ample growth.
§ 145-1 WARSAW CODE § 149-2
1:248
such vehicles as may be used in the course of his business upon his own
premises.
§ 149-3. Notice of violation.
If the provisions of the foregoing section are violated, the Village Clerk shall
serve written notice, either personally or by mail, upon the owner, occupant
or person having charge of any such land to comply with the provisions of
this chapter. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:
"To the owner, occupant or person having charge of land known on the
Assessment Map of the Village of Warsaw as Lot(s) _____, Number(s) _____,
Sheet _____, Block _____ or Number _____, Street or Avenue.
"Notice is hereby given that an abandoned, junked, discarded and
unlicensed motor vehicle has been found stored or deposited upon the
above-described property in the Village of Warsaw. This automobile must be
removed within five days from the date of this notice.
"In case you fail or refuse to comply with this notice on or before the
expiration of said five days from the date of this notice, the Village of
Warsaw, acting through its duly authorized agents, servants, officers and
employees, will enter upon your land and remove and cause the same to be
destroyed. The expense incurred by the village will be assessed against the
above-described land and shall constitute a lien thereon and be collected as
provided by law.
"Dated __________
Village Clerk"
§ 149-4. Penalties for offenses.40
Any owner, occupant, lessee, agent or tenant who shall neglect and refuse
to remove said abandoned, junked, discarded and unlicensed motor vehicle,
as directed by this chapter, or who shall fail or refuse to comply with the
provisions of any notice herein provided for or shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or who shall resist or obstruct the duly authorized
agents, servants, officers and employees of the village on the removal and
destruction thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation
pursuant to the Penal Law of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 149-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-4
1:249
Chapter 153
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 90.
Parks — See Ch. 108.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 129.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 149.
§ 149-4 WARSAW CODE § 149-4
1:250
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 153-1. Definitions.
§ 153-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall install and maintain traffic control
devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make
effective the provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate,
warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 153-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas
Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
A. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby
established a system of schedules, appearing as Article VI of this
chapter, in which shall be entered all regulations after adoption. Such
schedules shall be deemed a part of the section to which they refer. All
regulations shall be adopted with reference to the appropriate schedule
as indicated in the various sections of this chapter.
B. Regulations shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees in accordance
with provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic Law, or by
an officer or agency authorized by the Board of Trustees to adopt
regulations pursuant to § 1603 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-3
1:251

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 153-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 153-24), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 153-5. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the village is hereby established at 30 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 153-25) shall be as indicated
in said schedule.
§ 153-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule III (§ 153-26), in the areas described in said Schedule III, during
school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 153-7. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule IV (§ 153-27), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 153-8. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule V (§ 153-28), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 153-9. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 153-29), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-9
1:253

ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 153-10. Application of Article.
The provisions of this Article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 153-11. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule VII (§ 153-30), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 153-12. Parking prohibited certain hours.
§ 153-13. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IX (§ 153-32) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IX of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule IX, attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 153-14. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule X (§ 153-33), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 153-15. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XI
(§ 153-34) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XI, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
A. All-night parking. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all
public highways or streets within the village between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule
VIII (§ 153-31) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule VIII, attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 153-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-16
1:255
§ 153-16. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XII (§ 153-35), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 153-17. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XIII
(§ 153-36) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XIII, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 153-16 WARSAW CODE § 153-17
1:256
ARTICLE III
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 153-18. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 153-19. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this Article, the Warsaw Police
Department may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place
at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle
may redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom stored of the
amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such
removal and storage, such storage charges not to exceed $20 per day or
fraction thereof.
§ 153-20. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Warsaw Police Department to ascertain to the
extent possible the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in
charge and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and
of the amount which will be required to redeem same. Said Warsaw Police
Department shall also without delay report the removal and disposition of
any vehicle removed as provided in this Article to the Village Clerk.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the Warsaw Police
Department.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of the
Warsaw Police Department.
§ 153-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-20
1:257

ARTICLE IV
Public Parking Lots
§ 153-21. Public parking lots established.
Public parking lots are hereby established at the following locations:
§ 153-22. Movement and parking of vehicles in public parking lots.
A. West of North Main Street, at the rear of business buildings between
the alleyway immediately south of West Court Street and West Buffalo
Street, bounded west by the properties on the east side of Perry
Avenue.
B. In the area east of the properties on the east side of North Main Street,
between Genesee and Frank Streets.
A. The Superintendent of Public Works shall cause pavement markings to
be applied, outlining permitted parking spaces in the village public
parking lots; shall install and maintain appropriate signs or markings
designating entrances and exits to public parking lots and traffic lanes
therein; and shall install and maintain appropriate signs and markings
designating those areas wherein parking shall be permitted for a period
of not more than 48 hours.
B. The parking of any vehicle in a public parking lot is hereby prohibited,
unless such vehicle is parked wholly within the lined area of a parking
space.
C. No person shall park a vehicle in a public parking lot between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in those specific areas wherein fortyeight-
hour parking is permitted.
D. No person shall park a vehicle for a period exceeding 48 hours in an
area in a public parking lot wherein forty-eight-hour parking is
permitted.
E. No person shall drive or operate a vehicle in a public parking lot other
than in a designated traffic lane and in the direction designated for
vehicular traffic.
F. The Village Chief of Police shall be responsible for the policing and
supervision of public parking lots.
§ 153-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-22
1:259

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 153-23. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 153-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-23
1:261

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 153-24. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 153-25. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-5, speed limits other than 30
miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Public parking lot 15 —
Village park 15 —
§ 153-26. Schedule III: School Speed Limits.
In accordance with § 153-6, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the
speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below, during school days
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
West Court Street 20 From the westerly curbline of
Perry Avenue to the easterly
curbline of North Maple Street
§ 153-27. Schedule IV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-7, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Prospect
Street
South Left All East Buffalo
Street
§ 153-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-28
1:263
§ 153-28. Schedule V: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-8, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Allen Street West Main Street
Ames Plaza East Main Street
Bishop Street North Buffalo Street
Brad Street South Buffalo Street
Brooklyn Street Both Center Street
Brooklyn Street Both Liberty Street
Brooklyn Street East Main Street
Butternut Street Both North Washington Street
Butternut Street North Grove Street
Butternut Street South Allen Street
Center Street Both Brooklyn Street
Center Street North Buffalo Street
Center Street South Oatka Street
Clinton Street East Perry Avenue
Commerce Way [Added
10-1-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
North Buffalo Road
Cottage Court East Main Street
Court Street East Main Street
Court Street West Main Street
Culver Avenue East Linwood Avenue
Culver Avenue East Main Street
Duncan Street West Main Street
East Court Street East Park Street
Elm Street East Park Street
Elm Street West Main Street
Empire Street East Liberty Street
Fargo Street North Livingston Street
Frank Street East Park Street
Frank Street West Main Street
§ 153-28 WARSAW CODE § 153-28
1:264
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Genesee Street West Main Street
Gordon Terrace East Main Street
Gouinlock Street South Buffalo Street
Grove Street East Prospect Street
Highland Avenue West Main Street
Humphrey Street South Buffalo Street
Industrial North Allen Street
Jackson Street Both Prospect Street
Jackson Street West Butternut Street
Jefferson Street Both Liberty Street
Jefferson Street East Main Street
Keeney Street South Duncan Street
Liberty Street Both Brooklyn Street
Liberty Street Both Jefferson Street
Liberty Street North Buffalo Street
Linwood Avenue Both Purdy Avenue
Linwood Avenue South West Court Street
Livingston Street Both Prospect Street
Livingston Street West Main Street
Maple Street Both Buffalo Street
Maple Street Both West Court Street
Maple Street South Brooklyn Street
Miner Street West Main Street
Mount View Both Summit Avenue
Murray Street East Perry Avenue
North Main Medical
Building parking lot
South Duncan Street
North Street East Main Street
North Street West Linwood Avenue
Oak Street North Buffalo Street
Oak Street South Brooklyn Street
Oatka Street East Main Street
Orchard Street West Center Street
§ 153-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-28
1:265
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Park Street South Frank Street
Park Street South Genesee Street
Perry Avenue North West Court Street
Perry Avenue South Buffalo Street
Private road from
Genesee Community
College Campus,
unemployment office and
apartments
West Route 19 (North Main Street)
Prospect Street Both Buffalo Street
Prospect Street Both Livingston Street
Prospect Street Both North Washington Street
Prospect Street North Genesee Street
Prospect Street South Allen Street
Public parking lot West Perry Avenue
Purdy Avenue Both Linwood Avenue
Purdy Avenue East Main Street
Reid Avenue East Main Street
Reid Avenue West Linwood Avenue
Rochester Street West Main Street
Salina Street West Main Street
Short Street North Buffalo Street
Short Street South Livingston Street
State Street East Park Street
State Street West Main Street
Summit Avenue East Oak Street
Summit Avenue North Buffalo Street
Summit Avenue West Mount View
United Church parking
lot
Both Livingston Street
Village driveway East Linwood Avenue
Washington Street Both Prospect Street
Washington Street West Main Street
West Court Street Both North Maple Street
West Court Street West Wyoming Street
§ 153-28 WARSAW CODE § 153-28
1:266
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Wyoming County
Community Hospital
entrance/exit
Duncan Street
Wyoming County
Community Hospital
entrance/exit
Route 19 (North Main Street)
Wyoming Street North West Buffalo Street (Route
20A)
Wyoming Street North West Court Street
Wyoming Street South West Court Street
§ 153-29. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-9, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Park road Clockwise Entire length
§ 153-30. Schedule VII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-11, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bishop Street East From the north curb of West
Buffalo Street north for 400 feet
Brooklyn Street
[Amended 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Between the westerly curbline of
South Main Street and the
easterly curbline of Oak Street
Center Street
[Amended 5-6-2013 by
L.L. No. 4-2013]
West Between the southerly curbline of
West Buffalo Street, southerly
therefrom until Oatka Street
Cottage Court Street South From the west curb of South Main
Street west for 384 feet
East Buffalo Street Both Between the easterly curbline of
Main Street and the easterly
corporation line of the Village
§ 153-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:267
Name of Street Side Location
East Court Street North Starting at the projected east
curbline on North Main Street
and proceeding 194 feet easterly
to the west edge of the driveway
of 140 North Main Street on East
Court Street
Frank Street North Between the easterly curbline of
North Main Street and a point
227 feet easterly therefrom
Genesee Street North Between the easterly curbline of
North Main Street and a point 37
feet easterly therefrom
Genesee Street South Between the point where the
pavement begins to narrow to the
projected easterly curbline of
Park Street
Industrial Street East Between the southerly curbline of
Allen Street and a point 118 feet
southerly therefrom
Liberty Street East Between the northerly curbline of
Brooklyn Street and a point 35
feet northerly therefrom
Liberty Street [Added
5-21-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007; repealed
10-1-2007 by L.L. No.
3-2007]
Liberty Street East Between the southerly curbline of
West Buffalo Street and a point
258 feet southerly therefrom
Liberty Street
[Amended 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
West Between the southerly curbline of
West Buffalo Street and the
northerly curbline of Jefferson
Street
Linwood Avenue
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
Linwood Avenue [Added
6-6-2011 by L.L. No.
1-2011]
East Between the northerly curbline of
Purdy Avenue and the dead end of
Linwood Avenue
Linwood Avenue West From the northerly curbline of
West Court Street to a point 500
feet northerly therefrom
§ 153-30 WARSAW CODE § 153-30
1:268
Name of Street Side Location
Livingston Street South Between the easterly curbline of
South Main Street and the
westerly curbline of Fargo Street
Murray Street [Added
9-17-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
South From the easterly curbline of
View Street to the westerly
curbline of Perry Avenue
North Street South Between Main Street and
Linwood Avenue
North Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
East From the northerly curbline of
East Buffalo Street to a point 59
feet north therefrom
North Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
East From the southerly curbline of
East Court Street to a point 203
feet south therefrom
North Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
East From the northerly curbline of
East Court Street to the southerly
curbline of Doody Street
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
North Main Street
[Repealed 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001]
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:269
Name of Street Side Location
North Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
West From a point 452 feet north of the
northerly curbline of North Street
to the southerly curbline of
Buffalo Road
North Main Street West Between the north curbline of
West Buffalo Street and a point 38
feet northerly therefrom
North Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
West From the northerly curbline of
West Buffalo Street to a point 58
feet north therefrom
North Main Street West Between the southerly curbline of
West Court Street and a point 123
feet southerly therefrom
North Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
West From the southerly curbline of
West Court Street to a point 258
feet south therefrom
North Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
West From the northerly curbline of
West Court Street to a point 60
feet south of the southerly
curbline of North Street
North Maple Street East Between the northerly curbline of
West Buffalo Street and a point 45
feet northerly therefrom
North Maple Street West From the north curb of West
Buffalo Street to the south curb of
West Court Street
Orchard Street Both Entire length
Park road (southern
entrance)
West From the entrance to a point 215
feet north thereof
Park road (southern
entrance)
West From the entrance to a point 110
feet south thereof
Park road turnaround North Entire length
Prospect Street West Between the northerly curbline of
East Buffalo Street and the
southerly curbline of Genesee
Street and on the east side of
Prospect Street from the
northerly curbline of East Buffalo
Street and a point 51 feet
northerly therefrom
§ 153-30 WARSAW CODE § 153-30
1:270
Name of Street Side Location
Rochester Street North From the easterly curbline of
North Main Street extending
easterly a distance of 735 feet
Rochester Street South From the easterly curbline of
North Main Street extending east
a distance of 50 feet
Short Street West Between the southerly curbline of
East Buffalo Street and the
northerly curbline of Livingston
Street
South Main Street East Between a point 125 feet north of
Allen Street and the north
curbline of Allen Street
South Main Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001;
amended 2-6-2006 by
L.L. No. 1-2006]
East Between the southerly curbline of
East Buffalo Street and a point 52
feet southerly therefrom
South Main Street East Between the easterly curbline of
East Buffalo Street and a point 66
feet southerly therefrom
South Main Street
[Added 2-6-2006 by
L.L. No. 1-2006]
East Between the northerly curbline of
Livingston Street and a point 87
feet northerly therefrom
South Main Street East At the north curbline of
Washington Street and
proceeding north 394 feet to the
south corner of the Main Street
bridge
South Main Street West Between the northerly curbline of
Brooklyn Street and a point 39
feet northerly therefrom
South Main Street West Between a point 25 feet south of
the center line of Cottage Court
and a point 25 feet north of the
center of Cottage Court
South Main Street West Between a point 60 feet north of
the center line of Jefferson Street
and a point 60 feet south of said
center line of Jefferson Street
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:271
Name of Street Side Location
South Main Street
[Amended 9-17-2001
by L.L. No. 1-2001;
repealed 4-1-2013 by
L.L. No. 3-2013]
South Maple Street West From the south curb of West
Buffalo Street to the north curb of
Brooklyn Street
State Street North Between the easterly curbline of
North Main Street and a point
188 feet easterly therefrom
State Street [Added
5-21-2007 by L.L. No.
2-2007]
South From the easterly curbline of
North Main Street extending east
a distance of 60 feet
West Buffalo Street North Between the projected easterly
curbline of Center Street and the
westerly corporation line of the
village
West Buffalo Street North Between a point 84 feet easterly
of the center line of the driveway
between Kemp's Service Station
and Wallace's Service Station and
a point 45 1/2 feet westerly of the
center line of said driveway
West Buffalo Street North Between the westerly curbline of
North Main Street and a point 41
feet westerly therefrom
West Buffalo Street North Between the easterly curbline of
Perry Avenue and a point 100 feet
easterly therefrom
West Buffalo Street North Between the westerly curbline of
Perry Avenue and a point 49 1/2
feet westerly therefrom
West Buffalo Street North Between the Sunoco Service
Station driveway and a point 25
feet east of the driveway
West Buffalo Street South Between the westerly curbline of
Center Street and the projected
easterly curbline of Wyoming
Street
§ 153-30 WARSAW CODE § 153-30
1:272
Name of Street Side Location
West Buffalo Street South Between a point 32 feet easterly
of the projected easterly curbline
of Perry Avenue and a point 92
feet westerly therefrom
West Buffalo Street South Between the westerly curbline of
South Main Street and a point 60
feet westerly therefrom
West Court Street North From the easterly curbline of
Linwood Avenue to a point 50 feet
easterly therefrom
West Court Street North From the westerly curbline of
Linwood Avenue to point 100 feet
westerly therefrom
West Court Street South Between the west curbline of
North Main Street and a point
116 feet westerly therefrom
West Court Street South From the easterly curbline of
Perry Avenue to a point 50 feet
easterly therefrom
West Court Street South From the westerly curbline of
Perry Avenue to a point 500 feet
westerly therefrom
Wyoming Street East Between the northerly curbline of
West Buffalo Street and a point
435 feet northerly therefrom
Wyoming Street West Between the north curbline of
West Buffalo Street and the south
curbline of West Court Street
§ 153-31. Schedule VIII: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-12, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-31
1:273
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Clinton Street
[Added 5-6-2013
by L.L. No.
4-2013]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ except
Sundays and
holidays
From the corner of
Perry Avenue westerly
143 feet to the easterly
edge of the first private
residential driveway
situated on SBL No.
85.7-2-64
Clinton Street
[Added 5-6-2013
by L.L. No.
4-2013]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ except
Sundays and
holidays
From the corner of
Perry Avenue westerly
120 feet to the easterly
edge of Zeches parking
lot situated on SBL No.
85.7-2-68
Cottage Street North 2:00 a.m. 11:00
a.m./ November
1 to April 30
Entire length
East Buffalo Street — 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Parking lot adjacent to
Village of Warsaw Fire
Hall
South Main Street West 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Between a point 25 feet
north of the center line
of Cottage Court and a
point 277 feet north of
said center line of
Cottage Court
West Court Street
[Added 4-5-2004
by L.L. No. 1-2004;
repealed
10-17-2011 by L.L.
No. 2-2011]
§ 153-32. Schedule IX: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-13, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 153-31 WARSAW CODE § 153-32
1:274
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Brooklyn Street South 2 hrs. Between the westerly
curbline of South Main
Street and the easterly
curbline of Liberty
Street
Center Street East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
Between the south side
of West Buffalo Street
and the north side of
Brooklyn Street
East Court Street South 1 hr. From 64 feet from the
easterly curbline of
North Main Street
proceeding easterly for
98 feet
Genesee Street North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
East curbline of North
Main Street proceeding
209 feet easterly to the
curbline where the
pavement narrows on
Genesee Street
Genesee Street South 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
East curbline of North
Main Street proceeding
easterly 189 feet to the
curbline of the eastern
driveway of No. 20
Genesee Street
Liberty Street
[Added 10-1-2007
by L.L. No.
3-2007]
East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
From the southerly
curbline of Brooklyn
Street to the northerly
curbline of Jefferson
Street
Liberty Street East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 258 feet
southerly from the
south curb of West
Buffalo Street to 35
feet from the northerly
curbline of Brooklyn
Street
§ 153-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-32
1:275
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Main Street West 15 mins.; 4:00
p.m. to 10:00
p.m./everyday
South curbline of
Anthony Place
proceeding 60 feet
southerly to the north
curbline of the
driveway of the Baptist
Church
Main Street West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
South curbline of
Livingston Street and
proceeding southerly
430 feet to the
projected north corner
of the Main Street
bridge
North Main Street East 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
85 feet from the south
curbline of East Court
Street proceeding
southerly 816 feet to
the north curbline of
East Buffalo Street
North Main Street West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
85 feet from the south
curbline of West Court
Street Court Street
proceeding southerly
778 feet to 38 feet from
the north curbline of
West Buffalo Street
North Maple Street East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
Between the north
curbline of West
Buffalo Street and the
south curbline of West
Court Street
South Main Street
[Amended
2-6-2006 by L.L.
No. 1-2006]
East 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
52 feet from the
southerly curbline of
East Buffalo Street
proceeding southerly
130 feet
South Main Street West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
North property line of
the Baptist Church
southerly 201 feet
§ 153-32 WARSAW CODE § 153-32
1:276
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
South Main Street West 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
From the north
property line of the
Baptist Church
southerly for a distance
of 201 feet
South Main Street
[Repealed
4-1-2013 by L.L.
No. 3-2013]
South Main Street
[Added 4-1-2013
by L.L. No.
3-2013]
West 15 mins.; 8:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./except
Sunday
From the south
curbline of West
Buffalo Street to the
south property line of
SBL No. 85.7-5-22
South Maple Street East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
Between the south
curbline of West
Buffalo Street and the
north curbline of
Brooklyn Street
West Buffalo Street North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
41 feet from the west
curbline of North Main
Street proceeding
westerly 208 1/4 feet to
19 1/2 feet from the
east curbline of the
east driveway of No. 35
West Buffalo Street
West Buffalo Street South 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m./except
Sundays and
holidays
60 feet from the west
curbline of South Main
Street proceeding
westerly 400 feet to the
east curbline of the
east driveway to Nos.
84-100 West Buffalo
Street
West Court Street
[Added
10-17-2011 by L.L.
No. 2-2011]
North 2 hrs; 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m./school days
From 100 feet west of
the westerly curbline of
Linwood Avenue to a
point 650 feet east of
the easterly curbline of
North Maple Street
§ 153-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-33
1:277
§ 153-33. Schedule X: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-14, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Linwood Avenue [Added
9-17-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
East From the northerly curbline of
West Court Street to the southerly
curbline of Purdy Avenue
Park road (northern
entrance)
South From a point 10 feet west of the
entrance west a distance of 375
feet
Perry Avenue [Added
9-17-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
East From the north curbline of West
Buffalo Street to the south
curbline of West Court Street
South Main Street West From the north curbline of
Brooklyn Street to a point 75 feet
north therefrom
West Court Street
[Added 9-17-2001 by
L.L. No. 1-2001]
North From the west curbline of
Linwood Avenue to a point 100
feet west therefrom
§ 153-34. Schedule XI: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-15, no person shall stand a
vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
West Court Street Both School days/
7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From the easterly
curbline of North
Maple Street for a
distance of 650 feet
east
§ 153-35. Schedule XII: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-16, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 153-33 WARSAW CODE § 153-36
1:278
§ 153-36. Schedule XIII: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 153-17, no person shall stop a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 153-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-36
1:279
Chapter 157
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 78.
Junkyards — See Ch. 96.
Sewers — See Ch. 123.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 129.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 133.
Zoning — See Ch. 163.
§ 153-36 WARSAW CODE § 153-36
1:280
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Definitions
§ 157-1. Purpose.
In order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the Village of Warsaw and for the purpose of protecting the environment,
the potable water supply sources, watercourses, tributaries and/or water
reservoirs and to ensure that the users of the potable water system fairly
and reasonably share the cost of the Village of Warsaw water delivery
system, the rules and regulations contained in this chapter have been
adopted by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of Warsaw.
§ 157-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR-GAP SEPARATION — A physical break between the supply pipe and
receiving vessel. The air gap must be at double the diameter of the supply
pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel and in no case less
than one inch.
APPROVED CHECK VALVE — A check valve that seats readily and
completely. It must be machined to have free-moving parts and be
watertight. The face of the closure element and valve seat must be of bronze
or other noncorrodible material which will seal tightly. Pins and bushings
must be bronze or other noncorrodible, nonsticking material machined
for easy, dependable operation. The closure element (clapper) must be
internally weighted or otherwise equipped to promote rapid and positive
closure in all sizes.
APPROVED DOUBLE-CHECK-VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of at least
two independently acting check valves which include tightly closing shutoff
valves on each side of the check valve assembly, suitable leak detector
drains and connections available for testing the water-tightness of each
check valve. This device must be approved as a complete assembly.
APPROVED REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION
DEVICE — A device incorporating two or more check valves, an
automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two
checks, two shutoff valves and the necessary appurtenances for testing. The
device must prevent the pressure in the zone between the two check valves
from exceeding the pressure on the public water supply side of the device.
At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between check valves must be
less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve must operate to maintain this reduced pressure by
discharging to the atmosphere thereby providing an air gap in the device.
These devices must be readily accessible for maintenance and testing and
installed in a location where no part of the valve will be submerged. The
enclosure must drain such that the water vented by the relief valve will
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-2
1:281
be ejected without submergence of the relief valve. This device must be
approved as a complete assembly.
AUXILIARY SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the premises,
other than the water supply.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE TESTER — A person who is
certified annually by the State of New York for testing backflow prevention
devices. He shall be provided with an appropriate identification card.
CHLORIDE SALT — Solid compounds or solutions of potassium chloride
(commonly used as fertilizer), calcium chloride (commonly used for winter
road maintenance) or sodium chloride (commonly used for water softener
regeneration).
CONSUMER — Any user of water or any owner of property serviced by the
village water system.
CROSS-CONNECTIONS — Any unprotected connection between any part
of a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes
and any source or system containing water or a substance that is not or
cannot be approved as equally safe, wholesome and potable for human
consumption.
HUMAN EXCRETA — Human feces and urine.
JUNKYARD — An area where inoperable equipment or motor vehicles are
being accumulated for purposes of disposal, sale of used parts or
reclamation of materials, such as metal, glass or fabric.
LINEAR DISTANCE — The shortest horizontal distance from the nearest
point of a structure or object to the high-water mark of a reservoir or to
the edge, margin or steep bank forming the ordinary high-water line of a
watercourse.
POLLUTANT — Dredge, spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Any material in any form that emits radiation
spontaneously. "Radiation" is ionizing radiation, any alpha particle, beta
particle, gamma ray, X-ray, neutron, high-speed proton and any other atomic
particle producing ionization, but not any sound or radio wave or visible,
infrared or ultraviolet light.
REFUSE — All solid wastes, including garbage, manure, rubbish, ashes,
incinerator residue, street cleanings, dead animals, offal and solid
commercial and industrial wastes.
REFUSE DISPOSAL AREA — Land used for the deposit of refuse, except
refuse from a single family, a member of which is the owner, occupant or
lessee of said land, or any part of a farm on which only animal wastes
resulting from the operation of such farm are deposited.
§ 157-2 WARSAW CODE § 157-2
1:282
SEWAGE — Any liquid or solid waste matter from a domestic, commercial,
private or industrial establishment which is normally carried off in sewer or
waste pipes.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system used for disposing of sewage.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of
Warsaw or any village employee authorized to act in his place.
TOXIC CHEMICAL — Any compound or substance which is harmful or
poisonous to humans, including but not limited to gasoline, kerosene, fuel
oil or diesel oil.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any treatment plant, sewer, disposal field, lagoon,
pumping station, septic system, constructed drainage ditch, surface water
intercepting ditch, incinerator, area devoted to sanitary landfill or other
works not specifically mentioned in this definition installed for the purpose
of treating, neutralizing, stabilizing or disposing of sewage.
VILLAGE — The Village of Warsaw, County of Wyoming, State of New York,
acting through its Board of Trustees.
WATERCOURSE — Every spring, stream, marsh or channel of water of any
kind which flows or may flow into the village water supply.
WATERSHED — The entire drainage area contributing water to the village
water supply.
WATER SOURCE — Any reservoir, creek, stream, river tributary or any
other source supplying water to the village water system.
WATER SUPERVISOR — The consumer or a person on the premises having
complete knowledge and understanding of the water supply piping within
the premises and responsible for maintaining the consumer's water system
free from cross-connections and other unsanitary defects.
WATER SUPPLY — The public water supply of the Village of Warsaw
approved by the New York State Health Department.
§ 157-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-2
1:283

ARTICLE II
Water Use Regulations
§ 157-3. Establishment of rules; compliance required.
The following rules and regulations are established by the village. These
rules and regulations constitute the terms of a contract between the
consumer and the village. The consumer must strictly comply with said
rules and regulations.
§ 157-4. Application for service; installation to be approved.
Consumers desiring water from the village must make a written application
to the Village Clerk stating the intended use of water. The application must
be signed by the consumer or his duly authorized agent. Once a permit is
issued, the consumer must employ installers who are registered with the
village. Water will be turned on only after installation is approved by the
Superintendent and all expenses and water rates have been paid.
§ 157-5. Expenses; maintenance of service.
§ 157-6. Determination of equipment; installation.
The village or the Superintendent will determine the size of the taps to be
inserted in any water main; the form and size of the curb box to be used;
the type of corporation stop; and the type of curb stop. The tap, equipment
and line from the main to the curb must be installed by the village and will
remain the property of the village; however, the cost of installation will be
that of the consumer. The insertion of taps, tees and connections in any
water main must only be completed by the Superintendent.
§ 157-7. Placement of curb and street boxes.
Curb boxes and street boxes must be neatly cut off and the top of the box
must be even with the surface of the material in which it is placed.
§ 157-8. Distance of service below the surface.
The service must be installed at least four feet below the surface, unless the
Superintendent grants written authorization to vary from this requirement.
A. The consumer must pay all expenses involved with the flow of water
from the curb box to a use outlet to include the installation of the water
meter and any new or discontinued service. The consumer need not pay
for the cost of the water meter [unless it is larger than 3/4 inches] and
once installed it remains the property of the village.
B. The consumer must maintain the water service in a satisfactory and
sufficient condition. The service may be inspected at any time by the
Superintendent, who may shut off the water supply after notice if the
consumer fails to comply with this section.
§ 157-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-9
1:285
§ 157-9. Distance from sewer lines.
All new water lines must be installed at least 10 feet from sewer lines
(public or private), unless the Superintendent grants written authorization
to vary from this requirement.
§ 157-10. Service lines.
Service lines must be K-Copper and at least 3/4 inch inside diameter and
approved by the Superintendent. All piping must include a corporation cock
at the main and a service cock and extension service box between the walk
and curblines. The line must be inspected by the Superintendent before it is
covered. A stop- and waste cock must be located inside the basement wall
where the service pipe enters.
§ 157-11. Initiation of service; permit required.
Water service may be initiated only after the work is completed in
accordance with the rules and regulations set forth herein. No water may
flow to the premises without the permit from the Village Clerk, and upon
completion of installation, the installer must close the curb cock until said
permit is received. If a permit has already been issued and the water is in
use, the installer may leave the curb cock open and the consumer will be
charged for any additional use from the date of application.
§ 157-12. Interruption of service.
§ 157-13. Shared service.
Water may not be supplied to two or more buildings from a single tap except
with the approval of the Superintendent.
§ 157-14. Equipment inspection; waste.
The Superintendent may enter the premises of any consumer at any
reasonable time to examine and inspect the water meter, the pipes, fixtures,
A. The village will use reasonable care to maintain a constant supply of
pure water for consumers but reserves the right at such times as it
deems necessary to interrupt the flow of water to consumers for
maintenance, repairs, new installations or emergencies. The village will
not be liable to consumers for:
(1) Any deficiency or failure of the supply of water;
(2) The bursting of any mains, pipes or service pipes; or
(3) Any emergency or accident at the water treatment facility.
B. When practical, the village will give notice of any interruption of service
to the consumer. No adjustment to the water bill may be made in
consequence of anything contained in this section.
§ 157-9 WARSAW CODE § 157-14
1:286
outlets, the quantity of water used and the manner of its use. In case
of fraud or waste of water by the consumer, all payments made will be
forfeited and the water service terminated.
§ 157-15. Leaks.
If leaks occur in the service lines between the curb box and the meter, the
Village Clerk and the Superintendent will estimate the amount of water lost
and charge the consumer.
§ 157-16. Discontinuance of service; resumption.
A consumer wishing to discontinue service must give written notice thereof
to the Village Clerk. Whenever water has been turned off by the village for
nonpayment or a violation of any rule or regulation, it may not be turned on
again until the party in default has paid all amounts due.
§ 157-17. Use of unmetered water by contractors.
No contractor may take unmetered water until obtaining a permit from
the Village Clerk. The contractor will be billed in accordance with § 157-22
below.
§ 157-18. Tampering with fire hydrants, valves and mains.
No person may open any fire plug or hydrant nor draw water therefrom
except by permission of the Superintendent; except that the Warsaw Fire
Department and its members are authorized to use the hydrants for the
purpose of extinguishing fires and cleaning and testing its engines and
equipment under the supervision and direction of the Chief or the Assistant
Chiefs of the Fire Department. Tampering with valves and gates in the
street mains is prohibited.
§ 157-19. Meters.
A. The consumer will pay for all metered water. All water meters 3/4 inch
or smaller will be supplied by and remain the property of the village. All
water must flow through a water meter except as set forth above in
§§ 157-17 and 157-18.
B. All new installations must have pressure regulators installed before the
meter.
C. The cost of any damage sustained by water meters will be paid by the
consumer and will be added to the water bill.
D. If a water meter fails to work properly, the consumer will be charged an
amount equal to the annual consumption when the meter was working
properly.
E. No meter may be removed or disturbed without permission of the
Superintendent.
§ 157-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-19
1:287
§ 157-20. Protection of water lines from freezing; thawing water
lines.
§ 157-21. Water emergencies.
The village may declare a water emergency during which the
Superintendent may prohibit or limit the use of water by consumers.
§ 157-22. Water rates.
F. Meters may be tested upon request. If any meter so tested is found to
be registering correctly, running slowly or no more than 2% too fast, the
expense of testing will be paid by the consumer. The cost will be
determined by the village in accordance with § 157-22 below. The
Superintendent may at any reasonable time and at the expense of the
village remove and/or test the water meter for the purpose of
determining its accuracy.
A. Where service lines are not at a sufficient depth to prevent freezing, the
Superintendent may require the consumer to lower the service. Upon
failure to do so, the village may discontinue the service.
B. The consumer must receive permission from the Superintendent before
attempting to thaw a frozen service. The Superintendent will uncover
the curb box and insert a street key for the welder connection. An
attempt will be made to thaw the service line between the curb box and
the water main. If successful, the cost will be paid by the village. If
service is frozen between the curb box and the outlet, the consumer will
pay the cost. The consumer may be required by the village to keep the
water running to prevent further freezing. In that event an equitable
adjustment of the water bill will be made by the village.
A. The village will establish rates and charges for consumer use of water
services and equipment. Rates and charges may differ for use outside
the village limits. The rates and charges may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the village and may include but are not limited to:
meter rates; minimum rates; flat rates; bulk rates; water meters; meter
testing, installations; late charges; discontinuance of service;
maintenance; repairs; thawing; and penalties as set forth elsewhere in
this Article.
B. Water usage will be billed quarterly or at such other time as determined
by resolution of the village.
C. No consumer may claim any credit towards a water bill unless granted
by resolution of the village.
D. All rates and charges are due and payable at the office of the Village
Clerk within 30 days of the date of the quarterly bill. If a quarterly bill is
not received, the consumer must inquire with the Village Clerk. The
absence of a bill does not excuse quarterly payment of water rates. If
§ 157-19 WARSAW CODE § 157-22
1:288
§ 157-23. Fire sprinkler systems.
There will be no charge for water service used exclusively for automatic fire
suppression systems. The consumer must maintain the service pipes and
system in its entirety from the street main into the premises serviced.
§ 157-24. Tampering with system prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to interfere
with, tamper with or adversely affect water, its supply, the headwaters,
watershed or any part of the village water system. Water may not be
taken from any hydrant or any source, except as otherwise specified in this
Article.
§ 157-25. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of the rules and regulations contained in this Article is
punishable by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
the bill is not paid when due, a penalty of 10% will be added to the
bill. If it is not paid within 60 days, the service may be terminated until
the bill is paid in full. An additional service charge must be paid to
resume the water service. All charges for materials furnished or work
completed by the village in connection with the water service will be
billed as water charges.
E. All charges, rates, penalties, service charges and fines described in this
Article will become a lien upon the real property serviced until paid. If
said sums are not paid when demanded, water service may be
terminated and a reconnection charge imposed for resumption of
service. The Village Clerk will maintain records of nonpayment, and any
person may receive a certificate indicating the status of payment of
water bills affecting any particular premises serviced by the village
water system. A conveyance of real property subject to an unpaid water
bill will result in the new owner being responsible for all amounts due.
Nothing herein contained will prevent the village from using any other
means of collecting unpaid water charges. The village may assess said
amount against the property, together with the annual village tax, and
may collect it with the village tax in the same manner as any other local
assessment.
§ 157-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-25
1:289

ARTICLE III
Water Supply Protection
§ 157-26. Cross-connections.
No consumer may install or maintain any cross-connection from any
auxiliary supply. If such cross-connection exists, service will be terminated
to prevent contamination of the water supply. The consumer must
disconnect the auxiliary supply before resuming water service from the
village water system. Where required by the New York State Department
of Health Sanitary Code or by the Superintendent, a backflow prevention
device of a type currently approved by the New York State Department of
Health must be installed.
§ 157-27. Inspection of protection devices.
On any premises where a backflow prevention device exists, the consumer
must conduct an inspection of said device at least annually and at any
time directed by the Superintendent. The consumer must pay the cost
of installation, repair or replacement. Testing must be performed by a
registered installer, and all test results must be provided to the
Superintendent within 72 hours of the test. Records of such tests, repairs or
replacements must be kept and made available to the Superintendent and
the Wyoming County Health Department.
§ 157-28. Separate drinking water systems.
The Superintendent may order the installation of separate drinking water
systems at points convenient for consumers.
§ 157-29. Fire systems.
Water for fighting fire obtained from an auxiliary supply must be kept
separate from drinking water pipelines and equipment. When water is used
for both drinking and fire-fighting purposes, approved backflow prevention
devices must be installed to protect such individual drinking waterlines
as are not used for fire-fighting purposes. Any auxiliary supply which is
so connected that it may be introduced into potable water piping during
an emergency must be equipped with an approved automatic chlorination
machine. The person causing the introduction of said unapproved or unsafe
water into the pipelines must develop and execute a procedure to notify
and protect users of the water system during the emergency and must take
special precautions to thoroughly disinfect and flush out all pipelines which
may become contaminated before they are again used to furnish drinking
water.
§ 157-30. Process water.
Potable water pipelines connected to equipment for industrial processes
or operations must be protected by a suitable backflow prevention device
located beyond the last point from which drinking water may be taken,
§ 157-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-30
1:291
which device must be provided on the feed line to process piping or
equipment. In the event that the particular process liquid is especially
corrosive or apt to prevent reliable action of the backflow prevention device,
air-gap separation must be provided.
§ 157-31. Sewage treatment plants and pumping stations.
Sewage pumps must not have priming connections directly off any drinking
water systems. No connections may exist between the drinking water
system and any other piping, equipment or tank in any sewage treatment
plant or sewage pumping station.
§ 157-32. Non-potable-water lines.
Where premises contain more than one water system (either village or
private), the exposed portions of pipelines must be painted, banded or
marked at sufficient intervals to distinguish clearly which water is safe
and which is not. All outlets must be properly marked as being unsafe or
safe for drinking purposes. A water supervisor must be designated who
will be responsible for the installation and use of pipelines and equipment
and for the avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination
or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on
the premises, the Superintendent and Wyoming County Health Department
must be promptly notified.
§ 157-33. Compliance required.
No water service may be installed or maintained unless the water supply is
protected as required by state regulations and this Article.
§ 157-34. Discontinuance of service.
Service to any premises may be terminated if a backflow prevention device
required by this Article is not installed, tested and maintained; if any defect
is found in an installed backflow prevention device; if a backflow prevention
device has been removed or bypassed; or, if unprotected cross-connections
exist on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or
defects are corrected.
§ 157-30 WARSAW CODE § 157-34
1:292
ARTICLE IV
Watershed Protection
§ 157-35. Applicability.
The rules and regulations herein set forth apply to the water source defined
in Article I and any other water supply source which now or hereafter may
discharge into the water source for the village water system.
§ 157-36. General prohibitions.
No individual, corporation, business entity or state political subdivision
may perform any act or grant any permit or approval resulting in the
contravention of the standards for raw water quality as contained in the
Public Health Law and the Rules and Regulations of the State of New York
and the New York State Health Department.
§ 157-37. Specific prohibitions.
A. No interment of a human body may be made within a linear distance of
250 feet of the water source.
B. No chloride salt may be stored within a linear distance of 500 feet of the
water source, except in weatherproof buildings or watertight vessels.
C. No herbicides or pesticides may be stored, discharged, applied or
allowed to enter the water source unless a permit to do so has been
obtained from the appropriate state agency having jurisdiction.
D. Human excreta and sewage.
(1) No human excreta or sewage may be deposited or allowed to
escape into the water source or spread upon the surface of the
ground at any point in the watershed.
(2) No human excreta or sewage may be buried in the soil in the
watershed unless deposited in trenches or pits at a linear distance
of not less than 250 feet from the water source and covered with
not less than one foot of soil in such a manner as to prevent its
being washed into the water source by rain or melting snow.
(3) No privy, receptacle or facility for the deposit, movement,
treatment or storage of human excreta or sewage may be
constructed, placed, maintained or allowed to remain within a
linear distance of 50 feet of the water source, except:
(a) Watertight receptacles.
(b) Water-flushed toilets connected by a watertight pipe to a
sewage disposal system approved by the appropriate state
agency having jurisdiction over such facility.
§ 157-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-37
1:293
§ 157-38. Penalties for offenses.
The violation of any rule or regulation contained in this Article is a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, is punishable by a fine not
exceeding $200 or imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, in
accordance with § 1103 of the Public Health Law of the State of New York.
(4) No portion of the seepage unit (tile field, seepage pit or equivalent)
of a subsurface sewage disposal system may be constructed, placed
or allowed to remain within a linear distance of 50 feet of the water
source.
(5) Every watertight receptacle used for containing human excreta or
sewage must be emptied when the receptacle is filled to within six
inches of the top. In emptying a watertight receptacle or in
transferring its contents to a transportable receptacle, all
necessary care must be exercised to prevent contamination of the
water source. All such transportable receptacles must be provided
with tightly-fitting covers which are securely fastened when
transporting wastes to the place of ultimate disposal. The contents
of the watertight receptacles must be disposed of in accordance
with Subsection D(1), (2) and (3) or at a properly designed,
constructed and operated sewage disposal system that has been
approved by the appropriate state agency having jurisdiction over
such facility.
(6) Before any existing sewage disposal system is altered or any new
sewage disposal system is constructed in the watershed, the plans
in relation thereto must have been first approved by the
appropriate state agency having jurisdiction over such facility.
E. No radioactive material may be disposed of by burial in the soil in the
watershed.
F. Boating, bathing and swimming are prohibited in the water source. No
fishing or hiking is allowed within 1,000 feet of the water supply
intakes.
G. No junkyards or refuse disposal areas may be maintained within 250
feet of the water source.
H. No toxic chemicals may be maintained or stored within the watershed.
§ 157-37 WARSAW CODE § 157-38
1:294
Chapter 163
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult bookstores, cabarets and
theaters — See Ch. 36.
Carnivals, circuses and traveling shows — See
Ch. 56.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention and building
construction — See Ch. 78.
Garbage and refuse — See Ch. 90.
Junkyards — See Ch. 96.
Sewers — See Ch. 123.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 133.
Tourist and mobile home parks — See Ch.
141.
Water — See Ch. 157.
§ 157-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-38
1:295

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 163-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Village of Warsaw."
§ 163-2. Purpose.
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of
the people of the Village of Warsaw, this chapter is adopted pursuant to
Article 7 of the Village Law of the State of New York. Its purpose is to
regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of buildings
and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size
of yards, courts and other open space; the density of population and the
location and use of buildings, structures and land for business, industry,
agriculture, residence or other purposes. Such Zoning Law and the Zoning
Map, which is a part of said Zoning Law, are designed to lessen congestion
in the streets; to secure safety from fire and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to provide for solar access and the implementation
of solar energy systems; to prevent the overcrowding of land and to avoid
undue concentration of population; to facilitate the efficient and adequate
provision of public facilities and services; and to provide the maximum
protection to residential areas from the encroachment of adverse
environmental influences. Such Zoning Law and Zoning Map were enacted
after reasonable consideration, among other things, as to the character
of the village and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve
property values and natural resources and to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the village.
§ 163-3. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum standards and requirements for the protection
of the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 163-4. Higher standards to prevail.
Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances
or laws, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall
govern.
§ 163-5. Compliance with SEQR required.
Prior to any action by a municipal board or official on any application
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the village shall
satisfy the requirements of the State Environmental Quality Review (SEQR)
regulations.
§ 163-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-6
1:297
§ 163-6. Amendments.
A. Procedure. The Village Board may, from time to time, on its own motion,
on petition or on recommendation of the Planning Board and in
accordance with the laws of the State of New York, amend, supplement
or repeal the regulations, provisions or district boundaries of this
chapter.
B. Filing of petition. A petition to amend, change or supplement the text of
this chapter or any zoning district as designated on the Zoning Map
established herein shall be filed with the Village Clerk and shall be
transmitted by the Clerk to the Village Board. A petition for a change to
the Zoning Map shall contain a map which clearly describes the
affected property and its boundaries and shall indicate the existing
zoning district and the requested zoning change. In addition, every
petition for an amendment to this chapter shall contain an
environmental assessment form completed and signed by the petitioner
or agent in accordance with the procedures set forth in State
Environmental Quality Review (SEQR) regulations.
C. Referral to Planning Board. Each proposed amendment, except those
initiated by the Planning Board, shall be referred to the Planning Board
for an advisory report. In reporting to the Village Board, the Planning
Board shall fully state its reasons for recommending or opposing the
adoption of such proposed amendment. The Planning Board may
condition its approval, as may be appropriate, and shall state whether
such amendment is in harmony with the village's Comprehensive Plan.
The Planning Board shall state its position relative to proposed zoning
amendments, in writing, within 45 days of its referral from the Village
Board. Absence of a reply from the Planning Board within the forty-fiveday
period shall indicate that the Board is in favor of the proposed
amendment.
D. Public hearing; notice; recording of actions. Unless otherwise provided,
the provisions of the Village Law of the State of New York pertaining to
public hearings, official notices and proper recording of zoning actions
taken by the Village Board shall apply to all proposed amendments to
this chapter.
E. Disposition final; rehearing on petition. The disposition of a petition for
amendment by the Village Board shall be final, and disapproval or
denial of the proposed amendment shall void the petition. No new
petition for an amendment which has been previously denied by the
Village Board shall be considered by it, except for a vote to table or to
receive and file, and no public hearing shall be held on such amendment
within a period of one year from the date of such previous denial unless
the Planning Board shall submit a recommendation, with reasons stated
therefor, certifying that there have been substantial changes in the
situation which would merit a rehearing by the Village Board. Such
rehearing may be granted only upon a favorable vote by not less than
four members of the Village Board.
§ 163-6 WARSAW CODE § 163-7
1:298
§ 163-7. Annexation.
The zoning of lands annexed into the village subsequent to the adoption of
this chapter shall follow the procedures for amendments specified in § 163-6
above. The process for establishing zoning for lands to be annexed into the
village shall be coordinated with the annexation process.
§ 163-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-7
1:299

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 163-8. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall
be defined as follows:
§ 163-9. Administrative agencies defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall refer to the following
administrative agencies:
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of
Warsaw.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official designated by the Village
Board of the Village of Warsaw to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code in the
village.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the County of
Wyoming.
A. All words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. All words in the plural number include the singular number, and all
words in the singular number include the plural number, except as to
the number of permitted structures, unless the natural construction of
the wording indicates otherwise.
C. The word "person" includes an association, partnership or corporation.
D. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally
along the ground.
E. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
F. "Lot" includes the words "plot," "parcel," "tract" or "site."
G. The word "premises" includes a lot and all buildings or structures
thereon.
H. "To erect," "to construct" and "to build" a building or structure each
have the same meaning and also include "to excavate" for a building
and "to relocate" a building by moving it from one location to another.
I. "Used" shall be deemed also to include "designated, intended or
arranged to be used or occupied."
J. "Shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; "may" is permissive.
K. "He" shall include the feminine gender "she" as well.
§ 163-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-9
1:301
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Wyoming County Department of Health
and any other health board or department established pursuant to the laws
of the State of New York and having authority for the regulation of matters
pertaining to the public health of the village.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of Warsaw.
VILLAGE BOARD — The Village Board of the Village of Warsaw.
§ 163-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY — The term applied to a building, structure or use which is
customarily incidental and subordinate to and serves a principal building
or principal use; is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal
building or principal use served; contributes to the comfort, convenience
or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use; and is
located on the same parcel as the principal building or principal use.
ACTION — Any project or physical activity, such as construction or other
activity that may affect the environment by changing the use, appearance
or condition of any natural resource or structure, that requires a permit or
approval from any board or official of the Village of Warsaw.
ADULT BOOKSTORES, CABARETS AND THEATERS — See definitions
included in Chapter 36, Adult Bookstores, Cabarets and Theaters.
AGRICULTURAL OR FARMING ACTIVITIES — The use of the land for
agricultural purposes, including truck farms or nurseries, greenhouses,
horticulture, viticulture and apiaries; and the raising or breeding of animals,
swine or poultry; riding academies; livery or boarding stables; and the
necessary accessory uses for storage; provided, however, that the operation
of any such accessory use shall be incidental to that of the principal
agricultural activities.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, the change or
rearrangement in the supporting members of a building or structure, such
as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or in the exit facilities; an
enlargement of a building or structure, whether by extending on a side or
by increasing in height; the moving from one location or position to another;
any alteration whereby a structure is adapted to another or different use.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building arranged, intended or designed to
include three independent dwelling units, but having common hallways and
entrances.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
§ 163-9 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:302
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain subject
to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area
may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1 through 30, A99, V, VO, VE
or V1 through 30. It is also commonly referred to as the "base floodplain" or
"one-hundred-year floodplain."
ARTISAN/CRAFTSMAN FACILITY — An establishment where raw materials
are refined, milled or processed into finish grade for sale on premises and
offered into a general stream of commerce.[Added 4-20-2015 by L.L. No.
1-2015]
AWNING — A rooflike shelter, made of fabric and which may be retractable,
that extends over a doorway, window or the facade of a building in order
to provide protection, as from the sun or weather. Regulations governing
awnings are included in Article XIII.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) at any point on the periphery of the building. For purposes of
this chapter, "basement" has the same definition as "cellar."
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A dwelling within which
overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests
for compensation. For purposes of this chapter, "bed-and-breakfast
establishments" shall include tourist homes.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
BUFFER AREA — A continuous strip of land area covered with grass,
vegetation, trees, fencing, embankments or berms not less than 10 feet in
depth and not less than six feet in height, densely planted and designed to
provide a physical screen preventing visual access from one use to another
and to reduce the escape and/or intrusion of litter, fumes, dust, noise or
other noxious or objectionable elements.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals,
property or business activity.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the areas of all enclosed and roofed
spaces of the principal building and all accessory buildings. Such areas
shall be computed by using outside building dimensions measured on a
horizontal plane at ground level.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade level around the entire perimeter of the
building to the highest point of the structure.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane at
an average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:303
surface of the building or a projected roof or porch. The vertical plane will
coincide with the most projected surface, excluding steps and overhanging
eaves less than two feet in width. All yard and setback requirements are
measured to the "building lines."
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certificate issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer upon completion of the change in use of an existing
building or of a parcel of land with no buildings. Said certificate shall
acknowledge compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer upon completion of construction or alteration of a
building. Said certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all of the
requirements of the Uniform Code.
CLUB — An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests,
including premises and buildings for recreational or athletic purposes,
which are not conducted primarily for gain, provided that there are no
vending stands, merchandising or commercial activities conducted except
as required generally for the membership and purposes of such club or as
permitted by separate ordinance or local law.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development of lots to be used for singlefamily
residences, each containing less area than the minimum lot area
required for the zone within which such development occurs, while
maintaining the density limitation imposed by said minimum lot area
through the provision of open space as part of the site development plan.
CONDOMINIUM — A building or group of buildings in which units are
owned individually and the structure, common areas and facilities are
owned by all the owners of individual units on a proportional undivided
basis. "Condominiums" are a form of ownership of units which may be built
in residential or nonresidential districts. "Condominiums" are governed
under Article 9-B of the Real Property Law, also known as the
"Condominium Act of the State of New York."
CURB LEVEL — The established elevation of the street grade at the point
that is opposite the center of the wall nearest to and facing the street
line. Where a building is on a corner lot, the "curb level" is the average
of the mean levels of the curb on the two intersecting streets. Where no
such grade has been established, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
establish the "curb level" for the purposes of this chapter.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A center, operated on a regular basis, designed to
provide daytime care or instruction for more than six children.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
§ 163-10 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:304
DRIVEWAY — A roadway providing a means of access from a street to a
property or off-street parking area. An accessway may also be deemed a
"driveway."
DWELLING — A building designed or used for one or more families. The
term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include a motel, hotel,
boardinghouse or travel trailer.
DWELLING DEVELOPMENTS, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A series of multiplefamily
dwellings, designed and built as an integrated development with a
common architectural style.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED — A factory-built residential dwelling unit
designed to be occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and
placement on a permanent foundation and connections to utilities.
"Manufactured housing" shall meet the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards as set forth by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development and the requirements
of the Uniform Code. A travel trailer shall not be considered as a
"manufactured dwelling."
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A residential building designed for or
occupied by three or more families living independently of each other with
the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling
units provided.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential dwelling unit designed for
and occupied exclusively by one or more persons living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit and having a minimum width dimension of not less than
16 feet.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A residential building containing two dwelling
units designed for occupancy and used exclusively by two families living
independently of each other and having a minimum width dimension of not
less than 16 feet. A duplex is a two-family dwelling which is designed with a
common wall.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing housekeeping
facilities, including cooking and sanitary facilities, designed and used for
occupancy by a single family for living and sleeping purposes.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built to have the lowest
floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or any governmental department or
commission of underground or overhead gas, electrical,
telecommunications or water transmission and/or distribution systems,
including poles, wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, towers, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary
for the furnishings of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:305
or other governmental agencies or for the public health, safety or general
facilities or sites for the disposal of waste materials associated with the
provision of such services.
EXCAVATION — The process of the removal of sand, gravel, soil (including
topsoil) or other natural deposits by stripping, digging or other means.
EXCAVATION SITE — A parcel of land used for the purpose of extracting
stone, sand, gravel or topsoil for sale as an industrial or commercial
operation.
FAMILY — One or more persons, related by birth, marriage or other
domestic bond, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit.
FARM — Any parcel which is used for agricultural production or farming
activities. It includes necessary farm structures and the storage of
equipment used.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal agency
that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FENCE — A structure of wood, masonry, wire mesh or other material,
including landscaping, which prohibits or inhibits unrestricted travel or
view between properties or portions of properties or between the street or
public right-of-way and a property.
FILLING STATION — See "motor vehicle service station."
FINISHED GRADE LEVEL — The level where the finished grade of the
ground intersects the foundation walls of a building. All height
measurements shall be taken from the "finished grade level."
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as part of a
Flood Insurance Study. The "FBFM" delineates a regulatory floodway along
watercourses studied in detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations or an examination, evaluation and determination of floodrelated
erosion hazards.
FLOOD OR FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of land
along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion
or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding
anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
B.
§ 163-10 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:306
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A but no flood
elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the village.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood
Hazard Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See the definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of several
floors of a building or buildings, measured from the inside faces of exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two uses. For the purpose
of applying the requirements for off-street parking and loading in the case
of offices, merchandising or service types of uses, "gross floor area" shall
not include areas used principally for nonpublic purposes, such as storage,
rest rooms, fitting or alteration rooms or general maintenance or enclosed
pedestrian malls or corridors.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The horizontal area of any floor of a building
designed and intended for living purposes, which includes working,
sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor
used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor." All dimensions shall
be measured from the interior faces of exterior walls or from the center line
of the base of walls separating two dwelling units.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding and ship-repair facilities.
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm
or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable
event which results in flooding as defined in Subsection A(1) above of
this definition.
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:307
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing, sales or
service facilities.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building which provides for the storage
of motor vehicles or household items by the occupants on the lot upon which
it is erected, with no provision for repairing or servicing such vehicles for
profit.
GARAGES, PUBLIC OR REPAIR — Any garage, other than a private garage
operated for gain, available to the public, which is used for the storage,
repair, servicing or rental of motor vehicles.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation or profession customarily
conducted entirely within a dwelling or a building accessory to the dwelling
by the inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the
character thereof. A "home occupation" shall not be interpreted to include
the following: commercial stables and kennels, restaurants, musical and
dancing instruction to groups exceeding four pupils, convalescent homes,
mortuary establishments, garages or shops for the repair of motor vehicles.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure or part thereof where junk, waste
or discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, sorted,
baled, packed, disassembled, handled or abandoned, including automobile
or other vehicle or machinery wrecking or dismantling yards; house
wrecking yards; used lumber yards; places or yards for storage of salvaged
house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; or where
two or more unregistered motor vehicles are held outside of a completely
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a Village Inventory of Historic Places that has
been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior.
D.
§ 163-10 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:308
enclosed building, whether for the purpose of resale or sale of used parts
therefrom, for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all the materials
therein or for the purpose of storage or disposing of the same for any
other purpose. Such term shall include any place of storage or deposit for
any such purposes of used parts or waste materials from motor vehicles
which, taken together, equal in bulk two or more such vehicles. The term
"junkyard" shall not be construed to mean an establishment having facilities
for processing iron, steel or nonferrous scrap and whose principal product
is scrap iron, steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes
only. In addition, the term "junkyard" shall not include pawn shops and
establishments for the sale, purchase or storage of used furniture,
household equipment and clothing or for the processing of used, discarded
or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. Exceptions shall
be:
KENNEL — Any premises on which four or more dogs six months old or
older are kept, bred and/or boarded.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — Space logically and conveniently located
for public pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be
used and accessible to such vehicles. Required "off-street loading space" is
not to be included as off-street parking space in the computation of required
off-street parking area.
LODGING ROOM — A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, without
cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom.
LOT — A parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to a certain use and
occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or group of buildings
that are united by a common interest or use and the customary accessory
uses and open space belonging to the same.
LOT AREA — The square footage or acreage contained within the
boundaries of a lot. Any portion of a lot included in a public road, street or
highway right-of-way shall not be included in calculating "lot area."
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two
or more intersecting streets. All "corner lots" shall be deemed to have two
front yards, two side yards and no rear yard.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area which is devoted to
building area.
New and/or used motor vehicles which are operable, qualify for a
current New York State Motor Vehicle inspection sticker under Article
5 of the New York Motor Vehicle and Traffic Law and are offered for
sale to the public may be stored on premises on which new or used
car sales may be conducted in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations.
A.
The storage of vehicles subject to seasonal use, such as travel trailers
and snowmobiles, even though such vehicles may be unlicensed during
the part of the year they are not in use, is permitted.
B.
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:309
LOT DEPTH — The minimum horizontal distance from the street line of a lot
to its opposite rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines
of the lot.
LOT FRONTAGE — The front of a lot shall be construed to the portion
nearest the street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on
corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered front yards.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of an approved subdivision recorded
in the office of the County Clerk or a lot described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot which is not a corner lot and which has frontage on
two streets.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines measured parallel to
the street line at the front setback line.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement or cellar. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area, is not considered a building's "lowest floor," provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME AND MOBILE HOME PARKS — See definitions included in
Chapter 141.
MOTEL — A building or buildings containing sleeping units for transient
guests and providing accessory off-street parking facilities; and which may
include restaurant facilities and a dwelling unit for a bona fide caretaker or
operator. The term "motel" includes hotels, auto courts, motor lodges and
similar terms. Each sleeping unit shall contain not less than 240 square feet
of living space.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is propelled by any power other
than muscular power, except electrically driven invalid chairs being
operated or driven by an invalid. "Motor vehicles" shall include but not be
limited to automobiles, trucks, boats, all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, etc.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from a street right-ofway.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
B.
C. LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 163-10 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:310
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any building, structure or land
used to disperse, sell or offer automotive fuels, oils or accessories, including
lubrication, washing, polishing or cleaning and the replacement or
installation of parts and accessories to passenger automobiles or trucks not
exceeding 1 1/2 tons. For the purpose of this chapter, "motor vehicle service
station" includes the term "filling station."
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — A vertical control as
corrected in 1929, used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the floodplain.
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER — The atmosphere or physical
environment which is created by the combination of land use and buildings
within an area. "Neighborhood character" is established and influenced by
land use types and intensity, traffic generation and also by the location,
size and design of structures as well as the interrelationship of all these
features.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any lawful building or
structure existing at the date of enactment of this chapter which in its
design or location upon a lot does not conform to the regulations of this
chapter for the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record existing at the date of the
enactment of this chapter where the owner(s) of said lot does not own any
adjoining property, the resubdivision of which would create one or more
conforming lots, which does not have the minimum width, depth or area for
the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any use of land, buildings or structures lawfully
existing on the date of enactment of this chapter which does not conform to
the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A place providing or designed to provide daytime
care or instruction for six or more children from two to five years of age
away from their home for up to three hours per day.
OPEN SPACE — Any unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with
a building.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A space adequate for parking an
automobile and having a width of not less than nine feet and an area of
not less than 180 square feet per vehicle, exclusive of passageways and
driveways appurtenant thereto. Such space shall be located on the lot it is
accessory to and shall have direct access to a street or public way.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is located.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary purpose for which a building,
structure or lot is to be used.
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:311
PUBLIC AND SEMIPUBLIC BUILDINGS AND USES — Intended to
designate any one or more of the following uses, including grounds and
accessory buildings necessary for their use:
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — See definition included in Chapter 141.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height as determined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or by other agencies as
provided in this chapter.
RESERVOIR SPACE — Any temporary storage space for a vehicle waiting
for admission to a commercial use for service. Such space shall be in
addition to drives, aisles or off-street parking spaces required by this
chapter. One "reservoir space" shall be 20 feet long and eight feet wide.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises to patrons and equipped with seating
facilities and where the taking of food and drink from said building is
incidental. The term "restaurant" shall include bars and taverns licensed to
sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. However, a snack bar
or refreshment stand at a public, semipublic or community swimming pool,
playground, playfield or park operated by the agency or an approved vendor
A. Churches, places of worship, parish houses and convents.
Public parks, including golf courses, playgrounds and recreational
areas when authorized or operated by a governmental authority.
B.
Nursery schools, elementary schools, secondary schools, colleges or
universities having a curriculum approved by the Board of Regents of
the State of New York.
C.
D. Public libraries and museums.
Administrative office buildings and related facilities operated by public
agencies.
E.
F. Fire, ambulance, public safety and public works buildings.
Hospitals for the care of human beings, nursing homes, convalescent
homes, homes for the aged or residences for adults as the same are
defined under the Public Health Law or the Social Services Law of the
State of New York, provided that they are duly licensed by the State of
New York.
G.
Membership corporations established for cultural, social or
recreational purposes.
H.
Day-care centers approved by the New York State Department of Social
Services.
I.
§ 163-10 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:312
operating the recreational facilities and for the convenience of the patrons
of the facility shall not be deemed to be a "restaurant."
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where food, soft drinks, ice
cream and similar confections are sold for principal consumption outside
the confines of the principal building or in automobiles, regardless of
whether or not seats are provided for patrons.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The line determining the street or highway limit of public
ownership.
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling other than a hotel, motel or bed-andbreakfast
establishment where not more than two persons are housed or
lodged for hire with or without meals. A "rooming house" is distinguished
from a bed-and-breakfast establishment in that it is designed to be occupied
by longer-term residents as opposed to overnight or weekly guests.
SETBACK — The horizontal distance between the street line, rear or side
lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. All
measurements shall be made at right angles to or radially from the lot
lines to the building lines. Setbacks from street lines to building lines are
defined as "front setbacks." Setbacks from side lot lines are "side setbacks."
Setbacks from rear lot lines are "rear setbacks."
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores, shops and similar establishments
occupying adjoining structures or two or more commercial buildings
located on a single lot or adjacent lots, with such buildings developed
as part of a single integrated development with a common architectural
design.
SIGN — Any material, structure or part thereof or any device attached to
a building or structure or painted or represented thereon, composed of
lettered or pictorial matter, or upon which lettered or pictorial matter is
placed and is intended for display of an advertisement, notice, directional
matter or name, and includes sign frames, billboards, sign boards,
illuminated signs, pennants, fluttering devices, projecting signs or ground
signs.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign consisting of the entire surface of any
regular geometric form or combinations of regular geometric forms,
comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the
elements of the matter displayed, but excluding supporting or structural
members not bearing advertising matter.
SIGN, BUILDING FRONT OR FACE — The outer surface of a building which
is visible from any private or public street, highway or driveway, including
window display areas.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business, profession
or industry conducted upon the premises or to a commodity or service sold
or offered by such business, profession or industry upon the premises where
such sign is located.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign that directs attention to the location of a
local service or place of business.
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:313
SIGN, ERECTION — The construction, alteration, repair, display, location or
relocation, attachment, placement, suspension, affixing or maintenance of
any sign, including the painting of exterior wall signs and the use of any
vehicle or other substitute for a sign.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign or sign support structure that is not
attached to or part of a building or structure.
SIGN, GROUND — A sign supported by a pole, uprights or braces which are
placed in or on the ground.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by electricity, gas or other artificial
light, including reflective or phosphorescent light, paint or tape.
SIGN, LIGHTING DEVICE — Any light, string or groups of lights located or
arranged so as to cast illumination on or from a sign.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — A sign which exists at the time of enactment
of this chapter and which does not conform to the regulations and
restrictions imposed herein.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a
business, profession or industry conducted or a commodity or service sold
or offered on a site other than upon the premises where such sign is located.
SIGN, PORTABLE OR MOBILE — A sign that is designed and intended to
be transported from place to place and is not permanently affixed to the
ground or to a building or structure. Portable signs may or may not have
wheels.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign which is attached to the exterior of a building
or a structure beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure
to which the sign is attached and not parallel to the face of the building.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign constructed on or supported by the roof of any
building or structure.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which is intended to advertise community
or civic projects, real estate for sale or lease or other special events on a
temporary basis.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan, drawn to scale, showing uses and
structures proposed for a parcel of land, including lot lines, streets, existing
and proposed buildings and structures, topography, rights-of-way, parking
areas, open space and any other information deemed necessary by the
Planning Board.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The initiation, excluding planning and
design, of any phase of a project or physical alteration of a property,
and shall include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings,
piers or foundations; or the erection of temporary forms. It also includes
the placement and/or installation on the property of accessory buildings
(garages or sheds), storage trailers and building materials.
§ 163-10 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:314
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above; also any portion of a building used for
human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof.
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal
means of access to abutting properties.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon which
a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade of
the street shall be taken as the "street grade."
STREET LINE — The right-of-way line of a street; the front lot line; the line
separating a lot from a street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected which requires temporary
or permanent support or attachment to the ground, beneath the ground
or to something having permanent location on the ground, including
swimming pools, gasoline and oil tanks, buildings, mobile homes, fences,
signs, billboards, towers, antennas and satellite television dishes.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plots, sites or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership or building development, and shall include
resubdivision.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, alteration or
modification of a building, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the building either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the building has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine the
value of the improvements to be made based upon the square footage
of building area added or improved. For the purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building. The term does not, however, include either:
SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water or receptacle for water which has
a capability of a depth of more than two feet at any point, used or intended
to be used for swimming, bathing or wading and installed or constructed
above or below ground.
Any project for improvement of a building to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a building listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
B.
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:315
TEMPORARY USE — An activity conducted for a specific limited period
of time which may not otherwise be permitted by the provisions of this
chapter. Examples of such uses are structures incidental to new
construction which shall be removed after the completion of the
construction work.
TOWER — Includes any structure, including dish antennas, whether
attached to a building or freestanding and whether guyed or selfsupporting,
designed to be used as or for the support of devices to be used
for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, such as but
not limited to broadcast, shortwave, citizens band, FM or television signals
or wind-driven devices, such as energy converters and wind speed and/or
direction indicators.
TOWNHOUSE — An independent single-family dwelling unit which is one
of a series of dwelling units, having a common party wall between each
adjacent unit, each with a private outside entrance.
TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENTS — A tract of land adequately sized to
accommodate the construction of townhouse dwelling units in accordance
with the density standards contained elsewhere in these regulations.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code.
USE, SPECIAL PERMIT — A use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as
to number, area, location or relating to the neighborhood, would promote
the public health, safety, order, comfort, convenience, appearance,
prosperity or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in a zoning
district as a "special permit use" only if specific provision for such special
permit use is made in this chapter.
VARIANCE, AREA — Authorization by the Board of Appeals for the use
of land in a manner which is not allowed by the dimensional or physical
requirements of this chapter.
VARIANCE, USE — Authorization by the Board of Appeals for the use of
land for a purpose which is otherwise not allowed or is prohibited by this
chapter.
VIEW — The combination of the natural terrain and built environment that
can be seen looking out from a property.
WINDMILL — An alternate energy device which converts wind energy by
means of a rotor to mechanical or electrical energy. A wind generator may
also be deemed a "windmill."
YARD — A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure, except as may be provided by this
chapter, and situated between the principal building or group of buildings
and the nearest lot line.
§ 163-10 WARSAW CODE § 163-10
1:316
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending between the side lot lines across the
front of a lot adjoining a street; situated between the street line and the
front building line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending between the side lot lines situated
between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line. In the case of
through lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending between the side building line and the
nearest side lot line; situated between the front and rear yards.
§ 163-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-10
1:317

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 163-11. Code Enforcement Officer.
The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is
hereby conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall have such
powers as are conferred upon him by this chapter. He shall be appointed
by the Village Board and shall carry out any directives from the Board
relative to the duties of the position set forth in § 163-12 below. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall receive such compensation as the Village Board
shall determine.
§ 163-12. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer or his duly
authorized assistants to cause any plans, buildings or premises to be
examined or inspected to determine that they are not in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. In the fulfillment of his duties, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his authorized assistants may enter any
premises or building during reasonable hours in the course of his duties
in accordance with state law after due written notice has been given.
B. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any of the provisions of
this chapter are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation
and ordering the action to correct it. In his efforts to attain compliance,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to order
discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings or structures; removal
of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or
structural changes; stop work; or discontinuance of any illegal work
being done. On the serving of notice by the Code Enforcement Officer to
the owner of any property violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
the certificate of occupancy or certificate of compliance, as appropriate,
for such building or use shall be held null and void. A new certificate of
occupancy and/or compliance shall be required for any further use of
such building or premises.
C. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to issue permits
and certificates to applicants who fully comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a permanent and current
record of all applications for permits and certificates, his action upon
the same, any conditions relating thereto and any other matters
considered and action taken by him. Such records shall form a part of
the records of his office and shall be available for use by village officials
and for inspection by the public. The records to be maintained shall
include the following:
§ 163-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-12
1:319
§ 163-13. Certificates and permits required; term; extensions.
(1) Application file. An individual permanent file for each application
for a permit or certificate provided for herein shall be established
at the time the application is made. Said file shall contain one copy
of the application and all supporting documents and plans;
notations regarding pertinent dates and fees; one copy of any
resolutions or actions of the Village Board, Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Appeals in acting on the application; and the date
the permit or certificate applied for was issued or denied.
(2) Monthly report. The Code Enforcement Officer shall prepare a
monthly report for the Village Board. Said report shall cite all
actions taken by the Code Enforcement Officer, including all
referrals made by him; all permits and certificates issued and
denied; all complaints of violation received and all violations found
by him and the action taken by him consequent thereon; and the
time spent and mileage used. A copy of this monthly report shall
also be transmitted by the Code Enforcement Officer to the Tax
Assessor, Planning Board and Board of Appeals at the same time it
is transmitted to the Village Board.
E. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer denies a permit or certificate,
he shall, in writing, inform the applicant of the specific reasons for
denial and instruct the applicant on the proper methods to apply for
relief.
F. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a current list and a map of
nonconforming uses to determine if discontinuance or destruction or
change in use or vacancy has taken place.
G. The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain a current list and a map
showing the variances and special use permits to determine if the
conditions and safeguards placed on variances and special permits are
being complied with.
H. Upon written direction from the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue special use permits. Upon approval of a variance by
the Board of Appeals, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
empowered to issue the necessary permits with the specific conditions
to be imposed.
I. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized and empowered to
issue appearance tickets pursuant to the New York State Criminal
Procedure Law.
A. The certificates and permits enumerated herein are hereby established
for the equitable enforcement and administration of the provisions of
this chapter. A zoning permit or special use permit shall be a
prerequisite for an application for a building permit for the erection or
§ 163-12 WARSAW CODE § 163-13
1:320
§ 163-14. Zoning permit.
alteration of a building, structure or use thereof or for the change in
the use of any land area or existing building.
B. Permits issued pursuant to this Article shall expire in 12 months unless
the project is completed. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant an
extension for time of completion and include any conditions or
requirements deemed necessary or desirable. Applicants shall justify
the need for the proposed extension. Unless such an extension is
requested and approved, further work as described in the canceled
permit shall not proceed until a new permit has been obtained. If a
project is not initiated within six months of the issuance of the permit,
the permit issued shall be considered null and void.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered under the
procedures and requirements specified herein to issue a zoning permit
for any plans regarding the construction or alteration or demolition of
any building or part of any building, or the change in the use of any land
area or part thereof, or for the change in use of any existing building,
where he shall determine that such plans are not in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
B. No development activities shall commence, nor shall any building or
structure be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered or
changed in use, nor shall any land area or part thereof be changed in
use without a zoning permit therefor issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer. No zoning permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, unless
he receives a written order from the Board of Appeals in the form of an
administrative review or variance as provided by this chapter.
C. Where the proposed use is for the construction of a new single-family
dwelling, the expansion or structural alteration of an existing singlefamily
dwelling or the erection of an accessory use or structure in a
residential district, the Code Enforcement Officer shall carefully
consider the application for compliance with this chapter and may
either issue or deny the permit applied for within 30 days after receipt
of a complete application and determination of environmental
significance. In the event of disapproval, the reasons shall be stated
clearly, in writing. The Code Enforcement Officer shall deny a zoning
permit until such conditions as the disapproval are based upon have
been corrected.
D. When the application is for any other permitted use other than those
specified in the preceding subsection, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall, prior to the issuance of any permit, refer a copy of the zoning
permit application, environmental assessment and site development
plan to the Planning Board for approval in accordance with the
procedures specified below.
§ 163-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-14
1:321
§ 163-15. Site development plan approval.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also transmit a copy of the
complete application, environmental assessment and site development
plan to the County Planning Board for review when required under
Article 12-B, § 239-m of the General Municipal Law. This transmission
shall be made concurrent with the referral of the application to the
Planning Board.
F. All zoning permit applications shall be reviewed to determine that the
proposed site development plan is consistent with the goals and
objectives of the village's Comprehensive Plan, that the proposed
improvements are sufficient to adequately serve the proposed use, that
adjacent properties are protected from potential negative impacts and
that potential adverse environmental impacts are identified and
appropriate mitigation measures have been proposed.
G. The Planning Board shall carefully consider the proposed development
or construction and make a decision to approve, approve with
conditions or deny the proposed application within 45 days after the
receipt of a complete application from the Code Enforcement Officer.
The Planning Board may not act within the first 30 days, however,
unless a report, if applicable, is received from the County Planning
Board. In approving said application, the Board may impose any
conditions it determines to be in the best interests of the village and
sound land use planning. All decisions of the Planning Board shall be in
writing and shall be transmitted directly to the applicant.
H. Prior to taking action on the application, the Planning Board may
conduct a public hearing on the proposal. If a public hearing is
considered desirable, such public hearing shall be conducted within 45
days of the receipt of the complete application and shall be duly
advertised in the official newspaper of the village. If a public hearing is
held on an application, the time period within which the Planning Board
shall act on the proposal shall be extended up to a maximum of 30 days
following the date of the public hearing, prior to reaching a final
decision.
I. If the Planning Board does not act on an application within 45 days of
the receipt of a complete application from the Code Enforcement
Officer or within 30 days following a public hearing on an application,
the application shall be approved and the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue the permit.
J. The period of time available for the Planning Board to act on an
application may be extended by mutual agreement of the applicant and
the Planning Board.
A. General requirements.
§ 163-14 WARSAW CODE § 163-15
1:322
(1) Each application for a zoning permit which is dependent upon site
development plan approval by the Planning Board shall initially be
made to the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine the application's completeness. Upon the
Code Enforcement Officer's acceptance of a complete site
development plan application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
prepare a written response to the applicant containing the
following information:
(a) The date of the Planning Board meeting at which the
application for site development plan approval will be
discussed.
(b) A preliminary indication under SEQR to include the type of
action involved and any additional SEQR forms to be
completed by the applicant or agent.
(c) A determination whether any portion of the site will be affected
by the FP-O Floodplain Overlay District regulations and what
effects this will have on the application.
(d) A tentative time schedule for site development plan approval.
(e) Any other information the Code Enforcement Officer deems
appropriate, including fees and criteria for site development
plan preparation.
(2) In the event that a site development plan identifies the potential
need for dimensional variances, the applicant shall first be denied
preliminary site development plan approval by the Planning Board
before appealing the need for such variance(s) to the Zoning Board
of Appeals. Where the Planning Board has denied such site
development plan on these grounds, the Planning Board shall
convey its opinion to the Board of Appeals on the requested
variances. Once variances have been granted, the applicant may
proceed for site development plan approval. If the variances are
denied, the applicant shall submit a revised site development plan
complying with the dimensional requirements of the zoning
district.
(3) The Planning Board shall, for each site development plan
application, determine whether a public hearing would serve a
community benefit. According to such a determination by the
Planning Board, the process for site development plan approval,
including the timetables for making decisions, shall coincide with
that set forth in § 163-14 above.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer shall transmit one copy of all
approved and denied applications to the Planning Board and one
copy of all approved applications to the Tax Assessor.
B. Supplemental regulations pertaining to site plan approval.
§ 163-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-15
1:323
§ 163-16. Special use permit.
Upon written direction of the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement Officer
is hereby empowered to issue a special use permit as provided for by this
chapter.
(1) Expiration of site development plan approval. Such site
development plan approval shall automatically terminate one year
after the same is granted unless work on the site has been
completed.
(2) Reimbursable costs. Costs incurred by the village for consultation
fees or other extraordinary expenses associated with the review of
a proposed site development plan shall be charged to the applicant
in accordance with the fee schedule specified in the application
documents.
(3) Performance guaranty. As an alternative to the installation of
required infrastructure and improvement, prior to approval by the
authorized board, a performance bond or other security sufficient
to cover the full cost of the same shall be furnished to the Village by
the owner. The sufficiency of such performance guaranty shall be
determined by the Village Board, after consultation with the Code
Enforcement Officer, Village Engineer, Planning Board and Village
Attorney. [Amended 2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
(4) Inspection of improvements and development. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the overall inspection
of site improvements, including coordination with the Village
Engineer and other officials and agencies, as appropriate. No
certificate of compliance shall be granted prior to a final inspection
and determination of conformity to the site development plan and
the New York State Uniform Code.
(5) Integration of site development plan approval procedure with other
Planning Board approvals. Whenever the particular circumstances
of a proposed development require compliance with either the
special use permit procedure or the requirements of the village's
land subdivision regulations,41 the Planning Board shall attempt to
integrate, as appropriate, site development plan review as required
by this section with the procedural and submission requirements
for such other compliances. In any case, all state permits and local
land use control approvals shall be procured prior to the issuance
of a building permit for a development project.
(6) Conflicts. If any conflicts arise between this site development plan
review procedure and other land use controls of the village, this
section shall apply.
41.Editor's Note: See Ch. 133, Subdivision of Land.
§ 163-15 WARSAW CODE § 163-16
1:324
A. Uses permitted by special permit shall be deemed to be permitted uses
in their respective districts, subject to the satisfaction of the
requirements and standards set forth in Article X in addition to all other
requirements of this chapter. All such uses are hereby declared to
possess characteristics of such unique and special forms that each
specific use shall be considered as an individual case.
B. A special use permit shall authorize only one particular special use. The
special use permit shall expire if the use shall cease for more than one
year for any reason.
C. No person shall be issued a special use permit for a property where
there is an existing violation of this chapter.
D. Before any special use permit shall be issued, the Planning Board shall
make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules
governing individual special permit uses and that satisfactory provision
and arrangement has been made relative to the following additional
concerns:
(1) Ingress and egress to the property and proposed structures
thereon, with particular reference to vehicular and pedestrian
safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and access in case
of fire or catastrophe.
(2) Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with
particular attention to the items in Subsection D(1) above and the
noise, glare or odor effects of the special permit use on adjoining
properties and properties generally in the district and the
economic impact of the proposed special permit use.
(3) Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in
Subsection D(1) and (2) above.
(4) Utilities as appropriate, with reference to locations, availability and
compatibility.
(5) Storm drainage, including potential impact on downstream
properties.
(6) Screening and buffering, with reference to type, dimensions and
character.
(7) Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare,
traffic safety, economic effect and compatibility and harmony with
properties in the district.
(8) Required yards and other open space.
(9) General compatibility with adjacent properties and other
properties in the zone district.
§ 163-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-16
1:325
E. All applications for special use permits shall be made in quadruplicate
to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided by him.
F. The Code Enforcement Officer, after determining that an application is
in proper form, shall transmit copies of the application and all
supporting documents to the Planning Board for approval in
accordance with the procedures specified below.
G. The Code Enforcement Officer shall transmit a copy of the complete
application and supporting documents to the County Planning Board for
review when required under Article 12-B, § 239-m of the General
Municipal Law.
H. The application shall include a site development plan of the special
permit use and subject parcel drawn to scale, which includes all of the
data specified in § 163-19 of this chapter.
I. Prior to taking action on an application for a special use, the Planning
Board shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed request. Said
hearing shall be conducted within 45 days following the receipt of a
complete application and supporting documents from the Code
Enforcement Officer. Within 30 days from the date of such public
hearing, the Planning Board shall, by resolution, either approve,
approve with conditions or disapprove the application so heard. The
thirty-day period available to make a determination may be extended by
mutual agreement of the applicant and the Planning Board.
J. If the application was transmitted to the County Planning Board under
Article 12-B, § 239-m of the General Municipal Law, the Planning Board
cannot act within the first 30 days following the referral of the
application to the County Planning Board unless said Board provides a
written reply to the village within the thirty-day period.
K. In approving an application, the Planning Board may impose any
modifications or conditions it deems necessary to conform to the goals
and objectives of the village's Comprehensive Plan and its principles of
land use and development and to protect the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
L. If an application is approved by the Planning Board, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be furnished with a copy of the approving
resolution of the Planning Board, and he shall issue the permit applied
for in accordance with the conditions imposed by the Board.
M. If any application is disapproved by the Planning Board, the reasons for
such denial shall be set forth in the Board resolution, and a copy of such
resolution shall be transmitted to the Code Enforcement Officer. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall deny the application accordingly by
providing the applicant with a copy of the Board's reasons for
disapproval.
§ 163-16 WARSAW CODE § 163-16
1:326
§ 163-17. Temporary use permits.
Upon written direction of the Board of Appeals, the Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby empowered to issue a temporary use permit. A temporary
use permit shall only be effective for a period of not to exceed three months;
said permit may be extended by the Board of Appeals not more than once,
for an additional period not to exceed three months.
§ 163-18. Certificates of compliance/occupancy.
N. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the premises of a use
authorized and approved with a special use permit not less than one
time each calendar year. The inspection shall determine that the use is
being operated consistent with the terms and conditions established by
the Planning Board in approving the permit. If the Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine that the conditions are not in compliance with
the permit, the Code Enforcement Officer shall nullify the special use
permit and set forth the procedures and requirements for
reestablishing the use. The use may not be operated until a new
application is submitted and approved.
A. All applications for temporary use permits shall be made in
quadruplicate to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided by
him.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer, after determining that an application is
in proper form, shall transmit copies of the application to the Board of
Appeals for review and approval.
C. The application shall include a statement by the applicant which
specifies the nature of the proposed use and the length of time for
which the temporary use is to be authorized.
D. The Board of Appeals may seek the advisory opinion of the Planning
Board or the Village Engineer as well as that of other agencies,
organizations or individuals prior to making a decision on the request.
E. The Board of Appeals may schedule a public hearing to invite public
comment if it determines that the public interest would be served on
the application by such a hearing.
F. The Board of Appeals shall, within 45 days of the receipt of a complete
application, approve or deny the application. In approving the request,
the Board of Appeals shall set the maximum length of time for the
authorization of such use. Further, the Board of Appeals may impose
any conditions or restrictions on the applicant that is deemed to be in
the best interests of the Village of Warsaw.
G. The Code Enforcement Officer, acting on written direction of the Board
of Appeals, shall either issue or deny the permit.
§ 163-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-18
1:327
§ 163-19. Application details.
Each application for a zoning, temporary use and special use permit shall
be made in quadruplicate and accompanied with a site development plan.
All site development plans submitted to the village for review and approval
shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer, architect, land
surveyor or landscape architect as per the New York State Education Law.
The materials to be submitted with each application shall clearly show the
conditions on the site at the time of the application, the features of the
site which are to be incorporated into the proposed use or building and the
appearance and function of the proposed use or building. The application
shall include the following information and specify both before and after
conditions:
A. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of
any building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in
its use or structure until a certificate of compliance or certificate of
occupancy, as appropriate, has been issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to
the requirements of this chapter.
B. Failure to obtain either a certificate of occupancy or compliance shall
be a violation of this chapter and punishable as provided by Article XIV.
C. Within seven days after the completion of the change in use of a
building or parcel of land, the applicant shall so notify the Code
Enforcement Officer by certified mail stating that such action has been
completed in compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall provide
the Code Enforcement Officer with suitable evidence to document
compliance. This evidence shall be in the form of an instrument survey,
tape location map or comparable documentation. Within seven days of
the receipt of this letter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct a
final inspection of the premises to determine whether the new use
complies with the requirements of this chapter. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that said building or use complies with
the provisions herein, he shall issue a certificate of compliance. If it is
determined that the provisions specified herein are not fully complied
with, the Code Enforcement Officer shall specify the violations and the
terms and conditions for remedying these violations. A certificate of
compliance shall not be issued until such violations are corrected.
D. No nonconforming building or use shall be maintained, renewed,
changed or extended without a certificate of compliance having first
been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer. The certificate of
compliance shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use
differs from the provisions of this chapter.
A. The location, design, dimensions, use and height of each proposed
building and yard area.
§ 163-18 WARSAW CODE § 163-19
1:328
§ 163-20. Fees.
Each application for a permit provided for by this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee, payable in cash or other form of security approved
by the Village Attorney. Fees shall be established annually by resolution of
the Village Board.
B. Property boundaries, as shown on an accurate map drawn to scale,
including the precise location of the center line of the road, dimensions,
North arrow and the date.
C. A general location map showing the location of the property in relation
to adjacent parcels.
D. The location and arrangement of vehicular accessways and the location,
size and capacity of all areas to be used for off-street parking.
E. Information to describe topography and natural grades.
F. Provisions for water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage.
G. The location of fire hydrants.
H. The location and design of outdoor lighting facilities.
I. The location and design of construction materials of all proposed signs.
J. The location and capacity of all areas to be used for loading and
unloading and the distance to the nearest intersection.
K. The location and dimensions of sidewalks, walkways and other areas
established for pedestrian use.
L. The design and treatment of open areas, buffer areas and screening
devices maintained, including dimensions of all areas devoted to lawns,
trees and other landscaping devices.
M. The location of fire and other emergency zones.
N. Other elements integral to the proposed development as considered
necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer, Village Engineer or
Planning Board, including a property survey, any and all requirements
to comply with the State Environmental Quality Review (SEQR)
procedures, other community impacts and the identification of any
state or county permits required for the execution of the project.
§ 163-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-20
1:329

ARTICLE IV
Board of Appeals; Planning Board42
§ 163-21. Creation of Board of Appeals; appointments and
removals; meetings; rules and regulations.
A. A Board of Appeals is hereby created. Said Board shall consist of five
members appointed by the Village Board, who shall also designate a
Chairman. The existing Board of Appeals shall be continued. No person
who is a member of the Village Board shall be eligible for membership
on such Board of Appeals. Of the members of the Board of Appeals first
appointed, one shall hold office for the term of one year, one for the
term of two years, one for the term of three years, one for the term of
four years and one for the term of five years. All terms shall run
concurrent with the governmental year. Their successors shall be
appointed for terms of five years from and after the expiration of the
terms of their predecessors in office. In making such appointments, the
Village Board may require Board of Appeals members to complete
training and continuing education courses in accordance with any local
requirements for the training of such members. If a vacancy shall occur
otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by the Village
Board by appointment for the unexpired term.
B. The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, any
member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for cause and may provide by
local law for removal, after public hearing, of any Board of Appeals
member for noncompliance with minimum requirements relating to
meeting attendance and training as established by the Village Board by
local law.
C. All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as such Board may determine.
Such Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
D. The Board of Appeals shall establish such rules and regulations as are
required by state and local laws for the transaction of its business and
may amend, modify and repeal the same from time to time.
E. Whenever the Board of Appeals, after hearing all the evidence
presented upon an application for appeals under the provisions of this
chapter, denies or rejects the same, said Board of Appeals shall refuse
to hold further hearings on the same or substantially similar application
for appeal by the same applicant, their successors or assigns for a
period of one year, except and unless the Board of Appeals shall find
and determine from the information supplied in the request for a
rehearing that a change in conditions has occurred which relates to the
42.Editor's Note: In 2012, the Village joined with the Town to create a Joint Planning Board
and Joint Zoning Board of Appeals. For provisions regarding the establishment of those
joint boards, see Ch. 3.
§ 163-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-21
1:331
§ 163-22. Powers and duties of Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by
Article 7 of the Village Law of the State of New York and this chapter.
§ 163-23. Procedures of Board of Appeals.
promotion of public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and
general welfare and that a reconsideration is justified. Such rehearing
may be granted only upon the favorable vote of not less than four
members of the Board of Appeals.
A. Meetings, minutes and records. Meetings of such Board of Appeals
shall be open to the public to the extent provided in Article 7 of the
Public Officers Law. Such Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question or,
if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep
records of its examinations and other official actions.
B. Filing requirements. Every rule and regulation, every amendment or
repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Board of Appeals shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk
within five business days and shall be a public record.
C. Assistance to the Board of Appeals. Such Board shall have the authority
to call upon any department, agency or employee of the village for such
assistance as shall be deemed necessary and as shall be authorized by
the Village Board.
D. Hearing appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
from and review any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination made by an administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter. Such Board shall have the authority to call
upon any department, agency or employee of the village for such
assistance as shall be deemed necessary and as shall be authorized by
the Village Board. Such department, agency or employee shall be
reimbursed for any expenses incurred as a result of such assistance.
The concurring vote of not less than three members of the Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any such administrative official or to grant a use
variance or area variance. Such appeal may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department or board of the village.
E. Time of appeal. Such appeal shall be taken within 60 days after the
filing of any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination of the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter by filing with such administrative official
and with the Board of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the
grounds thereof and the relief sought. The administrative official from
whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of
Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
§ 163-21 WARSAW CODE § 163-23
1:332
§ 163-24. Permitted actions by Board of Appeals.
appealed from was taken. The cost of sending or publishing any notices
relating to such appeal shall be borne by the appealing party and shall
be paid to the Board of Appeals prior to the hearing of such appeal.
F. Stay upon appeal. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the administrative official charged
with the enforcement of this chapter certifies to the Board of Appeals,
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the administrative
official, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of
record on application, on notice to the administrative official from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
G. Meeting on appeal. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it and give public
notice thereof by the publication in a paper of general circulation in the
village of a notice of such hearing at least seven days prior to the date
thereof. Further, the applicant shall, at least seven days prior to the
date of the hearing, give notice, in writing, by registered or certified
mail or by service in person and with adequate proof of contact thereof,
to all property owners within 200 feet of the property to be affected by
said appeal or to all property owners of contiguous land or property
adjoining said property to be affected and other interested property
owners as may be designated by the Board of Appeals.
H. Notice to Park Commission and County Planning Board. At least five
days before such hearing, the Board of Appeals shall mail notices
thereof to the parties and to the Regional State Parks Commission
having jurisdiction over any state park or parkway within 500 feet of
the property affected by such appeal and to the County Planning Board
as required by § 239-m of the General Municipal Law, which notice shall
be accompanied by a full statement of the matter under consideration,
as defined in Subdivision 1 of § 239-m of the General Municipal Law.
I. Time of decision. The Board of Appeals shall decide upon the appeal
within 62 days after the conduct of said hearing. The time within which
the Board of Appeals must render its decision may be extended by
mutual consent of the applicant and the Board.
J. Filing of decision and notice. The decision of the Board of Appeals on
the appeal shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk within five
business days after the day such decision is rendered and a copy
thereof mailed to the applicant.
A. Interpretations, requirements, decisions and determinations. The
Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination
§ 163-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-24
1:333
appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination as in its opinion ought to have been
made in the matter by the administrative official charged with the
enforcement of such chapter and to that end shall have all the powers
of the administrative official from whose order, requirement, decision
or determination the appeal is taken.
B. Use variances.
(1) The Board of Appeals, on appeal from the decision or determination
of the administrative officer charged with the enforcement of this
chapter, shall have the power to grant use variances, authorizing a
use of the land which otherwise would not be allowed or would be
prohibited by the terms of this chapter.
(2) No such use variance shall be granted by the Board of Appeals
without a showing by the applicant that applicable zoning
regulations and restrictions have caused unnecessary hardship. In
order to prove such unnecessary hardship, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Board of Appeals that:
(a) Under the regulations of this chapter, the applicant is deprived
of all economic use or benefit from the property in question,
which deprivation shall be established by competent financial
evidence;
(b) The alleged hardship relating to the property in question is
unique and does not apply to a substantial portion of the zone
district or neighborhood;
(c) The requested use variance, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood; and
(d) The alleged hardship has not been self-created.
(3) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of use variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate to
address the unnecessary hardship proven by the applicant and at
the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. Area variance.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power, upon an appeal
from a decision or determination of an administrative official
charged with the enforcement of this chapter, to grant area
variances from the area or dimensional requirements of this
chapter.
(2) In making its determination, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
into consideration the benefit to the applicant if the variance is
granted, as weighed against the detriment to the health, safety and
§ 163-24 WARSAW CODE § 163-24
1:334
§ 163-25. Appeals to Supreme Court.
welfare of the neighborhood or community by such grant. In
making such determination, the Board shall also consider:
(a) Whether an undesirable change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a detriment to nearby
properties will be created by the granting of the area variance;
(b) Whether the benefit sought by the applicant can be achieved
by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue other than
an area variance;
(c) Whether the requested area variance is substantial;
(d) Whether the proposed variance will have an adverse effect or
impact on the physical or environmental conditions in the
neighborhood or zone district; and
(e) Whether the alleged difficulty was self-created, which
consideration shall be relevant to the decision of the Board of
Appeals, but shall not necessarily preclude the granting of the
area variance.
(3) The Board of Appeals, in the granting of area variances, shall grant
the minimum variance that it shall deem necessary and adequate
and at the same time preserve and protect the character of the
neighborhood and the health, safety and welfare of the community.
D. Imposition of conditions. The Board of Appeals shall, in the granting of
both use variances and area variances, have the authority to impose
such reasonable conditions and restrictions as are directly related to
and incidental to the proposed use of the property and/or the period of
time such variance shall be in effect. Such conditions shall be consistent
with the spirit and intent of this chapter and shall be imposed for the
purpose of minimizing any adverse impact that such variance may have
on the neighborhood or community.
E. A condition will be placed on each and every variance granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals that all area variances and use variances shall
terminate one year after being granted unless all work and
requirements on the site have been completed in accordance with the
site development plan. [Added 2-19-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
A. Application to Supreme Court by aggrieved persons. Any person or
persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of
Appeals, or any officer, department or board of the village may apply to
the Supreme Court for review by a proceeding under Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules. Such proceeding shall be instituted within
30 days after the filing of a decision of the Board in the office of the
Village Clerk or in the office designated by resolution of the Village
Board. The Court may take evidence or appoint a referee to take such
§ 163-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-25
1:335
§ 163-26. Creation of Planning Board; appointments and removals;
terms; meetings; rules and regulations.
evidence as it may direct and report the same with his or her findings of
fact and conclusions of law if it shall appear that testimony is necessary
for the proper disposition of the matter. The Court, at special term,
shall itself dispose of the cause on the merits, determining all questions
which may be presented for determination.
B. Costs of appeal. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board of Appeals
unless it shall appear to the Court that it acted with gross negligence or
in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from.
C. Preference of appeal to Court. All issues in any proceeding under this
section shall have preference over all other civil actions and
proceedings.
D. Power of Court. If, upon the hearing at a special term of the Supreme
Court, it shall appear to the Court that testimony is necessary for the
proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a
referee to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to
the Court with his or her findings of fact and conclusions of law, which
shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination
of the Court shall be made. The Court may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may specify the decision brought up for review.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Village Law applicable thereto, the
Village Board hereby creates a Planning Board. The existing Planning
Board shall be continued.
B. The Planning Board shall consist of five members, each with a term of
five years. The terms of membership shall run concurrent with the
governmental year. The Board is hereby vested with the powers and
duties subject to the limitations set forth in § 7-718 of Article 7 of the
Village Law, as the same may be amended, modified or changed from
time to time, or any sections subsequently adopted pertaining to
Planning Boards.
C. Members and the Chairperson of such Planning Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor. In making such appointments, the Village
Board may require Planning Board members to complete training and
continuing education courses in accordance with any local
requirements for the training of such members.
D. No person who is a member of the Village Board shall be eligible for
membership on the Planning Board.
E. The terms of members of the Planning Board first appointed shall be so
fixed that the term of one member shall expire at the end of the village
governmental year in which such members were initially appointed.
The terms of the remaining members first appointed shall be so fixed
that one term shall expire at the end of each governmental year
§ 163-25 WARSAW CODE § 163-26
1:336
§ 163-27. Powers and duties of Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:
thereafter. At the expiration of the term of each member first appointed,
his or her successor shall be appointed for a term of five years.
F. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, the Mayor
shall appoint the new member for the unexpired term, subject to the
approval of the Village Board.
G. The Mayor shall have the power to remove, after public hearing, any
member of the Planning Board for cause and may provide by local law
for removal, after public hearing, of any Planning Board member for
noncompliance with minimum standards relating to meeting
attendance and training as established by the Village Board by local
law.
H. All meetings of the Planning Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as such Board may determine.
Such Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
I. No person shall be disqualified from service as a member of the
Planning Board by reason of serving as a member of the Town or County
Planning Board.
J. The Planning Board shall establish such rules and regulations as are
required by law and the provisions herein for the transaction of its
business and may amend, modify and repeal the same from time to
time.
A. To prepare and from time to time recommend changes to the
Comprehensive Plan for the development of the village.
B. To review proposals to approve or disapprove the laying out, closing off,
abandonment or changes in lines of streets, highways and public areas
and to make recommendations to the Village Board.
C. To make investigations and reports relating to the planning and
development of the village as it deems desirable. This shall include but
not be limited to changes in boundaries of districts, recommended
changes in the provisions of this chapter and other land use and
development matters of importance to the Planning Board and to act on
any matter lawfully referred to it by the Village Board.
D. To review, act on or provide advisory reports as specified by this
chapter.
E. To review and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove site
development plans, prepared to specifications set forth in this chapter,
showing the arrangement, layout and design of proposed uses,
buildings and/or structures shown on such plan.
§ 163-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-27
1:337
F. To review and approve, approve with modifications or disapprove plats
showing lots, blocks or sites for subdivisions under § 7-728 of Article 7
of the Village Law.
G. All such powers as are conferred upon Village Planning Boards by the
provisions of the Village Law, now or hereafter in effect.
§ 163-27 WARSAW CODE § 163-27
1:338
ARTICLE V
Provisions Applicable to All Districts
§ 163-28. Applicability of regulations.
No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
building or land area be used for any purpose other than those included
among the uses listed as permitted uses in each zone district of this chapter
and meeting the requirements set forth herein. Open space contiguous
to any building shall not be encroached upon or reduced in any manner,
except in conformity to the area and bulk requirements, off-street parking
requirements and all other regulations required by this chapter for the
zone district in which such building or space is located. In the event of
any such unlawful encroachment or reduction, such building or use shall be
deemed to be in violation of this chapter, and the certificate of occupancy or
certificate of compliance, as appropriate, shall become null and void.
§ 163-29. Preservation of natural features.
§ 163-30. Regulations applicable to all zones.
A. No structure shall be built within 50 feet of the bed of a stream or
drainage swale carrying water on an average of three months of the
year, except for:
(1) Public bridges, public waterworks and other municipal or public
utility facilities.
(2) Such private bridges, fords, drainage conduits, embankments and
similar structures as are necessary to permit access to a lot or
portion thereof or as are incidental to a lawful use of a lot, provided
that such structure will not have a material adverse effect on the
stream, nor alter the flow of water therein, nor substantially
increase the likelihood of flood or overflow in the area.
B. No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for use
other than on the premises from which taken, except in connection with
the approved construction or alteration of a building, swimming pool or
other use or structure on such premises pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
C. No movement of earth or erosion shall be permitted at any time in any
district which adversely affects conditions on any other property.
D. Whenever natural features such as trees, brooks, drainage channels
and views interfere with the proposed use of property, the retention of
the maximum amount of such features consistent with the intended use
of the property shall be encouraged.
§ 163-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-30
1:339
A. Where two or more adjacent parcels of land are in the same ownership
at the time of the enactment of this chapter, they shall, for the purposes
of this chapter, be considered a single parcel or lot.
B. Except as specifically provided herein, no lot shall have erected upon it
more than one principal building. No yard or other open space provided
about any building shall be considered to provide a yard or open space
for any other building.
C. No site preparation or construction shall be commenced until final
subdivision approval has been granted by the Planning Board and the
subdivision map has been filed in the Wyoming County Clerk's office or
site development plan approval has been granted by the Planning Board
and all conditions of said approval have been met. Upon application, the
Planning Board may, in special circumstances, grant approval for site
preparation in advance of final approval. Said application shall be
supported by good and sufficient reasons for starting in advance of final
approval and must contain adequate surety for the performance of the
work.
D. The surface slope of all surfaces of the front, side and rear yards of any
building shall slope down and away from the foundation walls on a slope
of not less than 1% for a distance equal to at least 1/2 the depth of the
required yards.
E. When a building is located within 200 feet of a public highway or road,
the top of the foundation wall at the front of the building shall not be
less than two feet above the elevation of the center line of any road
which fronts the premises. Buildings proposed within the L-I Light
Industrial District shall be exempt from the provisions of this
subsection. [Amended 6-3-1996 by L.L. No. 1-1996]
F. Every building shall have a foundation constructed of masonry and
concrete not less than 10 inches wide, with footings not less than 40
inches below the surface of the ground at the building line. Such
foundation shall be continuous for the outside perimeter of the building,
except for necessary window and door openings, and shall provide for
any chimney. If a structure is built on a concrete slab or treated wood
base, such slab or wood base shall be not less than eight inches thick.
G. Chimneys shall be constructed of and supported by fireproof materials
and shall have fire-resistent flue linings.
H. Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall comply with
the yard requirements of this chapter for the principal building.
I. Detached accessory buildings on corner lots may be located in a side
yard subject to the side yard setback requirements of Schedule I.43
Such accessory buildings shall be no closer to the right-of-way line than
the required front setback line.
43.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-30 WARSAW CODE § 163-30
1:340
J. The Planning Board may require detached accessory buildings to be
fenced and/or buffered from adjacent properties, consistent with
approved site development plans, in order to protect the value of
adjacent properties.
K. Every principal building shall have access to a public street improved to
meet village requirements. Access may be direct or by a driveway or
private road approved by the village. Said driveway or private road
shall have a right-of-way width of not less than 30 feet and a pavement
width of not less than 16 feet, improved with a durable all-weather
surface, subject to approval of the Superintendent of Public Works. All
structures shall be so located on lots so as to provide safe and
convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street
parking.
L. At the intersection of two or more streets, no hedge, fence or wall
(other than a single post or tree) which is higher than three feet above
ground level measured at the edge of the pavement or at the curb, nor
any obstruction to vision, including agricultural crops, shall be
permitted in the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines
and a line joining each 50 feet distant from said intersection. This
triangular area shall be measured along the edge of the pavement.
M. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which is proposed for
right-of-way widening, the required front yard setback area shall be
measured from such proposed right-of-way line.
N. No business establishment shall place or display goods for purposes of
sale or permit any coin-operated vending machine of any type to be
placed in any location which would infringe upon the required yard
areas specified in this chapter.
O. No manure, odor- or dust-producing substances shall be permitted to
be stored within 100 feet of any lot line.
P. For the purpose of regulating the location of buildings on corner lots
and on lots extending through between two parallel streets, all portions
of a corner lot or a through lot which fronts on a public street shall be
subject to the front yard requirements of the zone district in which said
corner lot or through lot is located.
Q. Except for parking on driveways, no front yard shall be used to store
boats, vehicles, travel trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers and
other similar equipment on a residential lot. Such equipment may be
stored on the side of the building but no closer than 10 feet to the rear
or side lot line.
R. When a new lot is formed so as to include within its boundaries any part
of a former lot on which there is an existing building or use, the
subdivision must be carried out in such a manner as will not infringe
upon any of the provisions of this chapter either with respect to any
§ 163-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-30
1:341
existing structures or use and any proposed structures or use or
setbacks.
S. Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the construction, use or
maintenance of public buildings, structures or facilities, parks or other
publicly owned properties or the installation and maintenance of such
public utilities as may be required to service any district. All facilities
shall be subject to the yard requirements of this chapter and to site
development plan review.
T. Fences erected in the village shall adhere to the following standards:
(1) No fence in a front yard of a residential district shall be erected,
altered or reconstructed to a height exceeding 48 inches above
ground level.
(2) Fences in any rear or side yard of a residential district may be
erected, altered or reconstructed to a height of up to six feet above
ground level.
(3) Fencing used to enclose a tennis court may be permitted up to 10
feet in height, provided that such fencing is not less than 25 feet
from either the side or rear property line.
(4) These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the erection
of a wall for the purpose of retaining earth.
(5) Fences in nonresidential districts may be up to eight feet in height,
except that they shall not exceed 48 inches in height in any front
yard.
(6) No fence shall be erected to encroach on any property line or upon
a public right-of-way and shall be set back not less than one foot
from any sidewalk.
(7) The face side of all fences erected shall be located so as to face the
adjoining lot.
(8) No fence shall be erected in a special flood hazard area.
U. If the use of any lot or building involves the disposal of sewage or
wastewater and public sewers are not available, an adequate sanitary
disposal system for the same shall be installed in accordance with
regulations and standards promulgated by the Wyoming County
Department of Health and at all times maintained on such lot or in
lawful connection therewith. The minimum lot area otherwise required
shall be increased where necessary to the extent required to provide
such disposal system. Certification of approval for the installation of onsite
sewage disposal systems shall be obtained from the Department of
Health and submitted to the village prior to the start of construction.
V. No lot shall be used for the commercial storage or disposal of solid or
liquid waste without the prior approval of the Village Board. Duly
§ 163-30 WARSAW CODE § 163-30
1:342
approved individual sewage disposal systems shall be excepted from
this provision. Village Board approval shall be given only upon a finding
that the proposed use shall not have a detrimental effect upon
surrounding properties and evidence of any required permits necessary
from the Department of Health and/or New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation. The Village Board may require the
submission of any documents necessary to make the foregoing finding.
Consistent with the provisions of Subsection O above, this regulation
shall not prohibit the storage of animal waste upon any farm.
W. Discharges from individual sewage disposal systems shall be in
accordance with approved plans and the procedures and standards of
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and the
Wyoming County Department of Health.
X. All construction plans shall include consideration of stormwater
drainage needs. Whenever possible, site grading shall direct water
away from buildings and structures to the natural drainageway.
Y. Any structure which has been vacant or which has had utility service
disconnected for 12 consecutive months shall not be used for any
purpose without obtaining a new certificate of compliance.
Z. Any structure destroyed sufficiently by a fire so as to be declared unsafe
by the Fire Marshal shall require a new building permit before any
reconstruction is started. A new certificate of occupancy shall also be
required.
AA. Any structure partially destroyed by fire shall be rebuilt in accordance
with this chapter and the following additional provisions:
(1) No permit shall be required to restore/replace any portion of a
structure to its same condition prior to its being damaged.
(2) Any change in a structure damaged by fire, including but not
limited to the size of the building, bearing walls, entranceways and
building materials, shall require a new building permit, and said
reconstruction shall meet or exceed the Uniform Code
requirements and the provisions of this chapter.
BB. No more than one antenna and no more than one television satellite
reception dish shall be permitted on any lot in any district.
CC. The dumping of refuse, waste material and other substances shall be
prohibited in all districts as set forth in Chapter 90 of this Code. This is
not, however, to be construed as prohibiting filling to establish grades
following the issuance of a permit by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Materials used as fill to establish grades shall consist solely of clean
dirt, gravel and other clean fill. All materials applied shall be leveled
and covered with at least four inches of clean dirt and subject to
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 163-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-30
1:343
DD. No dwelling units shall be allowed to keep more than four dogs and four
cats which are more than six months of age.
§ 163-30 WARSAW CODE § 163-30
1:344
ARTICLE VI
Establishment and Designation of Zone Districts
§ 163-31. Establishment of districts. [Amended 9-16-1996 by L.L.
No. 3-1996]
The Village of Warsaw is hereby divided into zoning districts as hereinafter
set forth and as the same may be from time to time amended:
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
R-B Restricted Business District
C-B Central Business District
G-B General Business District
L-I Light Industrial District
FP-O Floodplain Overlay District
PRD Planned Residential Development District
§ 163-32. Zoning Map.
§ 163-33. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the zoning
districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
A. There shall exist only one Official Zoning Map, which shall be kept in
the office of the Village Clerk, and it shall bear the Seal of the Village of
Warsaw, a certification that it is the Official Zoning Map of the Village of
Warsaw and its date of adoption. Said Zoning Map shall show the
boundaries of the zoning districts herein established and which,
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
B. Said Zoning Map shall be on material suitable for reproduction by a dry
diazo copier or equivalent process. Copies of this map, which may from
time to time be published and distributed, would be accurate only as of
the date of their printing and shall bear words to that effect.
C. Changes made in zoning district boundaries or other matters portrayed
on the Zoning Map under the provisions set forth herein shall be
permanently affixed to the Zoning Map promptly after the amendment
has been approved by the Village Board and shall convey information as
to the date and nature of the change. No amendment to this chapter
which involves matters portrayed on the Zoning Map shall become
effective until such change and entry has been made on said Zoning
Map and has been attested by the Village Clerk.
§ 163-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-33
1:345
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the municipal limits of
the village shall be construed as following such municipal limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following the center lines of streams or other
water bodies shall be construed to follow such center lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in Subsections A through D above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by
the scale of the map.
F. Where physical or cultural features on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other circumstances not
covered by Subsections A through E above, the Board of Appeals shall
interpret the district boundaries.
§ 163-33 WARSAW CODE § 163-33
1:346
ARTICLE VII
District Regulations
§ 163-34. Application of regulations.
The regulations set by this chapter shall be the minimum regulations within
each district and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
use of land, except as hereinafter provided:
§ 163-35. R-1 Residential District.
In an R-1 Residential District, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building or part of a building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any uses except as
specified herein:
A. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and
no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.
B. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered which:
(1) Exceeds the height limitation for any structure within a specified
district;
(2) Accommodates or houses a greater number of families;
(3) Occupies a greater percentage of lot area; or
(4) Has narrower or smaller yards or other open spaces than herein
required or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this
chapter and the requirements of the New York State Uniform Code.
C. No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading
space required or provided in connection with any building or use for
the purpose of complying with the regulations set forth herein shall be
included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading
space similarly required for any other building or use except as
provided in Article XI.
D. No yard or lot existing at the time of enactment of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements established herein.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 Residential District is to provide an
opportunity for single-family residential development to occur at
medium densities in areas where water and sewer services are
available and in locations where adequate highway facilities exist.
Provisions have been made to permit higher-density residential
§ 163-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-35
1:347
developments in areas where such densities will not adversely impact
or create a burden for existing development.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be:
(1) Single-family dwellings, not to exceed one principal structure per
lot.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Permitted accessory uses shall be:
(a) One private garage or carport with a maximum capacity of 600
square feet for the parking of automobiles of residents on the
premises. The use of a private garage for the repair of
automobiles or other vehicles for a profit shall not constitute a
permitted accessory use.
(b) Customary accessory structures serving residential uses,
including but not limited to private swimming pools, fences,
storage buildings, toolhouses, greenhouses, tennis courts, pet
shelters and fireplaces, all subject to the following provisions:
[1] No more than two detached accessory buildings, excluding
private garages, may be located on any single parcel of
land. Detached accessory buildings with less than 50
square feet of floor area shall not be included in
determining the number of accessory buildings on a
property.
[2] The total area of all detached accessory buildings on any
single parcel of land, including buildings with less than 50
square feet of floor area, shall not exceed 200 square feet
in area. The area of detached private garages shall not,
however, be included in determining the total square
footage of detached accessory buildings.
[3] No detached accessory building shall exceed 12 feet in
height, except for a detached private garage which may be
up to 15 feet in height.
[4] With the exception of detached private garages, all
detached accessory buildings shall be located behind the
rear foundation wall of the principal building and in accord
with the setback requirements for rear and side yards
specified in Schedule I.44 Detached garages shall be
located to the rear of the front building line of the principal
building and may be located in a side yard in accord with
the setback requirements specified in Schedule I.
44.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-35 WARSAW CODE § 163-35
1:348
(c) Private swimming pools subject to the provision of Article XII
of this chapter.
(d) Off-street parking subject to the provisions of Article XI of this
chapter.
(e) Signs subject to the provisions of Article XIII of this chapter.
(f) Antennas or towers.
[1] Not more than one ground-mounted satellite television
dish antenna not more than 12 feet in diameter and 16 feet
in height may be permitted for each property. The
minimum setback of a ground-mounted satellite television
dish antenna from all property lines shall be 16 feet. A
zoning permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be required prior to placing a dish in operation. The
village may require the applicant to screen the dish in
order to reduce potential nuisance or disturbances to
adjacent properties. Although locations in side and rear
yards shall be encouraged, a ground-mounted satellite
television dish antenna may be located in a front yard if
the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that locating the dish in either the side or
rear yard would not provide adequate reception.
[2] Other antennas or towers may be either ground-mounted,
mounted on or attached to a building for support. Such
antennas or towers shall not exceed 15 feet above the
maximum height of the building on which it is mounted or
to which it is attached or accessory thereto. A zoning
permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
required prior to placing a ground-mounted antenna in
operation.
[3] An antenna or tower which is ground-mounted shall be
located in rear yards only. Antennae or ground-mounted
towers shall be set back from all other structures and all
property lines a distance which is not less than one and 1/2
times the distance between the highest part of such
antenna or tower and the ground. Guy wires, anchors and
other supports for an antenna shall not be closer than 10
feet to any property line.
(2) Other accessory uses not specified herein may be approved by the
Planning Board, provided that the Board determines that such uses
are clearly accessory to the permitted principal use and consistent
with the purpose and intent of the zone district and this chapter.
D. Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in Zoning Schedule I, which is a part of this
chapter.45
§ 163-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-35
1:349
§ 163-36. R-2 Residential District.
In an R-2 Residential District, no building or premises shall be used, and no
building or part of a building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any uses except as
specified herein.
E. Special uses. The following uses may be permitted, consistent with the
provisions of Article X, provided that a special use permit is approved
by the Planning Board:
(1) Essential services, excluding power plants, maintenance buildings
and storage yards.
(2) Cluster residential developments.
(3) Townhouse developments.
(4) Home occupations.
(5) Public and semipublic uses and buildings.
(6) Windmills.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the R-2 Residential District is to provide for the
orderly development of mixed single- and two-family dwelling units in
established residential neighborhoods in the village. Higher-density
residential developments may be permitted if it can be determined that
such densities will not adversely impact or create a burden for existing
development.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be:
(1) Single-family dwellings, not to exceed one principal structure per
lot.
(2) Two-family dwellings, including duplexes, may be permitted upon
approval by the Planning Board, provided that the following
standards and provisions are maintained:
(a) The minimum lot size, frontage and setback requirements shall
conform to the specifications set forth in Schedule I of this
chapter.46
(b) Each residential unit shall be served with separate utility
meters, shutoff valves and heating systems.
(c) In cases where eight or more duplex structures are planned for
a subdivision, the Planning Board shall carefully consider the
need for two access points to the subdivision and require them,
if needed.
45.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-35 WARSAW CODE § 163-36
1:350
(d) Each structure shall have its own individual driveway access to
a public street.
(e) Each dwelling unit shall have not less than two off-street
parking spaces. At least one of these off-street parking spaces
shall be provided for in an enclosed garage.
(f) The minimum living area to be provided in each residential unit
shall equal or exceed the minimum area required for singlefamily
dwellings.
(g) Each structure shall be landscaped to effectively screen
dissimilar uses from one another and to protect and enhance
the overall quality of the existing neighborhood.
(h) The Planning Board shall determine that the neighborhood
character of the site proposed for the development of twofamily
dwellings is appropriate for such use and that plans for
water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage are capable
of serving the proposed use.
(i) The Planning Board shall determine that the street system
serving the site is adequate to carry the anticipated traffic
flows and that the proposal will not create a burden or
nuisance for adjoining property owners.
(j) The Planning Board shall review and approve the amount and
location of landscaping and buffer screening to be provided.
(k) No site preparation or construction shall commence until final
site development plan approval has been granted and permits
issued by all governmental agencies involved.
(3) Residential conversions, which provide for the conversion of an
existing structure for occupancy by up to two families living as
separate and independent housekeeping units, may be permitted
upon approval by the Planning Board, provided that the following
standards and provisions are maintained:
(a) Any building proposed to be converted to create additional
living units shall have not less than 2,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
(b) The conversion shall comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Code and this chapter.
(c) For each dwelling unit proposed to be created by a conversion,
the minimum lot size shall exceed the minimum for a singlefamily
dwelling by 10%.
(d) The minimum bulk requirements and setbacks for structures
proposed for residential conversions shall comply with the
standards specified in Schedule I of this chapter.47
§ 163-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-36
1:351
§ 163-36.1. Restricted Business (R-B) District. [Added 9-16-1996 by
L.L. No. 3-1996]
(e) The minimum habitable floor area for living units shall be 550
square feet for efficiency units; 650 square feet for onebedroom
units; 900 square feet for two-bedroom units; and
1,000 square feet for three-bedroom units.
(f) The Planning Board shall determine that water supply and
sanitary sewer services are adequate to support the additional
density.
(g) The Planning Board shall determine that the street system
serving the site is adequate to carry the anticipated traffic
flows and that the proposal will not create a burden or
nuisance for adjoining property owners.
(h) Not less than two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each independent housekeeping unit.
(i) The Planning Board shall review and approve the amount and
location of landscaping and buffer screening to be provided.
C. Permitted accessory uses shall include:
(1) All uses, provisions and regulations specified for the R-1
Residential District.
D. Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in Zoning Schedule I, which is made a part of this
chapter.48
E. Special uses. The following uses may be permitted consistent with the
provisions of Article X, provided that a special use permit is approved
by the Planning Board:
(1) All uses, provisions and regulations specified for the R-1
Residential District.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(3) Multiple-family developments.
(4) Rooming houses.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for the
location of professional and administrative offices and related nonretail
activities which provide employment opportunities and/or broaden the
tax base. Restricted business uses generally have low volumes of traffic
47.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-36 WARSAW CODE § 163-36.1
1:352
compared to commercial and industrial uses. They are further typified
by limited hours of operation and low noise characteristics.
B. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Offices of architects, engineers, accountants, real estate brokers,
insurance agents, financial planners, lawyers, travel agents or
manufacturer's representatives.
(2) Offices and clinics of New York State licensed health-care
professions, including but not limited to dentists, chiropractic,
optical, physicians, veterinarians or other health-care professions,
excluding overnight occupancy, provided that there are no more
than four professionals per office or clinic.
(3) Corporate offices.
(4) Data processing or computer service centers which do not include
retail sales.
(5) Offices for public service utility companies, excluding any
warehouse, garage or storage areas.
(6) Subject to the approval of the Planning Board, other types of
professional offices which are consistent with the purpose of this
district.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) A restaurant or cafeteria within the principal building for supplying
meals only to employees and guests of the principal use.
(2) An assembly hall for meetings incidental to the business of the
principal use, provided that there be available off-street parking
space for all persons in attendance at any such meeting.
(3) Pharmacies when included within a medical services building.
(4) Storage facilities incidental to the principal use, provided that all
storage of materials and equipment is enclosed and secured from
adverse weather.
(5) Subject to the approval of the Planning Board, dish antennae.
D. Dimensional requirements.
(1) For all sites that are less than 40,000 square feet in area, the
dimensional requirements of the R-2 Zone shall apply.
(2) For all sites that are equal to or greater than 40,000 square feet in
area, the following dimensional requirements shall apply:
(a) Principal structures shall not exceed two stories nor shall they
exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 163-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-36.1
1:353
(b) All building or structures shall be set back from the front street
line a minimum of 100 feet.
(c) Each side yard in this district shall have a minimum width of
not less than 50 feet.
(d) The rear yards in this district shall have a minimum depth of
not less than 50 feet.
(e) When a side or rear yard abuts a residential district, such side
or rear yard shall be screened by a solid wall, fence or
evergreen hedge approved by the Planning Board.
(f) Principal structures shall not exceed 30% coverage of the total
lot area.
(g) Total lot coverage, including structures, parking areas and
other impervious surfaces shall not occupy more than 75% of
the total lot area. The remainder of the lot shall be landscaped
area.
E. Additional conditions and requirements.
(1) Site plan approval shall be secured from the Planning Board as
required in Article III of this chapter.
(2) No use shall be permitted to be established or maintained which,
by reason of its nature or manner of operation, is or may become
noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas,
fumes, noise, glare, vibration, refuse or water-carried waste.
(3) No outside storage of material or merchandise shall be permitted.
(4) There shall be a minimum of one parking space for each 200 feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof of the principal structure.
(5) Signs within the Restricted Business (RB) District shall conform to
§ 163-85B (Residential districts).
(6) The front yard of all lots and the exterior side of a corner lot shall
be landscaped and shall include the provision of vegetation of
suitable levels of maturity to enhance the overall quality of the
environment. In the case of lots where the real or side yard is
visible from a public highway or residential area, the Planning
Board, through its site plan review authority, may impose a similar
requirement where appropriate.
(7) Off-street parking may be permitted in front yards as long as that
parking is set back no less than 25 feet from the front lot line and is
located in a paved area designed for that purpose.
§ 163-36.1 WARSAW CODE § 163-37
1:354
§ 163-37. C-B Central Business District.
In a C-B Central Business District, no building or premises shall be used,
and no building or part of a building shall be erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used, in whole or in part, for any uses
except as specified herein.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C-B Central Business District is to provide
a variety of retail and service uses to satisfy the needs of individual
consumers and households as well as to meet the requirements of other
businesses, industries and institutions. The proximity to nearby
residences requires that commercial operations be conducted at a scale
commensurate with nearby residential development and possess a
minimum of characteristics and effects which may be detrimental or
create a nuisance to nearby residences.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be:
(1) Retail business establishments such as but not limited to the
following:
(a) Stores selling groceries, meats, baked goods and other such
food items.
(b) Drugstores.
(c) Stationery, tobacco and newspaper stores and confectionery
stores.
(d) Clothing, variety and general merchandise stores.
(e) Hardware, appliance, radio and television sales and service.
(f) Restaurants and taverns.
(g) Office supplies and equipment.
(h) Furniture and home furnishings.
(2) Personal service establishments such as but not limited to the
following:
(a) Barber- and beauty shops.
(b) Shoe repair and fix-it shops.
(c) Business and professional offices, including but not limited to
medical, legal, engineering, architectural, planning, real estate
and insurance offices and banks. Banks with drive-in facilities
shall be permitted, provided that at least five car-length spaces
are provided in the approach drive within the property line of
the lot for each drive-in teller's window. Such spaces shall be
exclusive of required off-street parking spaces.
(d) Dry cleaning stores and laundromats.
§ 163-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-37
1:355
(3) Bowling alleys.
(4) Hotels and motels.
(5) Assembly halls and theaters, excluding drive-in theaters.
(6) Newspaper printing, including incidental job printing. Such
operations shall be limited to having not more than 15 full-time
persons engaged therein at any one time and using not more than
30 horsepower in electric motor power.
(7) The sale of new and used automobiles, provided that:
(a) Such sales shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building
located on the same lot and having a building area of not less
than 3,000 square feet devoted to the sales and services of
automobiles.
(b) Accessory to such building, the sale of new and used
automobiles may be carried on in an unenclosed area, provided
that:
[1] Such area is on the same or an adjacent lot to such
building. If the enclosed area is on an adjacent lot, the lot
shall be not more than 200 feet from the lot with the
building and shall further be in the same ownership as said
building; be in a C-B Central Business District; and be used
for no other purpose.
[2] Such unenclosed area shall be paved, shall be suitably
drained and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
manner and in good order and condition.
[3] All exterior illumination shall be approved by the Planning
Board and shall be shielded to reduce the glare that may
negatively impact on surrounding properties and streets.
[4] Suitable landscaping and/or fencing of such unenclosed
area shall be required.
[5] A minimum area of 200 square feet shall be provided on
the lot for each automobile displayed, parked or stored in
any unenclosed area. Each automobile stored or displayed
therein shall be placed or parked parallel to each other
facing in the same direction toward the street upon which
such lot fronts, and such automobiles shall be arranged in
an orderly manner in such spaces.
(c) As used in this section, the sale of new automobiles shall be
deemed to mean only the sale of such automobiles under a
franchise granted to the person, firm or corporation
conducting such business by an automobile manufacturer.
§ 163-37 WARSAW CODE § 163-37
1:356
Used automobiles shall be sold only in connection with the sale
of new automobiles.
(d) No establishment for the sale of new and used automobiles
shall be opened, conducted or maintained except as provided
above. None of the provisions of this section, however, shall be
deemed to prohibit the continuance of the present use of any
property for the sale of new and used automobiles, provided
that any change in the nature of said use shall be subject to the
provisions of this section. Plans for any changes required to
bring about such conformance shall be submitted to and
approved by the Planning Board before any such change shall
be made. The Planning Board may approve, modify or
disapprove such plans and may impose reasonable and
appropriate conditions to such approval so that the spirit of
this chapter shall be observed.
(8) Bus stations.
(9) Assembling, converting, altering, finishing, cleaning or any other
processing of products, provided that:
(a) Goods so produced or processed are to be sold at retail,
exclusively on the premises;
(b) Space used for such purposes shall not occupy more than 20%
of the area devoted to retail sales, shall be clearly incidental to
such retail use and shall be fully concealed from any street;
(c) Except in connection with newspaper printing, electric motor
power not exceeding a total of 10 horsepower shall be used
exclusively. An installation of 10 horsepower or less using fuel
other than electricity may be used upon a finding by the Code
Enforcement Officer that said installation is expected to be free
of nuisance characteristics and will have no adverse effect on
neighboring uses; and
(d) Not more than two persons shall be engaged in such
production/processing at any one time.
(10) Funeral parlors.
(11) Other business uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
are similar in nature and scale to those permitted above.
(12) Upon the approval of the Planning Board, a principal building may
contain a combination of residential and business uses, provided
that such residential uses are accessory to the business conducted
and located elsewhere than on the street frontage of the ground
floor and having a minimum habitable area as required in Schedule
I.49
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be:
§ 163-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-37
1:357
(1) Private garages and storage buildings which are necessary to store
any vehicles, equipment or materials on the premises and which
are used in conjunction with a permitted business use.
(2) Access control, off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities,
fences and landscaping subject to the provisions of Article XI of this
chapter.
(3) Signs subject to the provisions of Article XIII of this chapter.
(4) Satellite television dish antennas subject to the provisions of
§ 163-35C(6)(a); however, a building-mounted antenna may be
permitted upon approval of the Planning Board if it can be
demonstrated that a ground-mounted location is not appropriate or
would not provide adequate reception. No building mounted
television dish shall exceed four feet in diameter and extend more
than six feet above the height of the building to which it is attached.
(5) Other accessory uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
are similar in nature and scale to those permitted above.
D. Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in Zoning Schedule I, which is a part of this
chapter.50
E. Special uses. The following uses may be permitted consistent with the
provisions of Article X, provided that a special use permit is approved
by the Planning Board:
(1) Essential services, excluding power plants, maintenance buildings
and storage yards.
(2) Motor vehicle service stations, including filling stations and auto
repair shops.
(3) Public and semipublic uses.
(4) Produce markets.
(5) Windmills.
(6) Car wash establishments.
(7) Multiple-family developments.
F. Other provisions and requirements for uses in the C-B District. Except
as otherwise provided herein, all permitted uses, whether principal or
accessory, including all storage, shall be carried on in a fully enclosed
building. Such provisions shall not apply to parking of registered
vehicles, outdoor loading or other service activities.
49.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-37 WARSAW CODE § 163-38
1:358
§ 163-38. G-B General Business District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the G-B General Business District is to provide
sufficient space in appropriate locations for a wide variety of business,
commercial and miscellaneous service activities, particularly along
certain existing major thoroughfares. It is the further purpose of this
district to provide for attractive and efficient retail shopping facilities of
integrated design in appropriate locations which are laid out and
developed as a unit.
B. Permitted principal uses shall be:
(1) Any use permitted in the C-B Central Business District.
(2) Drive-in restaurants and eating establishments where a substantial
percentage of sales are to takeout customers, provided that such
uses shall not be closer than 200 feet to a residential district.
(3) Hotels and motels.
(4) Printing, publishing and engraving establishments.
(5) Building supply and farm equipment stores.
(6) Electrical, heating, plumbing or woodworking shops.
(7) Wholesale establishments, provided that all sales activities are
conducted in a completely enclosed building.
(8) Automobile sales establishments subject to the provisions of
§ 163-37B(7), except that used car sales shall not be required to be
conducted in conjunction with the sale of new cars.
(9) Material storage yards in connection with retail sales of products
where storage is incidental to the approved occupancy of a store or
other permitted use, provided that all products and materials used
or stored are in a completely enclosed building or enclosed by a
masonry wall fence or hedge not less than six feet in height. The
storage of all materials and equipment shall not exceed the height
of the wall. The storage of cars and trucks used in connection with
the permitted trade or business is permitted within the walls, but
not including the storage of heavy equipment such as road-building
or excavating equipment.
(10) Commercial storage buildings providing space for rent.
(11) Veterinary animal clinics or offices with interior operations only.
(12) Other business uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
are similar in nature and scale to those permitted above.
C. Permitted accessory uses shall include:
§ 163-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-38
1:359
§ 163-39. L-I Light Industrial District.
In an L-I District, no building or premises shall be used and no building or
part of a building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended or
designed to be or used in whole or in part for any uses except as specified
herein.
(1) All uses and regulations specified herein for the C-B Central
Business District.
D. Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in Zoning Schedule I, which is a part of this
chapter.51
E. Special uses. The following uses may be permitted consistent with the
provisions of Article X, provided that a special use permit is approved
by the Planning Board.
(1) Essential services, excluding power plants.
(2) Motor vehicle service stations, including filling stations and auto
repair shops.
(3) Public and semipublic uses.
(4) Produce markets.
(5) Planned business centers.
(6) Windmills.
(7) Car wash establishments.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the L-I Light Industrial District is to provide for
the establishment of industrial uses essential to the development of a
balanced economic base in an industrial environment and to regulate
such development so that it will not be detrimental or hazardous to the
surrounding community and to the general health, safety and wellbeing
of the Village of Warsaw.
B. Permitted principal uses. The following shall be permitted principal
uses:
(1) Any use of a light-industrial nature which involves only the
processing, assembly, compounding or packaging of previously
prepared or refined materials, provided that at no time shall such
use result in or cause:
(a) Dissemination of dust, smoke, smog, observable gas, fumes or
odor or other atmospheric pollution, objectionable noise, glare
or vibration that will be evident beyond the property line.
51.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-38 WARSAW CODE § 163-39
1:360
(b) Hazard of fire or explosion or other physical hazard to any
adjacent building or any land area adjacent to the site of the
use.
(c) Violation of applicable standards or regulations adopted and
enforced by any federal, state, county or village environmental
or health agency or legislative body. Violation of such
standards shall result in the revocation of an existing
certificate of occupancy and/or certificate of compliance and
the immediate cessation of operations. The correction of the
violation and new certificates shall be a prerequisite to the
resumption of such industrial operations.
(2) The following uses which are indicative of those which are intended
to be permitted:
(a) Manufacture of machinery such as cash registers, sewing
machines, typewriters, calculators and other office machines.
(b) Fabrication of metal products such as baby carriages, bicycles,
metal foil, tin, aluminum, gold, etc., metal furniture, musical
instruments, sheet metal products and toys.
(c) Fabrication of paper products such as bags, book bindings,
boxes and packaging materials, office supplies and toys.
(d) Fabrication of wood products such as bolts, boxes, cabinets
and woodworking, furniture and toys.
(e) Food and associated industries such as bakeries, bottling of
food and beverages, food and cereal mixing and milling, food
processing, food sundry manufacturing, ice cream
manufacturing and manufacturing of spirituous liquor.
(f) The warehousing or storage of goods and products such as
building materials, farm supplies and the like which may be
sold from the premises to the general public. The bulk storage
of fuel for resale is specifically excluded from the intent of the
above.
(3) Office buildings for executive, engineering and administrative
purposes.
(4) Scientific or research laboratories devoted to research, design and/
or experimentation and processing and fabricating incidental
thereto.
(5) The compounding and processing of pharmaceutical and cosmetic
products.
(6) Commercial storage buildings.
§ 163-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-39
1:361
(7) Other uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, are similar
in nature and scale to those permitted above.
C. Permitted accessory uses shall be:
(1) Private garages and storage buildings which are necessary to store
any vehicles, equipment or materials on the premises and which
are used in conjunction with a permitted use.
(2) Access control, off-street parking, loading and unloading facilities,
fences and landscaping subject to the provisions of Article XI of this
chapter.
(3) Signs subject to the provisions of Article XIII of this chapter.
(4) Other accessory uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
are similar in nature and scale to those permitted above.
D. Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements for this
district are specified in Zoning Schedule I, which is a part of this
chapter.52
E. Special uses. The following uses may be permitted consistent with the
provisions of Article X, provided that a special use permit is approved
by the Planning Board.
(1) Essential services, excluding power plants.
(2) Motor vehicle service stations, including filling stations and auto
repair shops.
(3) Car wash establishments.
(4) Windmills.
(5) Retail businesses and personal service establishments.
(6) Transfer stations/recycling uses.
(7) Adult bookstores, cabarets and theaters as defined and regulated in
Chapter 36 of this Code.
(8) Public and semipublic uses and buildings. [Added 6-26-2003 by
L.L. No. 2-2003]
F. Other provisions and requirements for uses in the L-I Light Industrial
District.
(1) Residential uses shall be prohibited except for a caretaker's
residence on-site.
52.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-39 WARSAW CODE § 163-39
1:362
§ 163-40. FP-O Floodplain Overlay District.
(2) The manufacturing of all goods, including but not limited to the
processing, assembly, compounding and packaging of materials
shall be performed in a fully enclosed building.
(3) Incidental storage out of doors may be permitted, provided that
such materials are shielded from view from public streets and
adjacent residential districts by fencing, landscaping or other
appropriate measures determined by the Planning Board.
(4) Each use shall provide truck loading and unloading areas in an
amount sufficient to permit the transfer of goods and products in
other than a public street, off-street parking area or front yard.
(5) Parking areas may be located in any of the required yard areas,
provided that they are not less than 50 feet from a right-of-way line
or 20 feet from a property line.
(6) As an exception to Subsection F(5) above, no industrial activities
associated with an approved use, including off-street parking,
loading or outdoor storage, shall be located within 50 feet of an
adjacent residential district.
(7) The development of industrial areas shall be designed so as to
minimize the interference of electrical transmissions to nearby
properties.
A. Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and
private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters.
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damages.
(5) Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
§ 163-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-40
1:363
(6) Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
B. Objectives. The objectives of this section are to:
(1) Protect human life and health.
(2) Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects.
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public.
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard.
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood-blight areas.
(7) Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
(8) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
C. General provisions.
(1) Lands to which this section applies. This section shall apply to all
areas of special flood hazard within the Village of Warsaw.
(2) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of
special flood hazard are identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency as follows: (single panel) No. 360951 0003B,
dated November 18, 1981. This document is hereby adopted and
declared to be a part of this section. The Flood Insurance Study and
maps are on file at the Village Office, 15 South Main Street,
Warsaw, New York 14569.
(3) Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
(a) This section has been developed in response to revisions to the
National Flood Insurance Program through November 1, 1989,
and shall supersede all previous laws and ordinances adopted
for the purpose of establishing and maintaining eligibility for
flood insurance.
(b) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
section shall be held to be the minimum requirements, adopted
for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 163-40 WARSAW CODE § 163-40
1:364
Whenever the requirements of this section are at variance
with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or that
imposing the higher standards shall govern.
(4) Overlay district. The FP-O District shall not be independently
mapped upon the Zoning Map, but shall be mapped in conjunction
with an underlying district. The area within the FP-O District shall
be identical to the areas of special flood hazard within the Village of
Warsaw. The Zoning Map serves to provide a close approximation
of the special flood hazard area. The FIRM Maps and the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map shall be used to determine the exact
legal boundaries of the special flood hazard area.
(5) Uses permitted; dimensional requirements. The uses permitted and
the dimensional requirements for the FP-O District shall be
determined by the regulations specified in this Article for the
primary or underlying zone district.
(6) Penalties for noncompliance. Penalties for noncompliance with
these regulations are specified in Article XIV of this chapter. Any
structure found not compliant with the requirements of this
chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not applied for
and received an approved variance under Subsection G will be
declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection
required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations.
Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the
Village of Warsaw, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
D. Administration.
(1) Designation of the local administrator. The Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer and
implement this section by granting or denying floodplain
development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
(2) Review of application.
(a) Prior to approving a floodplain development permit for the
construction, expansion, demolition or substantial alteration of
any building or the change in use of any land area or building
§ 163-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-40
1:365
within an area of special flood hazard, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall refer all information and documentation to the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review the
information and recommend approval or denial of the permit,
in writing, to the Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) The Planning Board, prior to reaching its decision, may request
an advisory opinion from the Village Engineer and/or the
Village Attorney. The Planning Board shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer of its decision, and the Code Enforcement
Officer, acting on the written direction of the Planning Board,
shall either approve or deny the permit.
(3) Establishment of floodplain development permit. A floodplain
development permit shall be obtained before the start of
construction or any development, including the placement or
replacement of manufactured dwellings, mobile homes or
recreational vehicles, within the area of special flood hazard as
established in Subsection C(2). Application for a floodplain
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Code
Enforcement Officer and may include but not be limited to plans, in
quadruplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; and existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities
and the location of the foregoing.
(a) Application stage. The following information is required where
applicable:
[1] Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
lowest floor (including basement or cellar) of all
structures.
[2] Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
[3] When required, a certificate from a licensed professional
engineer or architect that the utility floodproofing will
meet the criteria of Subsection E(1)(c).
[4] A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or
architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure
will meet the floodproofing criteria of Subsection E(2)(c).
[5] A description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
(b) Construction stage. Upon placement of the lowest floor or
floodproofing by whatever means, it shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a
certificate of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed
§ 163-40 WARSAW CODE § 163-40
1:366
elevation in relation to mean sea level. The elevation certificate
shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified
by the same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
building, the floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional
engineer or architect and certified by the same. Any further
work undertaken prior to submission and approval of the
certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall review all data submitted.
Deficiencies detected shall be cause to issue a stop-work order
for the project unless immediately corrected.
(4) Duties and responsibilities of the Code Enforcement Officer. The
duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include but not be
limited to:
(a) Permit application review. He shall:
[1] Review all floodplain development permit applications to
determine that the requirements of this section have been
satisfied.
[2] Review all floodplain development permit applications to
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required.
[3] Review all floodplain development permit applications to
determine if the proposed development adversely affects
the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this
section, "adversely affects" means physical damage to
adjacent properties. An engineering study may be
required of the applicant for this purpose.
[a] If there is no adverse effect, then the permit shall be
granted consistent with the provisions of this section.
[b] If there is an adverse effect, then flood damage
mitigation measures shall be made a condition of the
permit.
[4] Review all floodplain development permits for compliance
with the provisions of Subsection E(1)(e), Encroachments.
(b) Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
Subsection C(2), Basis for establishing the areas of special
flood hazard, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain,
review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source in
§ 163-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-40
1:367
order to administer Subsection E(2), Specific standards, and
Subsection F, Floodways.
(c) Information to be obtained and maintained. He shall:
[1] Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean
sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement or cellar
of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement or cellar.
[2] For all new or substantially improved floodproofed
structures:
[a] Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to
mean sea level, to which the structure has been
floodproofed.
[b] Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
Subsection E.
[3] Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this section, including variances when
granted and certificates of compliance.
(d) Alteration of watercourses. He shall:
[1] Notify adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of such notification to the Regional Director,
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region II, 26
Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278.
[2] Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying
capacity is not diminished.
(e) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
[1] The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
make interpretations when there appears to be a conflict
between the limits of the federally identified area of
special flood hazard and actual field conditions.
[2] Base flood elevation data established pursuant to
Subsection C(2) and/or Subsection D(4)(b), when
available, shall be used to accurately delineate the areas of
special flood hazard.
[3] The Code Enforcement Officer shall use flood information
from any other authoritative source, including historical
data, to establish the limits of the areas of special flood
hazard when base flood elevations are not available.
§ 163-40 WARSAW CODE § 163-40
1:368
(f) Stop-work orders.
[1] All floodplain development found ongoing without an
approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stopwork
order by the Code Enforcement Officer. Disregard of
a stop-work order shall be subject to the penalties
described in Article XIV of this chapter.
[2] All floodplain development found noncompliant with the
provisions of this section and/or the conditions of the
approved permit shall be subject to the issuance of a stopwork
order by the Code Enforcement Officer. Disregard of
a stop-work order shall be subject to the penalties
described in Article XIV of this chapter.
(g) Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
developer's engineer or architect shall make periodic
inspections at appropriate times throughout the period of
construction in order to monitor compliance with permit
conditions and enable said inspector to certify that the
development is in compliance with the requirements of either
the floodplain development permit or the approved variance.
(h) Certificate of compliance.
[1] It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or
wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure
until a certificate of compliance has been issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer stating that the use of any
building or land is in conformance with the requirements
of this section.
[2] All other development occurring within the designated
flood hazard area will have, upon completion, a certificate
of compliance issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
[3] All certificates shall be based upon the inspections
conducted subject to Subsection D(4)(g) and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic information, floodproofing,
anchoring requirements or encroachment analysis which
may have been required as a condition of the approved
permit.
E. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(1) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the
following standards are required:
(a) Anchoring.
§ 163-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-40
1:369
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure.
[2] All manufactured dwellings shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
Manufactured dwellings must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Manufactured dwellings shall be elevated in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection E(2)(b)[1]. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
[3] All recreational vehicles placed on-site for longer than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed and ready for
highway use must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Recreational
vehicles shall be elevated in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection E(2)(b)[4].
(b) Construction materials and methods.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.
[2] All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize
flood damage.
(c) Utilities.
[1] Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding. When designed for location below the base flood
elevation, a professional engineer's or architect's
certification is required.
[2] All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system.
[3] New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters.
§ 163-40 WARSAW CODE § 163-40
1:370
[4] On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(d) Subdivision proposals.
[1] All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need
to minimize flood damage.
[2] All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
[3] All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
[4] Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments (including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions)
greater than either 50 lots or five acres.
(e) Encroachments.
[1] All proposed development in riverine situations where no
flood elevation data is available (unnumbered A Zones)
shall be analyzed to determine the effects on the floodcarrying
capacity of the areas of special flood hazard set
forth in Subsection D(4)(a), Permit application review. This
may require the submission of additional technical data to
assist in the determination.
[2] In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood
elevation data is available pursuant to Subsection C(2) or
D(4)(b) and no floodway has been determined, the
cumulative effects of any proposed development, when
combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
[3] In all areas of the special flood hazard where floodway
data is provided or available pursuant to Subsection C(2),
the requirements of Subsection F, Floodways, shall apply.
[4] Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
certain development in Zones A1 through 30, AE and AH
may be permitted to increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood (e.g., dams, levees, etc.), provided that
the Village Board endorses an application to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the permit
application provides all necessary data and analyses and
pays all fees and FEMA approval is received.
§ 163-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-40
1:371
[5] The Code Enforcement Officer shall require within Zones
AH and AO adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
(2) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base
flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Subsection
C(2), Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazards, and
Subsection D(4)(b), Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(a) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any resident structure shall:
[1] Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
[2] Have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are in
an area of special flood hazard, designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[b] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished
grade.
[c] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves,
screens or other coverings or devices, provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
[3] Within any AO Zone, have the lowest floor, including the
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
FIRM [at least two feet if no depth number is specified].
[4] Within any A Zone, when no base flood data is available,
have the lowest floor elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
(b) Manufactured dwellings and recreational vehicles.
[1] A manufactured dwelling that is placed or substantially
improved on a site in an A1 through 30, AE or AH Zone
§ 163-40 WARSAW CODE § 163-40
1:372
that is either outside of a manufactured dwelling park
or subdivision, in a new manufactured dwelling park or
subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured
dwelling park or subdivision or in an existing
manufactured dwelling park or subdivision on which a
manufactured dwelling has incurred substantial damage
as the result of a flood shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
[2] A manufactured dwelling to be placed or substantially
improved on a site located in an A1 through 30, AE or AH
Zone, in a manufactured dwelling park or subdivision as
herein defined, that is not subject to the provisions of
Subsection E(2)(b)[1], shall be elevated so that either:
[a] The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or
above the base flood elevation; or
[b] The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade and are securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system.
[3] New construction or substantial improvements of
manufactured dwellings in Zone A, where no base flood
elevation data is available, shall be elevated at least three
feet above the highest adjacent grade.
[4] All recreational vehicles placed on-site for longer than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed and ready for
highway use must be elevated in accordance with
Subsection E(2)(b)[1], [2] or [3].
[5] Manufactured dwellings and recreational vehicles on-site
for longer than 180 consecutive days, with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor, must meet the requirements
of Subsection E(2)(a)[2].
(c) Nonresidential construction. In Zones A1 through 30, AE and
AH, new construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation or be floodproofed
so that the structure is watertight below the base flood level
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
All structural components located below the base flood level
§ 163-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-40
1:373
must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy.
[1] In an AO Zone, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor, including the
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
FIRM [at least two feet if no depth number is specified].
[2] In an A Zone, when no base flood data is available, have
the lowest floor elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
[3] Within any AO Zone, have the lowest floor, including the
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM [at least two feet if no depth number is
specified].
[4] Within an A Zone, when no base flood data is available,
have the lowest floor elevated at least three feet above the
highest adjacent grade.
[5] If the structure is to be elevated, fully enclosed areas
below the base flood elevation shall be designed to
automatically (without human intervention) allow for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed architect or
meet the following criteria:
[a] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
[b] The bottom of all such openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the lowest adjacent finished
grade.
[c] Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves,
screens or other coverings or devices, provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters.
[6] If the structure is to be flood proofed:
[a] A licensed professional engineer or architect shall
develop and/or review structural design,
specifications and plans for the construction and shall
certify that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
§ 163-40 WARSAW CODE § 163-40
1:374
to make the structure watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water,
with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy.
[b] A licensed professional engineer or licensed land
surveyor shall certify the specific elevation (in relation
to mean sea level) to which the structure is
floodproofed.
[7] The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain on record a
copy of all such certificates noted in this subsection.
F. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas
designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to high-velocity floodwaters carrying debris and posing additional
threats from potential erosion forces. When floodway data is available
for a particular site as provided by Subsections C(2) and D(4)(b), all
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, shall be prohibited within the
limits of the floodway unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that
such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
G. Variance procedure.
(1) Appeals Board.
(a) The Board of Appeals as established by the Village Board shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this section.
(b) The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer in the
enforcement or administration of this section.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article
78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Appeals shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other subsections of this section and:
[1] The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others.
[2] The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
§ 163-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-40
1:375
[3] The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner.
[4] The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
[5] The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
[6] The availability of alternative locations for the proposed
use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
[7] The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
[8] The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
[9] The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
[10] The costs to local governments and the dangers associated
with conducting search and rescue operations during
periods of flooding.
[11] The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site.
[12] The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including search and rescue
operations, maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
and streets and bridges.
(e) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection G(1)(d) above
and the purposes of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this section.
(f) The Code Enforcement Officer shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon
request.
(2) Conditions for variances.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided
that the items in Subsection G(1)(d)[1] through [12] have been
§ 163-40 WARSAW CODE § 163-40
1:376
§ 163-41. PRD Planned Residential Development District.
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance
would normally increase.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon the determination that:
[1] The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
[2] The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
(c) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that:
[1] The conditions specified in this Subsection G(2)(a), (d), (e)
and (f) are met.
[2] The structure or other development is protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threat to public safety.
(d) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(e) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
(f) Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written
justification of:
[1] A showing of good and sufficient cause.
[2] A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
[3] A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety or extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(g) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with
the lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given
written notice that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from lowest
floor elevation.
§ 163-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-41
1:377
A. Purpose. The PRD Planned Residential District has been designed to
encourage innovations in residential development so that desirable
residential living areas can be accomplished. This section recognizes
that while standard zoning changes are appropriate for the regulation
of land use in neighborhood areas that are already substantially
developed, these techniques represent a type of regulatory rigidity and
uniformity which will not permit the type of land development
envisioned in the PRD Planned Residential Development District. Thus,
where Planned Residential Development District techniques are
deemed appropriate through the rezoning of land to a Planned
Residential Development District by the Village Board, the set of use
and dimensional specifications specified herein in Schedule I53 shall be
replaced by the approval process in which an approved plan becomes
the basis for establishing land use controls.
B. Objectives. In order to carry out the intent of this section, the PRD
Planned Residential Development District shall be designed to achieve
the following objectives:
(1) The proposed residential development shall be in harmony with the
general purpose, goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan
and this chapter.
(2) The proposed residential development shall comply with all
applicable regulations of this chapter except as modified by the
authority of this section.
(3) The proposed residential development shall not have a substantial
adverse effect upon adjacent properties, utility facilities, traffic
conditions and other matters that would affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(4) The proposed residential development shall be constructed,
arranged and operated so as to not interfere with the development
and use of neighboring properties.
(5) The proposed residential development shall be adequately served
by essential public facilities and services, such as but not limited to
sanitary sewers, public water supply, stormwater drainage facilities
and highway capacity.
(6) The proposed residential development shall provide for the
effective development of the project site, making appropriate
provisions for the preservation of trees, streams, wetlands, natural
topography and geological features and the prevention of soil
erosion.
C. General requirements.
53.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-41 WARSAW CODE § 163-41
1:378
(1) All types of residential uses are encouraged to be included in this
district, but are not necessarily required to obtain PRD zoning. In
order to develop a balanced community, the use of a variety of
housing types and densities shall be deemed to be consistent with
the objectives of this section.
(2) Accessory uses, such as private garages, storage buildings and
recreational and community activities, shall also be permitted as
appropriate to the PRD Planned Residential Development District.
(3) The PRD Planned Residential Development District shall be
applicable to any area in the village where the applicant can
demonstrate that the characteristics of the property proposed for
such use will meet the objectives of this section.
(4) The minimum area required to qualify for a PRD Planned
Residential Development District shall be 20 contiguous acres of
land. However, if an applicant can demonstrate that the
characteristics of the property proposed for such use can meet the
objectives of this section, projects with less acreage will be
considered.
(5) Where an applicant proposes the use of a portion of the site as
common property, satisfactory arrangements shall be made for the
improvement, operation and maintenance of such common
property and facilities. For the purpose of this section, the term
"common property" shall be defined as a parcel of land, together
with improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which is
shared by the owners and occupants of the PRD Planned
Residential Development District.
(6) Commercial, service or other nonresidential uses may be permitted
or required where such uses are scaled primarily to serve the
residents of the PRD Planned Residential Development District.
(7) The Village Board shall determine the appropriate dwelling unit
density for proposed PRD Planned Residential Development
Districts on an individual case basis.
(8) Individual buildings within a PRD Planned Residential
Development District shall be related to each other in design, mass,
materials, placement and connections to provide a visually and
physically integrated development.
(9) The treatment of all building facades within a PRD Planned
Residential Development District shall be comparable in amenity to
provide a visually and physically integrated development.
(10) Each dwelling unit shall be located, constructed and served by
utilities in such a manner that each dwelling unit may be sold
individually as a subdivision lot, condominium unit or in a similar
fashion as approved by the Village Board. Dwelling units located in
§ 163-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-41
1:379
a building common to other dwelling units shall be separated from
such dwelling units by a fire wall. Such fire wall shall extend from
the foundation to the roof and shall be unpierced.
(11) Utility lines providing electric, telephone, television or other
services shall be installed underground.
D. Application procedure.
(1) Application for the establishment of a PRD Planned Residential
Development District shall be made to the Village Board by filing an
application with the Village Clerk. The Village Board shall refer the
application to the Planning Board for consideration.
(2) In order for the Planning Board and the developer to reach an
understanding on basic design requirements, the developer shall
submit a plan describing the proposal to the Planning Board. Such
plan shall be to scale and shall be supplied in such form and
quantity as the Planning Board may require and shall include the
following information in addition to any other information which
the applicant deems necessary to support the application:
(a) The principal physical characteristics of the site, including an
analysis of the soils and subsoils and the location of major
physical features, including streams, floodplains, rock
outcroppings, major stands of trees, etc.
(b) The topography of the site with contour intervals of not more
than five feet of elevation; areas of the site where grades
exceed 3%; and portions of the site with a moderate to high
susceptibility to erosion, flooding or ponding.
(c) An analysis of the relationship of the site to the surrounding
community, including significant parcels of vacant land, and
the character of nearby built-up areas.
(d) Principal ties to the community at large with respect to
circulation, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and other
pertinent public facilities and services.
(e) A general description of the relationship of the proposal to
other community facilities, such as schools, fire protection and
cultural facilities, if any, and some indication as to how these
needs are to be met.
(f) The proposed land use plan indicating the location, number
and types of dwelling units; parks, playgrounds, recreational
structures and facilities; open spaces; common property and
all other uses; and the circulation pattern with all existing
right-of-way and easements, parking areas and
pedestrianways.
§ 163-41 WARSAW CODE § 163-41
1:380
(g) A generalized grading and landscaping plan and plans for
stormwater drainage.
(h) If the development is to be staged, an indication of how the
staging is to proceed.
(i) Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning
Board to evaluate the consistency of the proposed PRD
Planned Residential Development with the purpose and
objectives of this section.
E. Review of development plan by Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall review the development plan and related documents and shall
provide a written report to the Village Board within 60 days of the date
following the receipt of a complete application. The Planning Board may
conduct a public hearing on the development plan to assist in the
preparation of its report. If the Planning Board does not submit a
written report to the Village Board within this sixty-day period, the
applicant may proceed on the basis that the Planning Board is in favor
of the proposed action. The Planning Board may, however, by official
action, extend this time period for an additional 60 days. The Village
Board shall be so informed as to the status of the review by the Planning
Board.
(1) A favorable report shall be based on the following findings which
shall be included as part of the report:
(a) The proposal implements the goals and policies of the village's
Comprehensive Plan more effectively than would the use of
conventional zoning techniques.
(b) The proposal meets all of the requirements of this section.
(c) The proposal represents a creative approach to the use of land
through innovation and flexibility.
(d) The proposal is conceptually sound in that it meets a
community need and that it conforms to accepted design
standards in the proposed roadway system, land use
configuration, open space system and drainage and utilities
systems.
(e) Adequate services and utilities are available or are proposed to
be made available to serve the development.
(2) An unfavorable report shall clearly state the reasons therefor and,
if appropriate, point out to the applicant what may be necessary to
receive a favorable report.
F. Application for Planned Residential Development District. Upon receipt
of a report from the Planning Board, the Village Board may consider the
application for a PRD Planned Residential Development District as it
would any other application for amendment to the Zoning Map and may
§ 163-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-41
1:381
establish a date for and conduct a public hearing for such an
amendment as provided by Village Law.
G. Zoning for PRD Planned Residential Development.
(1) If the Village Board approves the establishment of a PRD Planned
Residential Development District, the Zoning Map shall so be
amended. When rezoning land for such use, the Village Board shall
establish the maximum number and type of dwelling units therein
and may, if it feels it necessary in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the community, attach to its zoning
resolutions any additional requirements for the applicant to meet.
Such requirements may include, but not be limited to, visual and
acoustical screening, land use mixes, order of construction and/or
occupancy, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems,
availability of sites within the area for needed public services,
parks and open spaces and the protection of natural and/or historic
sites. Any application for the establishment of a PRD Planned
Residential Development District shall be subject to site
development plan review as provided in Article III of this chapter.
The Planning Board shall approve the final site development plan
prior to effectuation of the Zoning Map amendment and the
issuance of a building permit by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Such site development plan may constitute the entire development
or, if staged, only a portion thereof. If the project is to be
constructed in stages, only that portion receiving site development
plan approval may be effectuated.
(2) The fact that an application complies with all of the specific
requirements set forth herein shall not be deemed to create a
presumption that the proposed development would result in a more
efficient and desirable development than may be accomplished by
the use of conventional zoning categories or that it would ensure
compatibility with surrounding development; nor shall such
compliance, by itself, be sufficient to require the approval of the
development plan or the approval of the zoning amendment to
create a PRD Planned Residential Development District. Such
rezoning shall be recommended or rejected by the Planning Board
on a finding that the proposed action is or is not proper for the
comprehensive and systematic development of the Village of
Warsaw.
§ 163-41 WARSAW CODE § 163-41
1:382
ARTICLE VIII
Permitted Modifications
§ 163-42. Lot regulations.
§ 163-43. Height regulations.
§ 163-44. Yard regulations.
A. A nonconforming zone lot of official record existing at the effective date
of this chapter may be used for any purpose permitted in the zone
district in which it is located, irrespective of its area or width, provided
that the owner of which does not own any adjoining property which
would create a conforming lot if all or part of said property were
combined with subject zone lot, and provided that the minimum area
for such lot shall be 12,000 square feet and have a minimum lot width of
80 feet within the R-1 Residential District and 8,000 square feet and 65
feet in width in the R-2 Residential District and that all other provisions
of this chapter are adhered to. No lot or lots in single ownership shall
hereafter be reduced so as to create one or more nonconforming lots.
B. A permit for the use of preexisting lots which are less than the minimum
area and lot width specified in Subsection A above may only be issued
following the approval of a variance by the Board of Appeals.
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas, domes, silos and other buildings not used for human
occupancy.
B. Chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, freestanding towers,
television and radio antennas and similar features and necessary
mechanical appurtenances usually carried on and above the roof level
may exceed the height limitation of this chapter by not more than 15
feet.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the erection of
a parapet wall or cornice for ornament which may extend above the
height limits of this chapter by up to five feet.
A. Side yard reduction. In the case of lots which comply with the
provisions for modification (see § 163-42A), the minimum side yard
setback, as specified in Schedule I,54 shall be reduced by six inches for
each foot by which a lot is less than the minimum lot width requirement
specified in Schedule I for the zone in which located. In no case,
however, shall the minimum side yard setback be reduced to less than
12 feet in an R-1 Residential District and 10 feet in an R-2 Residential
District.
54.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-44
1:383
§ 163-45. Projections into required yards.
Certain architectural features may project into required yards as follows:
B. Front yard exception. In residential districts where the frontage on the
same side of the street within 500 feet of the subject property is 50% or
more developed, the required front yard setback from the right-of-way
line for a new structure may be modified to the average for such
existing development. Otherwise, the requirements of Schedule I55 shall
apply.
A. Cornices, canopies, eaves or other architectural features may project
into side yards a distance not exceeding two inches per one foot of side
yard width, but may not exceed a total of three feet.
B. Fire escapes may project into side and rear yards a distance not
exceeding four feet, six inches.
C. Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, uncovered stairways and necessary
landings and chimneys may project a distance not exceeding three feet,
provided that such features do not occupy in the aggregate more than
1/3 of the length of the building wall on which they are located.
D. Patios may be located in side and rear yards, provided that they are not
closer than 10 feet to any adjacent property line.
55.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-44 WARSAW CODE § 163-45
1:384
ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 163-46. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued although such use or building does not conform to the regulations
specified by this chapter for the zone district in which such land or building
is located. The following provisions shall, however, apply to all
nonconforming uses:
§ 163-47. Certification of nonconformance.
After the effective date of this chapter, upon the written request of the user
of any structure or premises or at the insistence of the Code Enforcement
Officer, an examination by the Code Enforcement Officer of any existing
use shall be made. A report of the findings made upon such examination
shall thereafter be filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals, together with a
certificate of existing nonconforming use, which shall clearly describe the
premises and structure, if any, referred to and shall specify the nature and
extent of such existing use. Such certificate shall be prepared in triplicate,
one copy of which shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer, one
A. A nonconforming lot shall not be further reduced in size.
B. A nonconforming building shall not be enlarged, extended or increased
unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of
nonconformance.
C. A nonconforming use shall not be expanded except as may be
authorized by § 163-48.
D. A nonconforming use may be changed into a conforming use. When a
nonconforming use is changed to conform to the requirements of this
chapter, the use of the building or tract of land shall not be changed
again except in accordance with these regulations.
E. Where such nonconforming use is upon the land itself and not enclosed
within a structure or where such use involves the removal of soil,
minerals or the excavation of gravel or rock or other material, such use
may be continued upon the land being so used at the time of the
adoption hereof. Any such nonconforming use of the land may be
extended or expanded to include any part of the plot or parcel of land
now being used or held in reserve for future use, provided that such
enlargement does not involve the use of any lot acquired or the
excavation rights of which were acquired by the excavation operator
after the effective date of this chapter. However, such extension or
expansion of such nonconforming use shall comply with the setback and
fencing requirements of this chapter.
§ 163-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-47
1:385
copy of which shall be furnished to the Zoning Board of Appeals and one
copy to be furnished to the owner or user.
§ 163-48. Expansion of nonconforming uses and/or structures.
A nonconforming use and/or structure shall not be expanded except in
conformance with the procedures and regulations specified in this section.
In no case shall such expansion extend beyond the lot occupied by such
nonconforming use or structure. The expansion of a nonconforming use
or structure hereunder shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Board
of Appeals, and each case shall be considered on an individual basis.
Application forms for the expansion of a nonconforming use and/or
structure shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit to allow the expansion of a
preexisting nonconforming use and/or structure only upon written
authorization of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals
in considering such special requests shall, at a minimum, address the
following potential concerns:
A. Standards applicable to authorizing the expansion of a nonconforming
use and/or structure:
(1) The location and size of the nonconforming use and/or structure,
the nature and intensity of the operations involved in or conducted
in connection with it, the size and site in relation to it, the location
of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to
streets giving access thereto. Conditions shall be in place such that
the expansion will not be inconsistent with the orderly development
of the district in which the use is located.
(2) Screening or other protective measures shall be adequate to
protect any adjacent properties from objectionable aspects of any
such expansion of the nonconforming use.
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be of adequate size for the particular
use, and access drives shall be laid out so as to achieve maximum
safety and minimum inconvenience to adjacent properties.
(4) The Zoning Board of Appeals may prescribe any condition that it
deems necessary or desirable to aid it in making a determination on
the application and to protect the interests of the community and
adjacent properties.
B. Public hearing.
(1) Before authorizing the expansion of a nonconforming use and/or
structure, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall give public notice and
hold a public hearing on the application in the same manner as
required by law for amendments to the chapter.
(2) Prior to such public hearing, the application shall be referred to the
Village Planning Board for report and recommendation. The
§ 163-47 WARSAW CODE § 163-48
1:386
§ 163-49. Abandonment.
In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, premises, building or
structure or any part or portion thereof has been discontinued for a period
of one year, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be reestablished,
and all future uses shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Such discontinuance of the active and continuous operation of such
nonconforming use or part or portion thereof for such period of one year
is hereby construed and considered to be an abandonment of such
nonconforming use, regardless of any reservation of an intent not to
abandon the same or of an intent to resume active operations. If actual
abandonment in fact is evidenced by the removal of buildings, structures,
machinery, equipment and other evidences of such nonconforming use of
the land and premises, the abandonment shall be construed and considered
to be completed and all rights to reestablish or continue such
nonconforming use shall thereupon terminate.
§ 163-50. Restoration.
Planning Board shall have 30 days after said referral to state its
position relative to the proposed application. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall hold such public hearing at the earliest possible date
following the thirty-day referral period and may take action on the
proposal as it deems appropriate.
C. Limitations. An authorization to permit the expansion of a
nonconforming use and/or structure shall be deemed to authorize only
the particular use or structure specified in the application and shall
apply only to the area specified in the permit. A permit authorizing an
expansion under this section shall expire within six months from the
date of issuance if the nonconforming use and/or structure is not
expanded or enlarged.
A. Any building damaged by fire or other unintentional causes to the
extent of more than 50% of its true value shall not be repaired or rebuilt
except in conformance with this chapter. In the case of a permitted
restoration of a nonconforming use, such restoration shall not increase
the degree of nonconformance.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe condition any wall or roof which has been declared unsafe by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Normal maintenance repairs and incidental alteration of a building or
other structure containing a nonconforming use shall be permitted,
provided that it does not extend the area or volume of space occupied
by the nonconforming use.
D. Any building which is nonconforming due to insufficient yard distances
or lot area shall not be considered a nonconforming use. Any alterations
or structural changes may be accomplished within the existing frame of
§ 163-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-50
1:387
§ 163-51. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one district to another of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein or
created thereby.
§ 163-52. Construction approval prior to adoption of regulations.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building or site complying with existing laws, a permit
for which had been duly granted before the date of adoption of this chapter
or any applicable amendment thereto.
said building, but any additions shall conform to the specific setback
and yard distance requirements of this chapter.
§ 163-50 WARSAW CODE § 163-52
1:388
ARTICLE X
Special Permit Uses
§ 163-53. Application; general standards.
A. The uses specified in this Article are hereby declared to possess unique
characteristics requiring that each proposal for any such use shall be
considered by the Planning Board as an individual case. Upon
application complying with the requirements of Article III, special use
permits may be approved by the Planning Board and issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer in accordance with the administrative procedures
set forth in Article III and only after it has found that each and all of the
following standards have been met:
(1) The proposed special use is consistent with the general intent of
the village's Master Plan and with each of the specific purposes set
forth in this chapter.
(2) The location, size and use of the structures involved, nature and
intensity of the operations involved and size and layout of the site in
relation to the proposed special use are such that it will be
compatible with the orderly development of the use district.
(3) The operation of the proposed special use is no more objectionable
to the uses of nearby properties, by reason of dust or smoke
emission, noise, odors, fumes, pollution of air or water, including
subsurface waters, unsightliness or similar conditions, than would
be the operation of any permitted use.
(4) The proposed special use satisfies each and all standards and
conditions specified for such special use by the relevant provisions
of this Article.
B. The Planning Board may impose additional conditions or restrictions as
it may deem necessary prior to approving any special use permit
application in order to protect public health and safety, the quality of
the village's natural resource base and the value of property. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall make an on-site visit to each property
authorized as a special use not less than one time each year. The
purpose of said site visit is to ensure that the use is being operated in
accord with the conditions specified by the Planning Board. If the Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine that a violation of this chapter or
the conditions imposed by the Planning Board exists, the certificate of
occupancy and/or certificate of compliance shall be null and void. A new
special use permit application shall be required to be submitted and
approved prior to the reestablishment of said use.
C. No site preparation or construction shall commence nor shall existing
structures be occupied for any special permit use until final site
development plan approval has been granted by the Planning Board
and permits have been issued by all governmental agencies involved.
§ 163-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-54
1:389
§ 163-54. Essential services.
§ 163-55. Motor vehicle service stations, filling stations and auto
repair shops.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for motor vehicle
service stations, filling stations and auto repair shops in the C-B Central
Business, G-B General Business and L-I Light Industrial Districts, provided
that the following standards and conditions are maintained:
A. Essential services, as defined in § 163-10 herein, may be allowed as a
special permit use in any zone district upon the approval of a special
use permit by the Planning Board.
B. The Planning Board shall determine the following prior to approving a
special use permit:
(1) The proposed installation in a specific location is necessary and
convenient for the efficiency of the essential service or the
satisfactory and convenient provision of service to the area in
which the particular use is to be located.
(2) The design of any building in connection with such facility shall
conform to the neighborhood character of the area and will not
adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property
rights in the district in which it is to be located.
(3) Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be
provided.
(4) A buffer strip not less than 15 feet in depth shall be provided
around the perimeter of the property proposed for such use.
(5) Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
(6) All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall be met.
A. In addition to the information required in the special permit application
and enumerated in § 163-19 herein, the site development plan
submitted shall also show the location and number of fuel tanks to be
installed, the dimensions and capacity of each storage tank, the depth
the tanks will be placed below the ground and the number and location
of fuel pumps to be installed.
B. Site development plans for such uses, including the location of tanks
and fire-suppression equipment, shall comply with the requirements of
the Uniform Code.
C. Such uses shall be screened from adjacent uses by a buffer area,
including screening and fencing to be determined by the Planning
Board, so as to prevent the transmission of headlight glare across the
property line. The Planning Board shall determine, on an individual
case basis, how close to the right-of-way the landscaped buffer shall be
§ 163-54 WARSAW CODE § 163-55
1:390
§ 163-56. Public and semipublic uses and buildings. [Amended
6-26-2003 by L.L. No. 2-2003]
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for public and
semipublic uses of an institutional, health, educational, recreational,
required to be installed. Such buffer screen shall have a minimum
height of six feet above the ground. If said shrubbery becomes decayed
and fails to provide an adequate screen, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall direct the property owner to replace said shrubs.
D. The entire area of the site traveled by motor vehicles shall be hard
surfaced and of asphalt or concrete construction.
E. All repairs of motor vehicles, except for minor servicing, shall be
performed in a fully enclosed building. No more than two partially
dismantled motor vehicles shall be stored outside of an enclosed
building at any one time.
F. Motor vehicle service stations may include facilities for the sale of food,
household items and convenience merchandise, provided that the sale
of such items takes place entirely within an enclosed building.
G. Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and the
building island only. The outdoor display of oil cans and/or antifreeze
and similar products may be displayed on the respective island if
provided for in a suitable stand or rack.
H. No building or structure, including gasoline pumps or automotive
service appliances, shall be erected within 30 feet of any street line.
I. No motor vehicle service station or auto repair shop may display more
than two unregistered vehicles for sale outside of an enclosed building
at any one time.
J. No motor vehicle service station or auto repair shop shall have more
than two driveways on any public street fronting the site. The driveway
width on any street shall not exceed 1/3 of the total site frontage on
each street.
K. No driveway shall be closer than 50 feet to the intersection of two street
corner lot lines or within 20 feet of an adjacent lot line.
L. No motor vehicle service station or auto repair shop and no driveway to
any such use shall be established within 200 feet of the boundary line of
any residential district or of any school, church, park, playground,
hospital, public library, institution for dependent children or any place
of public assembly designed for the simultaneous use of 100 persons or
more, regardless of the district where the subject premises are located.
For the purposes of this section, the distance shall be measured along
the street line on the side of the street where such use is proposed or
such driveway would cross.
§ 163-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-56
1:391
religious or cultural nature in all districts except the L-I Light Industrial
District, provided that the following standards and provisions are
maintained:
§ 163-57. Multiple-family developments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for multiple-family
developments in the R-2 Residential and C-B Central Business Districts,
provided that the following standards and provisions are maintained:
A. A statement setting forth the details of the operation of the use shall be
provided.
B. The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with evidence of
approval, certificate of need, license or other similar document
required to initiate or expand such a use from any and all appropriate
regulatory agencies.
C. The proposal shall meet the minimum area and yard requirements for
such uses as specified in Schedule I.56
D. The proposed use shall meet the minimum off-street parking and
loading and unloading requirements of this chapter as well as
provisions for landscaping, buffering, signs and accessways.
E. The Planning Board, in considering the request for a special use permit,
may impose any conditions it deems necessary to protect the health,
safety and public welfare of the village.
A. No site preparation or construction shall commence nor shall existing
structures be occupied until final site development plan approval has
been granted by the Planning Board and permits have been issued by
all governmental agencies involved.
B. The minimum land area required for such use shall be two acres.
C. The maximum gross density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre.
D. No apartment building shall contain more than 12 dwelling units.
E. Minimum habitable floor area requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Efficiency apartment unit: 550 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom apartment unit: 650 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom apartment unit: 800 square feet.
(4) Three-bedroom apartment unit: 900 square feet.
(5) Four-bedroom apartment unit: 1,000 square feet.
F. Unit distribution.
56.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-56 WARSAW CODE § 163-57
1:392
(1) No more than 30% of the total units within a multiple-family
dwelling development shall be efficiency units.
(2) No more than 30% of the total units within a multiple-family
dwelling development shall have three or more bedroom units.
G. Area and yard requirements. Minimum area and yard requirements for
each multiple-family structure within a multiple-family development
shall be as follows:
(1) Setback shall be as follows:
(a) Front: 60 feet.
(b) Rear and side: 40 feet.
(2) Minimum distance between buildings shall be 60 feet.
(3) Direct line of sight visibility from one building to another shall not
be less than 100 feet.
(4) Every building shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet from all
interior roads, driveways and parking areas.
(5) A strip of land at least six feet in depth surrounding each building
shall be kept completely open except for foundation plantings of
less than six feet in height.
(6) Courtyards bounded on three sides by the wings of a single
building or by the walls of separate buildings shall have a minimum
court width of two feet for each one foot in height of the tallest
adjacent building.
H. No exterior wall shall exceed 100 feet in length unless there is a lateral
offset of at least eight feet in its alignment. Each offset shall occur no
less frequently than along each 100 feet of length of such exterior wall.
I. All stairways to the second floor or higher shall be located inside the
building.
J. Access to public street.
(1) All multiple-family dwelling developments shall have direct access
to a public street or a private street which is improved to meet
village standards.
(2) Where there are 12 or more dwelling units in a development,
access from the common parking area(s) to the public street must
be provided by either a private street or a street dedicated to the
village by the developer. The minimum width of any private street
in a multiple-family development shall be 12 feet when no on-street
parking is allowed and 18 feet when parking is allowed on one side
of the street.
§ 163-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-57
1:393
(3) If there are more than 50 dwelling units in a multiple-family
development or if, in the opinion of the Planning Board, the location
or topography of the site indicate the need for additional access,
the Planning Board may require such additional access as a
condition of site development plan approval.
K. Requirements for off-street parking as provided in Article XI of this
chapter shall be met, except that the location of off-street parking lots
may be modified to conform with the approved site development plan,
provided that off-street parking shall not be located within any required
setback areas. Paved pedestrian walkways, with appropriate lighting,
shall be provided from off-street parking areas to all living units each
parking area is intended to serve.
L. The aggregate lot coverage of multiple-family dwelling developments
shall not exceed 30% of the total lot area.
M. Services.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities, toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities.
(2) There shall be a common storage area in each building for bicycles,
baby carriages and similar types of equipment. Storage areas shall
include not less than 40 square feet in area per dwelling unit and
shall be a minimum of five feet in height and not less than four feet
in width per dwelling unit.
(3) Sufficient laundry, drying, garbage pickup and other utility areas
shall be provided and shall be located with a view both to
convenience and to minimizing the detrimental effect on the
aesthetic character of the building(s) and shall be enclosed and
shielded from view by fencing, walls or shrubbery of at least six feet
in height around the perimeter. Fencing and walls shall be not more
than 50% open on the vertical surface.
N. Recreation and open space; maintenance.
(1) Multiple-family dwelling complexes shall be designed to create
usable private open space. A minimum of 10% of the total tract
area, exclusive of the required setback areas, buffer strip and
parking areas, shall be designated for common recreational
purposes.
(2) No recreational area shall be less than 10,000 square feet in area
nor less than 100 feet in width. Areas designated for recreation
purposes shall be approved by the Planning Board.
(3) Multiple-family dwelling complexes shall be attractively
landscaped and properly maintained. Open space adjacent to,
around or between driveways, parking areas, structures or other
§ 163-57 WARSAW CODE § 163-57
1:394
§ 163-58. Townhouse developments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for townhouse
developments in any residential district, provided that the following
standards and provisions are maintained:
required improvements shall be graded and seeded to provide a
thick stand of grass or other plant material.
(4) Multiple-family developments shall be constructed in accord with
the site development plan approval by the Planning Board and shall
be designed to include adequate provisions for stormwater runoff.
O. Utilities.
(1) All public utility, electric, gas, cable television and telephone lines
shall be installed underground.
(2) Multiple-family developments shall be served exclusively by public
water and sanitary sewer services. Connections to existing supply
and disposal systems shall be approved by the appropriate
authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
A. General requirements. No site preparation or construction shall
commence nor shall existing structures be occupied until final site
development plan approval has been granted by the Planning Board
and permits have been issued by all governmental agencies involved.
The following general requirements and standards shall govern the
review and approval of site development plans for townhouse
developments:
(1) Each townhouse dwelling unit shall be located, constructed and
served by public facilities and services and utilities in such fashion
that each dwelling unit may be sold individually.
(2) Each individual dwelling unit in a townhouse shall be separated
from other such dwelling units by a fire wall. Such fire wall shall be
of masonry construction, shall extend from the foundation to the
roof and shall be unpierced.
(3) Natural features, including streams, drainageways and existing
trees, shall be preserved and incorporated in the landscaping of the
development.
(4) All utility lines which provide electric, gas, telephone, television or
other similar services shall be installed underground. Surfacemounted
equipment shall be located in a manner so as to minimize
potential conflict with other uses and activities.
(5) Plans submitted for townhouse developments shall identify areas
proposed for dedication to the village, areas to be held in common
ownership and property to be owned by individuals.
§ 163-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-58
1:395
(6) Common property shall, except when accepted by the Village Board
for dedication, be privately owned. Where property is to remain in
common ownership, the developer shall provide for and establish
an organization for the ownership and maintenance of such
common property. Rules and regulations proposed to govern the
operation and maintenance of all common property shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Planning Board. Common
property shall not be changed from its status or use as common
property without specific authorization of the Village Board.
(7) In reviewing proposals for the establishment of organizations to
govern the ownership and maintenance of any common property,
the Planning Board shall consider and determine the adequacy of:
(a) The timetable for the creation of the organization.
(b) The requirements for membership in the organization by
residents.
(c) The safeguards to ensure the continuance of the common
property as common property.
(d) The liability of the organization for insurance, taxes and
maintenance of all facilities.
(e) The provision for pro rata sharing of costs and assessments.
(f) The financial capacity of the organization to maintain and
administer common facilities.
(g) The proposed relationship between the developer and the
organization and the plan to turn over the responsibility for the
maintenance and administration of common facilities to the
organization.
B. Minimum standards for townhouse developments.
(1) Area. The minimum land area for townhouse developments shall be
two acres.
(2) Densities. The maximum density of residential development per
gross acre of land (including roadways, pedestrian walkways,
common recreation and off-street parking areas, open areas and all
nonresidential areas) for townhouse developments shall not exceed
six units per acre in the R-1 Residential District and eight units per
acre in the R-2 Residential District.
(3) Open space. Not less than 25% of the land area within a townhouse
development, excluding parking areas and vehicle access facilities,
shall be developed and maintained as open space for the use and
enjoyment of residents of said development and their guests.
§ 163-58 WARSAW CODE § 163-58
1:396
(4) Lot coverage. The coverage of all buildings and structures within a
townhouse development shall not exceed 25% of the area of the
tract.
(5) Building height. No townhouse building shall exceed 32 feet in
height.
(6) Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between two
townhouse dwelling buildings shall be 60 feet. The minimum
distance between a townhouse dwelling building and any other
structure, including a swimming pool, shall not be less than 25 feet.
(7) Setbacks. No minimum front, side or rear setbacks shall be
required within a townhouse development except when dwelling
units are positioned relative to a public street. Where a structure
faces or abuts a public street, no part of the structure shall be
located closer than 60 feet to the public right-of-way. No structure
shall be set back less than 20 feet from any common parking area.
(8) Setbacks from other districts. No structure within a townhouse
development shall be located closer than 40 feet to any residential
district boundary line. This setback shall be increased to 60 feet
where the zone district boundary line abuts a business or industrial
district.
C. Building standards.
(1) No more than eight townhouse dwelling units shall be included in a
single dwelling building.
(2) No building shall exceed a maximum length of two 240 feet on any
exterior facade.
(3) Townhouse dwelling buildings shall be related to one another in
design, building mass, materials and placement to provide a
visually and physically integrated development.
(4) The treatment of the sides and rear facades of all buildings in a
development shall be comparable in amenity and appearance to the
treatment of any building facade which faces a public street and
complimentary in architectural design to adjacent residential
structures.
(5) Building walls shall be oriented so as to ensure adequate exposure
of light and air to each dwelling unit and to the rooms within.
(6) Buildings shall be arranged so as to preserve visual and audible
privacy between each townhouse dwelling unit and adjacent
townhouse buildings.
(7) Building entranceways of adjacent dwelling units in the same
structure shall be designed to ensure the privacy of occupants. This
§ 163-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-58
1:397
may be accomplished by varying the setbacks of entranceways or
by providing screening or landscaped plantings, as appropriate.
(8) Building entranceways shall be provided with appropriate
illumination for the convenience and safety of residents. Such
lighting shall be shielded to avoid glare disturbing other properties.
(9) All townhouse dwelling units shall include ground floor living
space. The location of an enclosed garage shall not qualify as
meeting this requirement.
D. Townhouse parking standards.
(1) No less than two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each townhouse dwelling unit.
(2) The developer may meet the requirements for off-street parking by
providing parking spaces in an enclosed garage, plus any
combination of spaces on private driveways and/or in a common
parking lot.
(3) No common off-street parking lot or outdoor storage area shall be
located closer than 25 feet to any adjacent property.
(4) All off-street parking areas shall be privately owned and
maintained.
(5) Common off-street parking facilities shall be landscaped and
screened from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate the
unsightliness of parked cars.
(6) Common off-street parking areas shall be designed with careful
regard to orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease
of access and shall be developed as an integral part of the overall
site development plan.
(7) Common off-street parking areas shall be provided with suitable
lighting for the convenience and security of residents, but
positioned and shielded to minimize glare and potential
inconvenience to residents of the townhouse development and
adjacent properties.
E. Size of townhouse dwelling units. The gross habitable floor area for all
townhouse dwelling units shall conform to the minimum requirements
specified in Schedule I.57
F. Landscape site design standards.
(1) Landscaping shall be provided along and adjacent to all streets,
common driveway areas and common off-street parking areas.
Landscaping treatments shall be designed, coordinated and
57.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-58 WARSAW CODE § 163-58
1:398
installed in accordance with the site development plan approved by
the Planning Board.
(2) Landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground cover and
street trees and shall be designed and installed to provide an
attractive development pattern. Landscape materials selected
should be appropriate to the growing conditions of the local
environment.
(3) Whenever possible, existing trees shall be conserved and
integrated into the landscape design plan.
(4) All landscaping except for trees, shrubs and grasses, either existing
or to be installed within the public right-of-way, shall be privately
owned and maintained.
G. Site circulation system design standards.
(1) An adequate, safe and convenient circulation system shall be
provided.
(2) The arrangement of streets and common parking areas shall be
designed as integral parts of an overall site development plan.
These features shall be properly related to existing and proposed
buildings and appropriately landscaped.
H. Miscellaneous townhouse regulations.
(1) No home occupations and no business activities of any type shall be
permitted within a townhouse development.
(2) Signs.
(a) No signs shall be permitted in a townhouse development
except for a single illuminated nonflashing nameplate sign not
more than two square feet in area attached to the townhouse
dwelling unit and bearing only the name of the occupant and/or
the street number of the dwelling.
(b) One ground-type sign indicating only the name and address of
the development shall be allowed. Such sign shall not exceed
four feet in height above grade and be larger than 16 square
feet in area. Such sign shall not be closer to any lot line than 1/
2 of the required setback. Said sign shall not be illuminated,
except indirectly.
(c) One temporary advertising ground-type sign pertaining only to
the sale of a townhouse dwelling unit shall be allowed,
provided that such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area.
Such signs shall be located not more than 10 feet from the
front entrance to the townhouse dwelling unit which is for sale
and shall be removed within seven days after the execution of
any agreement for the sale of the premises.
§ 163-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-58
1:399
§ 163-59. Cluster residential developments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for cluster residential
developments of one-family detached dwellings in any residential district,
provided that the following standards and provisions are maintained:
(3) Fencing.
(a) All fencing of common areas shall be shown on the site
development plan approved by the Planning Board.
(b) Individual owners may erect privacy fences to enclose outdoor
areas of individual dwelling units. Such fences may be up to six
feet above ground level, provided that such fencing is located
not less than 15 feet from a public street, common off-street
parking or storage area or vehicular accessway thereto.
Fencing which is closer than 15 feet to a public street or
common off-street parking or storage area or vehicular
accessway thereto shall not exceed three feet above ground
level.
(4) Except for land which is owned in common, no property owner shall
erect or place an accessory building or structure on the premises.
(5) The storage of any unregistered vehicles or other similar
equipment out of doors overnight shall be prohibited, except in a
common parking area.
I. Special accessory uses. The following special accessory uses may be
established for the common and exclusive use of owners of townhouse
residences and their guests. Such special accessory uses shall be
operated on a not-for-profit basis and subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
(1) Recreational facilities, such as open or enclosed tennis courts,
exercise facilities, picnic areas, gazebos or swimming pools as
regulated herein.
(2) One structure to house maintenance shops and vehicles to be used
exclusively for the maintenance and management of the townhouse
development.
(3) Common space for the exclusive use and convenience of residents
of the townhouse development and their guests to park vehicles.
Such common space shall be adequately landscaped and buffered
so as to screen the site from adjacent areas and uses.
A. A site development plan shall be submitted in conformance with the
requirements of § 163-19 of this chapter.
B. The minimum tract size shall be 10 acres.
§ 163-58 WARSAW CODE § 163-59
1:400
§ 163-60. Car wash establishments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for car wash
establishments, including both coin-operated vehicle washers and
automatic vehicle washers, in the C-B Central Business, G-B General
Business and L-I Light Industrial Districts, provided that the following
standards and provisions are maintained:
C. The lot size, yard, area and height requirements shall be established on
an individual case basis which reflects the unique conditions of each
site proposed for development, the potential impact on adjacent
properties and to ensure consistency with the Village Master Plan.
D. The number of lots or units (density of development) in a cluster plan
shall not exceed that which could be created under a conventional
development plan for the same tract of land.
E. The developers shall set aside an area of not less than 20% of the gross
acreage of the tract to be devoted exclusively to permanent recreation
areas or open space.
F. All recreation or open space areas shall, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, be suitable for such use. The ownership and future maintenance
of such recreation areas shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Board or offered for dedication to the village.
A. Coin-operated vehicle washers. These washers are intended to be those
where the vehicle operator washes the vehicle by using a hose which is
geared to a coin-operated, timed mechanism.
(1) The vehicle-washing facility or customary uses or operations
associated with the facility shall be located no closer than 200 feet
to any residential district and shall be separated from a residential
district by another nonresidential use.
(2) All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building
which shall be designed in keeping with the facades of adjacent
land uses.
(3) Vacuuming facilities may be located outside the building but shall
not be in the front yard and shall meet the respective setback
requirements as required for the specific district in which the use is
proposed. Such area shall be buffered or screened as deemed
necessary by the Planning Board.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided on the property in the ratio of
not less than four reservoir parking spaces entering each washing
stall and three reservoir parking spaces at the exit from each stall,
plus one space per employee.
(5) Adequate drainage facilities shall be provided to prevent standing
water on-site.
§ 163-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-60
1:401
(6) All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced and paved with
asphalt or concrete.
(7) Any lights used to illuminate the area shall be directed away from
adjacent properties.
(8) The hours of operation shall be determined by the Planning Board.
B. Automatic vehicle washers. These vehicle washers are intended to be
those where the vehicle is either slowly driven through or pulled
through by an automatic chain mechanism. This vehicle washer is one
in which the vehicle operator does not perform any of the washing
function other than to drive the vehicle where necessary.
(1) The vehicle-washing facility and customary uses or operations
associated with the facility shall not be located closer than 300 feet
to a residential district and shall be separated from a residential
district by at least two other nonresidential uses.
(2) All vehicle wash operations shall be so soundproofed, the entire
development shall be so arranged and the operations shall be so
conducted that the noise emanating therefrom, as measured from
any point on the adjacent property, shall be no more audible than
the noise emanating from the ordinary street traffic and from other
commercial or industrial uses measured at the same point on said
adjacent property.
(3) There shall be provided no less than 10 reservoir parking spaces
for the entrance to each washing area if there are two bays and
seven if there are three or more bays and five parking spaces at the
exit of each washing area. One parking space shall also be provided
for each employee on the maximum shift.
(4) Vacuuming facilities may be provided outside of the building but
shall meet the setback requirements as required for the specific
district in which the use is proposed. Such area shall be buffered or
screened as deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
(5) Adequate drainage facilities shall be provided to prevent standing
water on-site.
(6) Any lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
(7) All off-street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced and paved with
asphalt or concrete.
(8) All washing operations shall be conducted within enclosed
structures which shall be externally designed to be in keeping with
the exterior facades of adjacent land uses.
C. Operators of car wash establishments may be permitted to sell gasoline
on the site of the car wash property. The Planning Board, in considering
such a request, may require the operator to submit additional
§ 163-60 WARSAW CODE § 163-60
1:402
§ 163-61. Home occupations.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for a home
occupation in any residential district, provided that the following standards
are maintained:
information to adequately describe the location and operation of such
activity and, as a condition of granting such approval, may impose
any conditions it deems necessary to protect the health and safety
of motorists and pedestrians and to protect adjacent properties from
potential adverse impacts of such use. Under no conditions shall the
operator be allowed to perform repairs to motor vehicles on the site.
Further, any merchandise available for sale shall be maintained within
a fully enclosed building.
A. No more than one person other than a member of the immediate family
occupying such dwelling shall be employed as part of the home
occupation.
B. A home occupation must be conducted within a dwelling which is the
bona fide residence of the principal practitioner or in an accessory
building thereto which is normally associated with a residential use.
Home occupations may occupy either up to 15% of the gross floor area
of the residence to be used for the conduct of a home occupation or an
area of up to 200 square feet if operated in an accessory structure.
C. In no way shall the appearance of the structure used for the home
occupation be altered or the occupation within the residence be
conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from
its residential character, either by the use of colors, materials,
construction, lighting, signs or the emission of sounds, noises or
vibrations.
D. No outdoor display of goods or outside storage of equipment or
materials used in the home occupation shall be permitted.
E. No sign shall be permitted except in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIII.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article XI.
G. No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical
interference, fire hazard or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater
or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in an average
residential occupancy in the district in question under normal
circumstances wherein no home occupation exists.
H. Not more than one home occupation shall be permitted for each
residential property.
I. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, home occupations shall be
limited to the following uses:
§ 163-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-61
1:403
§ 163-62. Rooming houses.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for a rooming house
in any R-2 Residential District, provided that the following standards and
provisions are maintained:
§ 163-63. Windmills or wind generators.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for a windmill or
wind generator in any district, provided that the following standards and
provisions are maintained:
(1) Medical and dental office.
(2) Other professional office, including but not limited to lawyer,
engineer and architect.
(3) Custom dressmaking, seamstress and milliner.
(4) Artist.
(5) Musician.
(6) Tutoring or counseling for no more than four individuals at one
time.
(7) Barbershop.
(8) Beauty salon.
(9) Woodworking shop.
(10) Small tool repair shop.
(11) Collectibles, crafts and similar cottage industry operations.
(12) Limousine and taxi service, provided that no more than two
vehicles are garaged on the residential property.
(13) The sale of homegrown produce.
A. No rooming house shall provide shelter for more than two tenants who
are not members of the household unit.
B. Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: at least two spaces for
the family or household unit residing on the premises, plus not less than
one additional space for each roomer.
C. One sign up to four square feet in area may be permitted on the
premises. If freestanding, such sign shall not exceed four feet in height.
Such sign may not be illuminated, except indirectly.
D. The Planning Board shall specify the minimum amount and location of
buffer screening to ensure that the use does not create a nuisance for
adjoining property owners.
§ 163-61 WARSAW CODE § 163-63
1:404
A. In addition to the application requirements specified for site
development permits in § 163-15, the site development plan proposals
for a windmill or wind generator shall also show:
(1) The location of the tower on-site and tower height, including
blades, rotor diameter and ground clearance.
(2) All utility lines both above and below ground within a radius equal
to the proposed tower height, including blades.
(3) Dimensional representation of the various structural components
of the tower construction, including the base and footings.
(4) Design data indicating the basis of design, including
manufacturer's dimensional drawings, installation and operation
instructions.
(5) Certification by a registered professional engineer or
manufacturer's certification that the tower design is sufficient to
withstand wind load requirements for structures.
B. No windmill, including blades, shall extend more than 75 feet above the
average ground level measured at the base of the tower.
C. No more than one windmill or tower shall be permitted as an accessory
use to any property.
D. No windmill shall be erected in any location where its overall height,
including blades, is greater than the distance from its base to any
property line.
E. Access to the tower shall be limited either by means of a fence six feet
high around the tower base with a locking portal or by limiting towerclimbing
apparatus to no lower than 12 feet from the ground.
F. No windmill shall be installed in any location along the major axis of an
existing microwave communications link where the operation of the
windmill is likely to produce an unacceptable level of electromagnetic
interference, unless the applicant provides sufficient evidence
satisfactory to the Planning Board indicating the degree of expected
interference and the possible effect on the microwave communications
link.
G. Windmills shall be located or installed in compliance with the
guidelines of the Federal Aviation Regulations with regard to airport
approach zones (15.503) and clearance around VOR and DVOR stations.
H. All sites proposed for windmills shall have sufficient access to
unimpeded air flow for adequate operation. The Siting Handbook for
Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems, PNL-2521, or other nationally
recognized reference should be used as a guide in siting the location of
towers.
§ 163-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-63
1:405
§ 163-64. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for bed-and-breakfast
establishments in the R-2 Residential District, provided that the following
standards and provisions are maintained:
I. No windmill shall be installed in a location where the impact on the
neighborhood character is determined by the Planning Board to be
detrimental to the general neighborhood character.
J. If the windmill is to be interconnected to an electric utility distribution
system, the applicant shall provide evidence of approval of the
proposed interconnect by the local power company.
K. Towers shall be located in either a rear or side yard. Applicants seeking
a side yard siting shall demonstrate that such a location is essential to
the viability of the proposed investment.
L. Guy wires and anchors for towers shall not be located closer than 10
feet to any property line.
M. All windmills shall be designed with an automatic brake to prevent
overspeeding and excessive pressure on the tower structure.
N. The minimum distance between the ground and any protruding blades
shall not be less than 10 feet as measured at the lowest point of the arc
of the blades.
A. The minimum lot size, frontage and setback requirements shall conform
to the specifications set forth in Schedule I of this chapter58 for singlefamily
dwellings.
B. The building proposed for occupancy as a bed-and-breakfast
establishment shall contain no more than four lodging rooms for hire.
C. The operator of the bed-and-breakfast establishment shall reside on the
premises and shall be the only permanent occupant on the premises.
D. The structure proposed for use as a bed-and-breakfast establishment
shall meet the requirements of the Uniform Code.
E. Off-street parking space shall be provided as follows: at least two
spaces shall be provided for the family residing on the premises, plus
not less than one additional space for each lodging room.
F. One sign up to six square feet in area may be permitted on the
premises. The sign may be freestanding or mounted on the building. If
freestanding, the sign shall not be more than four feet in height
measured from the ground to the top of the sign. Such signs may not be
illuminated, except indirectly.
58.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-63 WARSAW CODE § 163-64
1:406
§ 163-65. Planned business centers.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for a planned
business center in the G-B General Business District, provided that the
following standards and provisions are maintained:
G. The operator of the bed-and-breakfast establishment shall not provide
more than one meal per day to any guest.
H. The exterior of the building shall be maintained consistent with the
neighborhood character of the area.
I. The Planning Board shall specify the minimum amount and location of
landscaping and buffer screening to ensure that the use does not create
a nuisance for adjoining property owners.
A. The Planning Board shall determine that the physical character of the
site proposed for planned business use is adequate to accommodate the
proposed use.
B. The site shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer services.
C. The Planning Board shall determine that the street system serving the
site is adequate to carry the anticipated traffic flows and that the
proposal will not create a burden or nuisance for adjoining property
owners.
D. The Planning Board shall determine that the plans for storm drainage
are capable of serving the planned business area.
E. Proposed planned business centers shall be located on a site of not less
than four acres, with not less than 300 feet of frontage on each highway
which fronts the site.
F. Planned business centers shall be constructed in accordance with an
overall plan for the entire area and shall be designed with a single
architectural scheme with appropriate common off-street parking,
service road access and landscaping. The development shall provide
initially for the construction of either a minimum of 8,000 square feet of
ground floor area or a minimum of four of the permitted uses.
G. The number, location and width of entranceways to provide access to
such planned development centers shall be determined on an individual
case basis by the Planning Board.
H. Uses permitted are shopping centers, stores and shops where retail
goods are sold or personal services rendered which are similar, but not
limited, to the following:
(1) Retail business establishments, such as grocery stores, drugstores,
stationery, furniture, home furnishings, appliances, variety and
clothing stores and restaurants.
§ 163-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-65
1:407
§ 163-66. Public markets.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for a public market
in the G-B General Business District, provided that the following standards
and provisions are maintained:
(2) Personal service establishments, such as barber- and beauty shops,
shoe repair shops, business and professional offices, self-service
laundries and dry-cleaning stores.
I. Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of not less than one
parking space per 150 square feet of floor area. Private garage space
for the storage of commercial vehicles used in conjunction with a
permitted business use shall also be permitted.
J. Truck loading and unloading areas shall be provided in sufficient
amount to permit the transfer of goods and materials on the premises
rather than on a public street or customer off-street parking area on the
premises. A dense landscaping screen of not less than six feet in height
shall be required where off-street loading and unloading areas abut
residential uses, so that such operations shall be shielded from view
from such residences.
K. The regulations of Article XIII shall govern the location, size, number
and characteristics of signs in a planned business center.
L. The Planning Board may prescribe more restrictive conditions deemed
reasonable or appropriate with respect to improving the design quality
of a planned business center.
M. A letter of credit shall be established and provided prior to final
approval of the planned business center to assure that all parking,
entrances, exits, facilities and services are installed as required and
proposed.
N. Where a planned business center abuts a residential use or district,
there shall be a landscaped buffer strip not less than 30 feet in depth at
the periphery of the planned business center. This landscaped buffer
shall be provided within the minimum setback requirements. The buffer
strip shall include materials and be perpetually maintained by the
developer or owner to provide a visual screen between the planned
business center and the adjoining residential lot(s) and shall be used for
no other purpose.
O. Lighting within the center shall be provided in a manner so as to
minimize potential disturbance to adjacent properties.
A. Minimum lot size, frontage and setback requirements shall conform to
the specifications set forth in Schedule I of this chapter.59
59.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-65 WARSAW CODE § 163-66
1:408
§ 163-67. Retail business and personal service establishments.
The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for retail business
and personal service establishments of the types permitted in the C-B and
G-B Districts in the L-I Light Industrial District, provided that the standards
and provisions which govern such uses in the C-B and G-B Districts are
maintained.
§ 163-68. Transfer stations/recycling uses.
The standards and provisions which the Planning Board may use to approve
a special use permit for the establishment of a transfer station or recycling
use in the L-I Light Industrial District are reserved.
§ 163-68.1. Artisan/craftsman facilities. [Added 4-20-2015 by L.L.
No. 1-2015]
B. Items offered for sale shall principally be agricultural products grown
or raised on area farms.
C. The Planning Board shall determine that the character of the site is
appropriate for such use and that plans for water supply, sewage
disposal and storm drainage are capable of serving the proposed use.
D. The Planning Board shall determine that the street system serving the
site is adequate to carry the anticipated traffic flows and that the
proposal will not create a burden or nuisance for adjoining property
owners. The Planning Board shall specify the location, number and
width of driveways deemed appropriate to serve the proposed use.
E. The Planning Board shall determine that areas designated for off-street
parking and for the loading and unloading of goods are adequate to
accommodate the level of activity anticipated with the proposed use.
F. No site preparation or construction shall commence until final site
development plan approval has been granted and permits issued by all
governmental agencies involved.
G. The Planning Board shall review and approve the amount and location
of landscaping and buffer screening to be provided.
H. No signs shall be permitted except in accordance with Article XIII.
I. The Planning Board, in approving such uses, may impose other controls
and operating requirements which, in its opinion, are necessary to
protect public health, safety and welfare.
A. The Planning Board may approve a special use permit for an artisan/
craftsman facility in the G-B General Business District, provided that
the following standards and provisions are maintained:
(1) Minimum lot size, frontage and setback requirements shall
conform to the specifications set forth in Schedule I of this chapter.
§ 163-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-68.1
1:409
The entire area intended for retail parking and shall be of a hard
surface (asphalt or concrete). As these facilities shall be considered
multi-use, the minimum percentage to be utilized for retail shall be
20%, and parking shall be calculated based upon both uses.
(2) Items on site must be raw materials which will be refined, milled
and or processed into a finish grade for sale on the premises and
entered into a general stream of commerce.
(3) The Planning Board shall determine that that character of the site
is appropriate for such use and that plans for water supply, sewage
disposal and storm drainage are capable of serving the proposed
use. The proposed use shall not exceed the normal lighting,
emissions, noise, odor or vibrations for the area.
(4) The Planning Board shall determine that the street system serving
the site is adequate to carry the anticipated traffic flows and that
the proposal will not create a burden or nuisance to adjoining
property owners. The Planning Board shall specify the location,
number and width of driveways deemed appropriate to serve the
proposed use.
(5) The Planning Board shall determine that areas designated for offstreet
parking and for the loading and unloading of goods are
adequate to accommodate the level of activity anticipated for the
proposed use.
(6) No site preparation or construction shall commence until a final
site development plan approval has been granted and permits have
been issued by all governmental agencies involved. All additional
storage facilities, bulk storage areas, tanks or chemical storage
vessels shall be set forth in the site plan.
(7) The Planning Board shall review and approve the amount and
location of landscaping and buffer screening to be provided for the
use.
(8) The only signage to be permitted shall be approved by the Planning
Board and shall be in accordance with Article XIII.
(9) The proposed facility may include:
(a) A loading dock for delivery of raw materials.
(b) A processing plant for creation of final products.
(c) A warehousing facility for storage of final product awaiting
delivery.
(d) A loading facility for re-entry of final product into general
commerce.
§ 163-68.1 WARSAW CODE § 163-68.1
1:410
(e) Twenty percent of the entire facility must be utilized for retail
purposes.
(f) On site consumption of goods is permitted.
*Note: This shall mean that either retail space of 20% of the
whole facility is utilized for retail space or, in the alternative,
that a processing facility is constructed in such a manner that
retail customers are brought into the processing area for an
artisan/craftsman experience.
(i.e., artisanal cheese makers, craft breweries, wineries,
bakeries, graphic design with retail outlet, pasta/bread
makers, maple syrup makers, pottery, glass blowing, soaps/
oils etc.)
(10) Permitted structures may include an existing facility or within a
principal building or accessory structure.
(11) Hours of operation may be from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. for loading,
unloading and manufacturing purposes, and include retail
operational hours from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.
(12) There shall be no hazardous materials stored, used, or
manufactured on site, including highly toxic, explosive, flammable,
combustible, corrosive, radioactive or similar waste products
exceeding those amounts which are typically found in normal
business use.
(13) No structures shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(14) The Village will not authorize the use or confinement of animals on
site for any artisan/craftsman use.
(15) The Planning Board, in approving such uses, may impose other
controls and operation requirements which, in its opinion, are
necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
B. It is recognized that certain industrial activities, though typically most
frequently sited within industrial zones, may, with proper attention
being paid to certain elements of their activity, be sited within a G-BGeneral
Business District, so long as they have a retail component.
Therefore, it is recognized that the special regulation of these uses is
necessary to ensure the adverse effects will not contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighbors, businesses or
land uses.
§ 163-68.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-68.1
1:411

ARTICLE XI
Parking, Loading and Access Regulations
§ 163-69. Off-street parking.
In all districts there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure
is erected, enlarged, increased in capacity or changed in use, improved and
usable off-street parking spaces for motor vehicles in accordance with the
requirements of this Article and Schedule II.60 None of the off-street parking
facilities as required herein shall be required for any existing building or
use, unless said building shall be enlarged or the use of land changed.
In such cases, off-street parking facilities shall be provided as hereinafter
specified for the building as enlarged or to accommodate the needs of the
new use.
A. Design requirements.
(1) Off-street parking space shall be provided as further specified in
this chapter and shall be furnished with necessary passageways
and driveways. For the purposes of this chapter, a parking space
shall not be less than nine feet in width and 20 feet in depth
exclusive of accessways and driveways.
(2) Off-street parking areas for nonresidential uses shall provide an
additional area of 100 square feet of area per off-street parking
space to provide sufficient area for access drives and aisles.
(3) Off-street parking areas with a capacity for more than 20 vehicles
shall delineate fire lanes and post "no parking" markers at the
expense of the owner.
(4) Any off-street parking area with at least 20 off-street parking
spaces shall designate a minimum of 5% of those spaces, up to a
maximum of 10 spaces, as only for the handicapped and clearly
mark them for such use. Parking spaces designated to serve
handicapped individuals shall be at least 14 feet in width and 20
feet in depth.
(5) All off-street parking space shall be deemed to be required space on
the lot on which it is situated and shall not be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner.
(6) All parking areas, passageways and driveways (except where
provided in connection with one- and two-family dwellings) shall be
adequately drained and surfaced with a dustless, durable, allweather
surface, subject to approval of the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(7) Each off-street parking space shall be so designed, maintained and
regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking
60.Editor's Note: Schedule II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-69
1:413
shall be on any public street, walk or alley and so that any motor
vehicle may be parked and unparked without moving or damaging
another.
(8) The collective provision of off-street parking areas by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots may be approved by the
Planning Board, provided that the total of such facilities shall not
be less than the sum required of the various buildings or uses
computed separately.
(9) No more than two driveways, of not less than 20 feet nor more than
30 feet in width, shall be used as a means of ingress and egress for
each nonresidential use, except where the deviation in the number
of or width of such driveways may be deemed necessary by the
Planning Board because of traffic safety conditions.
(10)Off-street parking for nonresidential or multiple-family uses shall
be set back not less than 20 feet from the front lot line. Off-street
parking may be permitted in rear and side yard areas, subject to
approval of the Planning Board. Off-street parking for single- and
two-family dwellings shall be provided on a driveway which
provides access to such residences or a garage which is accessory
to such residential uses.
(11)No driveway providing access to an off-street parking area shall be
located within 20 feet of any side lot line or within 50 feet of a
street intersection measured along the curbline of the same street
on which the driveway is located. In addition, a minimum distance
of 20 feet shall be maintained between two driveways located on
any one frontage.
B. Location of off-street parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities shall
be located as hereinafter specified. Where a distance is specified, such
distance shall be walking distance measured from the nearest point of
the parking facility to the nearest public entrance of the building that
such facility is required to serve.
(1) For one- and two-family dwellings and for all types of residential
structures: on the same lot with the building they are required to
serve.
(2) For multiple-family dwellings: not more than 200 feet from the
building they are required to serve.
(3) For other uses: not more than 500 feet from the building they are
required to serve.
C. Screening and landscaping.
(1) Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles shall be
effectively screened on the rear and side yards by a fence of
acceptable design, unpierced masonry wall, landscaped berm or
§ 163-69 WARSAW CODE § 163-69
1:414
compact evergreen hedge. Such fence, wall or hedge shall not
be less than six feet in height and shall be maintained in good
condition.
(2) When a parking area for five or more vehicles is within or abuts a
residential district, a planted buffer area shall be provided in
addition to the fence or wall specified in Subsection C(1) above.
Landscaping utilized to provide this buffer shall not be less than
four feet in height at the time of planting and spaced not more than
three feet apart. The planted buffer area shall not be less than 10
feet in depth.
D. Lighting.
(1) All off-street parking areas and driveways (excluding areas serving
one- and two-family dwellings) shall be illuminated adequately
during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the use is in
operation.
(2) Any lights used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from the street and all
adjoining properties.
E. Units of measurement.
(1) In churches and other places of assembly in which patrons or
spectators occupy benches, bleachers, pews or other similar
seating facilities, each 18 inches of such seating facilities shall be
counted as one seat for the purpose of determining requirements
for off-street parking facilities.
(2) When units of measurement determining the number of required
parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction shall require one parking space.
F. Mixed occupancies and uses not specified. In any case of mixed uses,
the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum
of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. In the
case of a use not specifically mentioned in this section, the
requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be determined by the
Planning Board. Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be
considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use,
except as hereinafter specified for joint use.
G. Joint use. The off-street parking requirements of two or more uses,
structures or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking or
loading space used jointly to the extent that it can be shown by the
owners or operators of the uses, structures or parcels that their
operations and parking needs do not overlap in point in time. If the
uses, structures or parcels are under separate ownership, the right to
joint use of the parking space must be evidenced by a deed, lease,
contract or other appropriate written document to establish the joint
§ 163-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-69
1:415
§ 163-70. Loading berths.
For every building, structure or part thereof having more than 4,000 square
feet of gross building area erected and occupied for business or industrial
use as well as other uses requiring the receipt and distribution of materials
and merchandise by vehicles, there shall be space provided and
permanently maintained for loading and unloading berths provided on the
same lot with such building. Such berths shall be located to avoid undue
interference with the public use of streets, alleys or parking areas and
provided in accord with the following standards:
§ 163-71. Access control.
In order to encourage the sound development of street frontage, the
following special regulations shall apply to all nonresidential buildings and
uses:
use. Said document shall bind the owner, his heirs and assigns to
maintain the required joint uses throughout the life of such uses and
shall be approved by the Village Attorney.
H. Required off-street parking space. The minimum number of off-street
parking spaces for specific uses as regulated in this chapter are
contained in Schedule II, which is part of this chapter.61
I. Central Business District exception. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this section to the contrary, no off-street parking shall be
required for any permitted principal or special use in the C-B District.
A. The number of spaces shall be as follows:
(1) Four thousand to 25,000 square feet: one space.
(2) For each additional 25,000 square feet: one space.
B. The loading berth in each instance shall be not less than 12 feet in
width, 55 feet in length and 14 feet in height.
A. Each separate use, grouping of attached buildings or groupings of
permitted uses shall not have more than one point of access. Additional
accessways may be approved by the Planning Board based on the need
for such additional access which is supported by a traffic analysis
prepared and submitted by the applicant.
B. The use of common access points by two or more permitted uses shall
be encouraged by the Planning Board in order to reduce the number
and closeness of access points along the streets and to encourage the
fronting of significant traffic generating uses upon a parallel access
street and not directly upon a primary road. Access points for industrial
uses shall not be less than 24 feet nor more than 40 feet in width. All
61.Editor's Note: Schedule II is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-69 WARSAW CODE § 163-71
1:416
other access points shall not be less than 20 feet nor more than 30 feet
in width.
§ 163-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-71
1:417

ARTICLE XII
Private Swimming Pools
§ 163-72. Compliance with regulations required.
Private swimming pools shall be permitted in any residential district,
provided that there is an existing residence on said lot and the following
regulations are complied with.
§ 163-73. Fences.
In-ground swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence of not
less than four feet in height. Said fence shall have a gate with a selfclosing
latch located inside the complex to control access to the pool
area. Aboveground pools less than four feet in height shall be similarly
fenced. Aboveground pools which are four feet or more above the ground
shall not require a fence, except that any steps leading to the pool deck
shall be enclosed by a gate that may be securely fastened and locked.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a fence shall be required if the walls of the
pool are so located as to provide a means by which the wall of this pool can
be climbed and entry gained to the deck of the pool.
§ 163-74. Setbacks.
§ 163-75. Drainage.
No permit shall be issued for such pool unless the applicant can show
that the proposed drainage of such pool is adequate and will not adversely
interfere with the property of others, with public highways or with area
drainage facilities. No pool shall drain into the village's sanitary sewer
system.
§ 163-76. Lighting.
Lights erected, operated or maintained in connection with a swimming pool
shall be located in such a manner so as to minimize the glare onto adjacent
properties.
A. Outdoor swimming pools shall be located in the rear or side yards and
shall conform to the minimum setback requirements for a structure in
the district. Aprons and decks which are accessory to a pool shall not be
within the minimum setback area specified in Schedule I for accessory
uses.62
B. No swimming pool shall be closer to the street or front lot line than the
front of the building or structure to which the pool is an accessory use.
62.Editor's Note: Zoning Schedule I is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-77
1:419
§ 163-77. Overhead wiring.
Service drop conductors and any other open overhead wiring shall not be
installed above the swimming pool or an area surrounding the swimming
pool which extends 10 feet horizontally from the pool edge, diving
structures, observation stands, towers or platforms. Service conductors
shall be enclosed in ground fault interrupter boxes and appropriately
grounded.
§ 163-78. Filtering system.
A filtering system shall be installed in all pools requiring in excess of 1,760
gallons of water to fill an area approximately 10 feet in diameter by 36
inches in depth.
§ 163-79. Permits.
Building and zoning permits shall be required for all swimming pools having
an area greater than 100 square feet or a depth greater than 18 inches
regardless of whether the pool is above or below ground.
§ 163-80. Compliance with more restrictive requirements.
Applications for swimming pool permits shall comply with these regulations
and all applicable requirements of the State of New York. Where the
regulations of the village and state are inconsistent, the more restrictive
requirements shall govern.
§ 163-77 WARSAW CODE § 163-80
1:420
ARTICLE XIII
Signs
§ 163-81. Purpose.
The intent of these regulations is to promote and protect public health,
welfare and safety by regulating and restricting the location, construction,
repair, removal, alteration and maintenance of signs and other advertising
devices in the village. The regulations are intended to promote and protect
public health, welfare and safety by regulating and restricting existing
and proposed signs and advertising devices of all kinds. It is intended
to promote public safety, to protect property values, to create a more
attractive economic climate and to enhance the scenic and natural beauty
of the village.
§ 163-82. General conditions and regulations.
A. Except for those signs specifically identified in §§ 163-86, 163-87 and
163-88, no sign shall be erected in the Village of Warsaw without a
permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The provisions and regulations specified herein apply only to exterior
signs and signs which are visible from the public right-of-way.
C. Except for temporary signs, no sign permit shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer without the approval of the Planning Board.
D. All signs shall be securely attached to a building or a structurally sound
support, and their display surfaces shall be kept neatly painted and in
good repair at all times.
E. No illuminated signs or outdoor illumination shall direct light in a way
which would create a traffic hazard or nuisance or be unreasonably
detrimental to adjoining or neighboring properties.
F. Except for time and temperature signs, no sign shall be illuminated by
or contain a flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights.
Lighting devices shall employ only lights emitting light of constant
intensity.
G. A projecting sign which overhangs a public right-of-way or sidewalk
shall not extend more than 48 inches from the face of the building to
which it is attached. No projecting sign shall be closer than eight feet to
the public right-of-way or sidewalk over which it is projecting.
Projecting signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area on each face
side and shall not be more than three feet in height measured parallel
to the building to which it is attached.
H. A flush-mounted building sign shall not project more than 12 inches
from the face of the building to which it is attached.
§ 163-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-82
1:421
I. No sign or part thereof shall contain or consist of banners, posters,
pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or similar fluttering devices.
J. No sign shall consist of animated or moving parts.
K. After one year from the date of the enactment of this chapter, no
movable or portable signs shall be permitted to be placed on any
premises in the village. Temporary signs approved under § 163-88 are
exempted from this provision.
L. No signs shall be attached to fences, utility poles or trees.
M. No sign shall be erected or maintained upon the roof of any building or
structure.
N. No motor vehicle, mobile home or trailer on which is placed or painted
any sign shall be parked or stationed in a manner primarily intended to
display the sign.
O. No sign shall be erected or maintained within the public right-of-way of
any street, nor within 15 feet of the pavement of any public street or
within 10 feet of any property line unless flush-mounted to a building.
P. No sign shall be permitted which advertises a business use or service
other than that which exists on the premises on which said sign is
located.
Q. The regulations specified herein shall not apply to any sign or
directional device erected by any governmental agency, nonadvertising
signs identifying underground utility lines or posted or preserve signs
erected pursuant to the Environmental Conservation Law of the State
of New York.
R. No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to confuse or obstruct the
view of any traffic sign, signal or device.
S. No sound amplifiers, public address systems or other sound devices
shall be used as a means of advertising or to attract attention to a sign.
T. Awnings, as defined by this chapter, are considered to be signs and may
be permitted, provided that they comply with the regulations for signs
and the following standards: [Amended 2-5-2007 by L.L. No.
1-2007]
(1) Only awnings made of fabric shall hereinafter be placed,
constructed or maintained over any street or sidewalk or portion of
the same.
(2) Awnings must be fastened to the facade of the building and not
supported from the ground; shall not extend more than six feet
from the facade; and no portion of the awning, including the flap
and brace, shall be less than seven feet above the sidewalk or
entranceway over which it is attached.
§ 163-82 WARSAW CODE § 163-82
1:422
§ 163-83. Business and industrial districts.
(3) No awning shall be illuminated so as to project an image, name of
business or advertisement. Illumination is permitted to the extent
that it provides a safe line of sight for pedestrians and/or eliminates
a dark vestibule, entryway, foyer, portal and the like.
(4) Awnings may be retractable.
(5) Awnings may contain lettering, but no logos or pictorial matter. Any
lettering on such awnings shall be restricted to the vertical face of
the awning (perpendicular to the street).
(6) Color schemes, lettering content and design must be approved by
the Planning Board prior to the installation of the awning.
(7) Awnings shall be maintained in a good state of repair. The fabric of
such awning shall not show evidence of excessive weathering,
discoloration, ripping, tearing, holes or other deterioration.
U. Flower boxes, which extend over or rest on a public right-of-way, shall
not extend more than nine inches from the facade of the building to
which they are accessory. Flower boxes shall not contain any lettering,
logos or pictorial matter and may not be illuminated, except indirectly.
A. The total area of all signs erected on a single property to advertise a
specific business or activity, including freestanding and building signs,
shall not exceed an area of two square feet for each linear foot of
building frontage of the principal structure, measured along the street
or off-street parking area, whichever is greater, that provides the
principal access for the use.
B. Directional signs that do not exceed two square feet in sign area and
are limited to such texts as "Office," "Entrance," "Exit," "Parking" and
"No Parking" shall be excluded from the limitation on the total area of
signs permitted.
C. No freestanding sign shall be more than 20 feet in height, measured
from the highest level of natural ground immediately beneath the sign
to the highest point of the sign or the supporting structure thereof. The
Planning Board shall establish the setback for freestanding signs to
ensure that such signs do not obstruct the view of motorists or create a
nuisance to adjacent properties.
D. Business identification signs attached to windows and/or doors on the
interior of a building and which are visible from the public right-of-way
shall be excluded from the calculations to determine the maximum
allowable sign area on a property specified in Subsection A above,
provided that such window or door signs do not exceed 30% of the total
surface area of the windows and/or doors on the facade of the building
to which said signs are attached. If such signs exceed the thirty-percent
§ 163-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-83
1:423
§ 163-84. Conduct of more than one principal activity.
Notwithstanding the standard governing the total area of signs permitted
to be erected or maintained on any parcel of real property set forth in
§ 163-83 above, the following standards shall guide the regulation of all
signs associated with projects when more than one principal building or
business use or activity is proposed to be conducted upon a single parcel
of real property, such as in the case of a shopping center, plaza or mall or
other multiple commercial use facility or industrial park.
limit, they shall be counted in determining the total area of all signs
permitted on a property. (See Subsection A.)
E. Signs attached to the windows and/or doors of business establishments
to advertise the temporary sale of a product or commercial service and
which do not identify the name of the business shall be excluded in
determining the total area of all signs permitted on a property. (See
Subsection A.) No business shall be permitted to display more than two
such temporary advertising signs at any time.
A. A single freestanding sign of up to 32 square feet in area and not more
than 20 feet in height may be erected which identifies the name of the
center or facility as a whole and does not advertise any individual
business activity.
B. Freestanding signs advertising individual businesses within a shopping
center or joint development project shall be prohibited.
C. One sign identifying individual businesses or uses may be erected for
each separate principal activity. Individual business signs may be
attached to the face of the building. Such signs shall not exceed the
lesser of two square feet of area for each linear foot of store frontage or
20% of the surface area of the building face on which the sign is to be
attached.
D. In a multiple commercial use facility or industrial park, there may be
one directory sign at any location therein which shall not exceed five
square feet for each acre of land in such commercial area or industrial
park, provided that no such sign shall exceed 20 square feet in area. In
addition, at each point of entrance and exit for vehicular traffic into
such multiple commercial use facility or industrial park, one other
directory sign shall be permitted which does not exceed two square feet
for each acre of land in such multiple commercial use facility or
industrial park. Such signs shall not exceed a total area of 12 square
feet.
E. An overall sign design plan for any such center or facility shall be
submitted with the application for the site development permit. The
sign design plan shall include plans for each principal activity therein
and shall reflect a reasonable uniformity of design, lettering, lighting
and material.
§ 163-83 WARSAW CODE § 163-85
1:424
§ 163-85. Residential districts.
§ 163-86. Signs permitted in all districts without permit.
The following signs are permitted in all districts without a permit:
A. A sign indicating the name and address of the occupant or identifying a
home occupation may be permitted, provided that such sign shall not be
larger than four square feet in area. If such signs are freestanding, they
shall not exceed four feet in height above the ground level at the sign's
location. Said signs shall not be illuminated, except indirectly.
B. For multiple-family dwellings, churches, libraries, social clubs, public
buildings and other similar uses, a single identification sign not
exceeding 16 square feet in area and indicating only the name and
address of the building may be displayed. Signs identifying churches,
libraries and other similar public buildings may, in addition to the name
and address, include the times that services are provided. Such signs
shall not be located closer to any lot line than 1/2 of the required
setback nor project more than four feet in height above grade. Said
signs shall not be illuminated, except indirectly.
C. No more than two signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of a
property may be placed on the site which is available. Such advertising
signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall be erected or
displayed not less than 10 feet inside the property line and not more
than four feet in height. Said signs shall be removed from the premises
within seven days after the property has been leased or title
transferred.
D. A permanent sign may be erected to indicate a subdivision. Said sign
shall not exceed 16 square feet in area nor more than four feet in
height.
E. A sign advertising the sale of property within an approved subdivision
may be permitted, provided that said sign does not exceed an area of 16
square feet. Said sign shall be located at the entranceway to the
subdivision and may be placed on the property for a period of three
years from the time of subdivision approval or 30 days following the
sale of the last lot in the subdivision, whichever occurs first.
F. Signs advertising a business or home occupation in a residential district
shall not exceed six square feet in area. If freestanding, such signs shall
not be located closer to any lot line than 1/2 of the required setback nor
project more than four feet in height above grade. Said signs shall not
be illuminated, except indirectly.
A. Signs bearing the name of the principal occupant and/or the street
address of a private dwelling which do not exceed one square foot in
area.
B. Professional nameplates which do not exceed one square foot in area.
§ 163-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-86
1:425
§ 163-87. Noncommercial speech signs.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Article, noncommercial speech
signs may be displayed without a permit subject to the following
regulations:
C. Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises upon which
the sign is located which do not exceed six square feet in area.
A. Noncommercial speech signs in residential districts.
(1) Noncommercial speech signs may be permitted in any residential
district without a sign permit, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The maximum number of noncommercial speech signs per lot
shall be two, excepting posted or preserve signs erected
pursuant to the Environmental Conservation Law of the State
of New York.
(b) Of the total number of signs, only one shall be a window sign.
No window sign shall exceed 25% of the total window opening
or one square foot, whichever is smaller.
(c) A building-mounted sign may not exceed two square feet in
total area. Any building-mounted sign shall be located in
proximity to an exterior entrance.
(d) A ground-mounted sign, unless otherwise specified herein,
shall:
[1] Not exceed six square feet in sign copy area;
[2] Not exceed four feet in height above grade;
[3] Maintain a minimum ground clearance of two feet;
[4] Not be closer to any lot line than 1/2 of the required
setback;
[5] Not interfere with vehicle site distances either from, along
or to a public way; and
[6] Not be illuminated, except indirectly.
B. Noncommercial speech signs in business and industrial districts.
(1) Noncommercial speech signs associated with nonresidential uses
may be allowed in any business or industrial district without a sign
permit, subject to the following conditions:
(a) The maximum number of noncommercial speech signs per lot
shall be two, excepting posted or preserve signs erected
pursuant to the Environmental Conservation Law of the State
of New York.
§ 163-86 WARSAW CODE § 163-87
1:426
§ 163-88. Temporary signs.
§ 163-89. Nonconforming signs.
(b) Such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(c) Freestanding noncommercial speech signs shall not be closer
to any lot line than 1/2 of the required setback.
(d) Freestanding noncommercial speech signs shall not exceed six
feet in height above grade level.
(e) Building-mounted noncommercial speech signs shall be
located on the first floor front facade of the structure.
(f) Noncommercial speech signs shall not be illuminated, except
indirectly.
(2) Noncommercial speech signs associated with a residential use in a
business or industrial district shall comply with the standards
specified above in Subsection A.
A. Temporary signs advertising any political, educational, charitable, civic,
religious or like campaign or event may be erected or displayed for a
consecutive period not to exceed 30 days in any calendar year.
Notwithstanding the above, political signs may be displayed without
requiring a permit for a period of up to 60 days. Said signs shall be
removed within seven days following the campaign or event.
B. If such temporary signs are not removed within the seven-day period,
the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to remove said signs and to
charge all costs incident to the removal of the sign or signs to the
organization responsible for the placement of the signs.
C. No temporary sign shall be attached to fences, trees, utility poles,
bridges or traffic signs and shall not obstruct or impair vision or traffic
in any manner or create a hazard or disturbance to the health and
welfare of the general public.
D. No temporary sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area.
A. Any existing sign erected prior to the adoption of this chapter which is
nonconforming and for which no permit was issued shall be removed
within six months from the effective date of this chapter.
B. Any existing sign erected prior to the adoption of this chapter for which
a permit was issued and which would be in violation under the
provisions of this chapter shall be allowed to continue for a period of
not more than four years from the effective date of this chapter. At the
end of the four-year period all such nonconforming signs shall be
removed.
§ 163-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-89
1:427
§ 163-90. Application for a sign permit.
All applications for a sign permit shall be made, in writing, upon the forms
prescribed and provided by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be
accompanied by the required fee.
C. The provisions of Subsection B above shall not apply to signs which the
Planning Board determines to have unusual community significance.
D. Nonconforming signs shall not be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended
or relocated, unless such action changes a nonconforming sign into a
conforming sign as provided herein. The failure to keep any such
nonconforming sign in good repair within a period of 30 days after due
notification by the Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute
abandonment of the sign. A sign which is abandoned shall not be reused
and shall be removed by or at the expense of the property owner.
E. If a project subject to zoning review(s) is proposed for a parcel of
property upon which a legally preexisting sign which does not conform
to these standards is located, the reviewing agency shall require that
said nonconforming sign be brought into compliance as a condition of
the approval of the proposed action.
A. All applications shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Location of the building, structure or land to which or upon which
the sign is to be erected.
(3) A detailed drawing or blueprint showing a description of the
construction details of the sign and showing the lettering and/or
pictorial matter composing the sign; the position of lighting or
other extraneous devices; a location plan showing the position of
the sign or any buildings or structures, including any private or
public street or highway.
(4) Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to
which or on which the sign is to be erected, in the event that the
applicant is not the owner thereof.
B. All applications for a sign permit, except those for a temporary sign,
shall be forwarded to the Planning Board for review. Prior to rendering
its decision, the Planning Board shall review the design, size and
location of the proposed sign to determine whether the proposed sign is
in compliance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. Upon the
completion of its review, the Planning Board may approve, approve with
conditions or reject the application. All decisions of the Planning Board
shall be made, in writing, to the Code Enforcement Officer within 45
days of the receipt of an application. If the Planning Board fails to act
within this period, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue the permit if
the proposed sign is in compliance with these regulations.
§ 163-89 WARSAW CODE § 163-91
1:428
§ 163-91. Issuance of permit.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer, upon the filing of the
application for said permit, to examine all of the data submitted to him with
the application and, if necessary, the building or premises upon which it is
proposed to erect the sign or other advertising structure. If it shall appear
that the proposed sign is in compliance with all of the requirements of this
chapter and other rules and regulations of the Village of Warsaw and has
been approved as to design, size and location by the Planning Board, as
provided for herein, a permit for the erection of the proposed sign shall be
issued. If the sign authorized under any such permit has not been completed
within six months from the date of the issuance of such permit, the permit
shall become null and void, but may be renewed for one additional sixmonth
period upon the approval by the Planning Board and upon payment
of an additional fee. A request which cites the reason for requesting the
extension for the completion of the sign shall be submitted, in writing, to
the Planning Board not more than 30 days following the first six-month
expiration period.
§ 163-92. Removal of signs.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of any sign which
no longer serves the purpose for which a permit was granted or is
unsafe, insecure or is a menace to the public or has been erected or
installed in violation of this chapter, in writing, to remove or correct the
unsatisfactory condition of said sign within 30 days from the date of
such notice.
B. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the prescribed time, the
Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause the
removal of such sign. All costs and expenses incurred in removing said
sign shall be charged to the owner of the sign and/or the owner of the
land or building on which such sign is located.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer may cause any sign which is a source of
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily upon
written notice to that effect. Failure to comply within 24 hours of such
notice shall serve as an authorization to the Code Enforcement Officer
to remove or cause the removal of such sign, with all costs and
expenses charged as provided for above.
§ 163-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-92
1:429

ARTICLE XIV
Enforcement
§ 163-93. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, company or corporation owning, controlling or managing
any building, structure or premises therein or where there shall be placed
on or there exists anything in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and any person, firm, company or corporation who shall assist in
the commission of any violation of this chapter or any conditions imposed
by the Village Board, Planning Board or the Board of Appeals; or who
shall build or use any building or parcel of land, contrary to the plans or
specifications submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and certified as
complying with this chapter and the Uniform Code; and any person, firm,
company or corporation who shall omit, neglect or refuse to do any act
required by this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and subject to a fine
of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 15
days, or both, and in addition may be ordered to pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Every such person, firm, company or corporation
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day such violation,
disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal shall continue.
§ 163-94. Alternative penalty.
In case of any new violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or
conditions imposed by the Village Board, Planning Board or Board of
Appeals, in addition to other remedies herein provided, the Village Board
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful
erection, structural alteration, reconstruction, moving and/or use, to
restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of such
building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business
or use in or about such premises.
§ 163-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-94
1:431
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
6-1995
3-27-1995 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No.
7-1995
10-3-1995 Eligible funds veterans
exemption adjustment
Ch. 137, Art. V
L.L. No.
1-1996
6-3-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 163
L.L. No.
2-1996
7-1-1996 Residency
Requirements
Ch. 27
L.L. No.
3-1996
9-16-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 163
L.L. No.
4-1996
9-16-1996 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
L.L. No.
1-2001
9-17-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
2-2001
9-17-2001 Curfew amendment Ch. 62
L.L. No.
3-2001
9-17-2001 Veterans tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 137, Art. III
L.L. No.
1-2003
6-26-2003 Adult bookstores,
cabarets and theaters
amendment
Ch. 36
L.L. No.
2-2003
6-26-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 163
L.L. No.
1-2004
4-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2011
L.L. No.
1-2006
2-6-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
2-2006
12-4-2006 Uniform Fire
Prevention and
Building Code
Ch. 78
L.L. No.
1-2007
2-5-2007 Streets and sidewalks
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 129; 163
§ 163-94 WARSAW CODE § DL-1
1:432
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2007
5-21-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
3-2007
10-1-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
1-2009
2-2-2009 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Ch. 137, Art. VI
L.L. No.
1-2010
4-5-2010 Termination of
Village's status as
assessing unit
Ch. 137, Art. VII
L.L. No.
1-2011
6-6-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
2-2011
10-17-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
3-2011
11-7-2011 Building contractors Ch. 52
L.L. No.
1-2012
5-7-2012 Taxation: converted
mixed-use property
exemption
Ch. 137, Art. VIII
L.L. No.
2-2012
8-6-2012 Boards, commissions
and committees:
Planning Board
Ch. 3, Art. I
L.L. No.
3-2012
8-6-2012 Boards, commissions
and committees:
Zoning Board of
Appeals
Ch. 3, Art. II
L.L. No.
4-2012
12-17-2012 Garage sales and yard
sales
Ch. 88
L.L. No.
1-2013
2-19-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 163
L.L. No.
2-2013
2-19-2013 Residency
requirements
amendment
Ch. 27
L.L. No.
3-2013
4-1-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
4-2013
5-6-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 153
L.L. No.
1-2014
2-17-2014 Officers and
employees: term of
office of Trustees
Ch. 21, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:433
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
2-2014
2-17-2014 Officers and
employees: term of
office of Mayor
Ch. 21, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-2015
4-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 163
L.L. No.
1-2016
4-28-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 WARSAW CODE § DL-1
1:434