Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 3
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 57.
Dogs — See Ch. 62.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 65.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 80.
Plumbing — See Ch. 90.
Public improvement construction — See Ch.
93.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 100.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 3-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted to authorize the Dog Warden, Building Inspector
and persons designated by them to issue and serve appearance tickets
in connection with violations of New York State statutes, local laws,
ordinances or rules and regulations of the Town of West Seneca which the
Dog Warden and Building Inspector are authorized or required to enforce.
§ 3-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEARANCE TICKET — A written notice issued and subscribed to by the
Dog Warden, Building Inspector and persons designated by them directing
a designated person to appear in a designated local Criminal Court at
a designated future time in connection with his alleged commission of a
designated offense. A notice conforming to such definition constitutes an
"appearance ticket" regardless of whether it is referred to in some other
provision of law as a summons or by any other name or title.
§ 3-3. Authorization.
The Dog Warden, Building Inspector and persons designated by them are
hereby authorized to issue and serve an appearance ticket with respect
to violations of New York State statutes, local laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations of the Town of West Seneca that they and their designees are
authorized or required to enforce.
3:1
§ 3-4. Serving of ticket.
An appearance ticket shall be served personally by the Dog Warden,
Building Inspector or by persons designated by them on the person
designated as the person alleged to have committed a designated offense.
Chapter 5
BUDGET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing — See Ch. 30.
§ 3-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 3-4
3:2
ARTICLE I
Limitation for Net-Operating Expenditures
[Adopted 6-20-2016 by L.L. No. 11-2016]
§ 5-1. Purpose.
It is the intent of this article to self-impose a cap for each annual adopted
budget to require that the budgeted increase in net operating expenditures
will be limited to 2% of the net operating expenditures included within the
adopted budget for the preceding fiscal year.
§ 5-2. Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Municipal Home Rule which authorizes
every local government to adopt and amend local laws not inconsistent with
the provisions of the constitution or not inconsistent with any general law
relating to its property, affairs or government and every local government,
as provided by that chapter, shall have power to adopt and amend local laws
not inconsistent with the provisions of the constitution or not inconsistent
with any general law, relating to the listed subjects, whether or not they
relate to the property, affairs or government of such local government,
except to the extent that the legislature shall restrict the adoption of such a
local law relating to other than the property, affairs or government of such
local government.
§ 5-3. Adopted budget limit.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca, County of Erie, shall adopt
a budget for each fiscal year, commencing for the budget effective January
1, 2017, which requires a budgeted increase in net operating expenditures
limited to 2% of the net operating expenditures included within the adopted
budget for the preceding fiscal year. Prior to adopting each annual budget,
the Town Board may adopt a resolution setting forth that the annual budget
increase for net operating expenditures may exceed the amount set forth in
this article.
§ 5-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NET OPERATING EXPENDITURES — Total appropriations of funds with
property tax levy less amounts for capital improvements, debt service
expenditures and employee benefits, including but not limited to workers'
compensation, retirement system contributions and health insurance.
§ 5-1 APPEARANCE TICKETS § 5-4
3:3
Chapter 10
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 28. Recreation Commission — See Ch. 33.
§ 10-1. Legislative intent.
§ 10-2. Establishment of Commission.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca hereby creates a commission
which shall be known as the "Town of West Seneca Commission for the
Conservation of the Environment," hereinafter called the "Commission."
§ 10-3. Membership.
A. The preservation and improvement of the quality of the natural and
man-made environment within the Town of West Seneca, in the face of
population growth, urbanization and technologic change with their
accompanying demand on natural resources, is found to be of
increasing and vital importance to the health, welfare and economic
well-being of present and future inhabitants and requires forthright
action by the governing body of the Town of West Seneca.
B. It is recognized that the biologic integrity of the natural environment on
which man is dependent for survival and the natural and functional
beauty of our surroundings which condition the quality of our life
experience cannot be protected without the full cooperation and
participation of all the people of the Town of West Seneca working in
partnership with local and state officials and with various public and
private institutions, agencies and organizations. Establishment of a
commission for conservation of the environment is a necessary step in a
fostering unified action on environmental problems.
A. The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members, of which nine (9)
shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall serve at the pleasure of
the Town Board, and the remainder shall be ex officio members as
provided herein. Persons residing in the Town of West Seneca who are
interested in the improvement and preservation of environmental
quality shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the
Commission. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment, except that a vacancy occurring
other than by the expiration of term of office shall be filled only for the
remainder of the unexpired term. [Amended 9-9-1974]
B. The membership of the Commission shall be diversified to take into
account the many different opinions on the environment throughout
§ 5-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 10-3
10:4
§ 10-4. Officers and meetings.
The Town Board shall designate a member of the Commission to act as
Chairman thereof. At the first meeting of the Commission, its members shall
elect from among themselves a Recording Secretary. The Commission shall
adopt rules and procedures for its meetings. It shall keep accurate records
of its meetings and activities and shall file an annual report as provided in
§ 10-6 of this local law.
§ 10-5. Powers and duties of Commission.
The powers and duties of the Commission shall be to:
West Seneca, with at least one (1) member between the age of sixteen
(16) and twenty-one (21) but not more than two (2) members between
the age of sixteen (16) and twenty-one (21).
C. The terms of members on the Commission shall be staggered with the
first three (3) members appointed to a term of one (1) year, the next
four (4) members appointed to a term of two (2) years, the eighth
member appointed for a term of one (1) year, and the ninth member
appointed for a term of two (2) years. Upon the expiration of each term,
the successor appointee shall be appointed for a full two-year term.
[Amended 9-9-1974]
D. The Town Board, Chairman of the Planning Board, Planning Director,
Recreation Director, Chairman of the Recreation Commission, Town
Attorney and other officials that may be hereafter designated by the
Town Board shall be ex officio members of the Commission.
A. Advise the Town Board on matters affecting the preservation,
development and use of the natural and man-made features and
conditions of the town insofar as beauty, quality, biologic integrity and
other environmental factors are concerned and, in the case of man's
activities and developments, with regard to any major threats posed to
environmental quality so as to enhance the long-range value of the
environment to the people of the town.
B. Develop and, after receiving general approval by resolution of the Town
Board, conduct a program of continuing public information in the
community which shall be designed to foster increased understanding
of the nature of environmental problems and issues and support their
solutions.
C. Conduct studies, surveys and inventories of the natural and man-made
features within the Town of West Seneca and such other studies and
surveys as may be necessary to carry out the general purposes of this
local law.
D. Maintain an up-to-date inventory or index of all open spaces in public or
private ownership within the municipality, including but not limited to
natural landmarks, glacial and other geomorphic or physiographic
§ 10-3 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 10-5
10:5
§ 10-6. Reports.
The Commission shall submit an annual report to the Town Board not later
than the first day of April of each year, concerning the activities and work
features, streams and their floodplains, swamps, marshlands and other
wetlands, unique biotic communities, scenic and other open areas of
natural or ecological value, and of the ownership, present use and
proposed use of such open areas, so as to provide a base of information
for recommendations by the Commission for their preservation and use.
E. Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of municipal agencies or
departments and those of private groups, institutions or individuals
within the Town of West Seneca in accord with the purposes of this local
law.
F. Maintain liaison and communications with public and private agencies
and organizations of local, state and national scope whose programs
and activities have an impact on the quality of the environment or who
can be of assistance to the Commission.
G. Working in cooperation with the Planning Board, recommend from time
to time to the Town Board features, plans and programs relating to
environmental improvement for inclusion in the Master Plan of the
Town of West Seneca, and, similarly, recommend to the Town Board
appropriate and desirable changes in existing local laws and ordinances
relating to environmental control or recommend new local laws or
ordinances.
H. Prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and pamphlets in
accord with the purposes of this local law.
I. Obtain and maintain in orderly fashion maps, reports, books and other
publications to support the necessary researches of the Commission
into local environmental conditions.
J. When authorized by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of West
Seneca, the Commission may accept, by gift, grant, devise, bequest or
otherwise, property both real and personal in the name of the Town of
West Seneca as may be necessary to conserve and otherwise properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water resources within the
boundaries of the Town of West Seneca. Such real property may be
accepted in fee for land and water rights or as any other lesser interest,
development right, easement, including conservation easement,
covenant or other contractual right, including conveyance with
limitations or reversions.
K. Carry out such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the
Town Board.
L. Hold meetings as its demands require but not less than once per
calendar year.
§ 10-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 10-6
10:6
of the Commission, and from time to time shall submit such reports and
recommendations as may be necessary to fulfill the purposes of this local
law.
§ 10-7. Compensation and expenses.
The members of the Commission, including ex officio members, shall
receive no compensation for their services as members thereof, but may
be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties within the appropriations made available
therefor.
§ 10-8. Construction.
This local law shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Town of
West Seneca to preserve and improve the quality of the natural and manmade
environment on behalf of the present and future inhabitants thereof.
This local law is not intended and shall not be deemed to impair the powers
of any other public corporation.
§ 10-9. Effective date.
This local law shall take effect upon adoption by the Town Board.
Chapter 11
RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 85.
§ 11-1. Legislative intent.
A. The organization, preservation and improvement of the recreational,
educational and athletic activities provided in the Town of West Seneca
are found to be of increasing and vital importance to the health, welfare
and economic well being of present and future inhabitants and require
action by the governing body of the Town of West Seneca.
B. It is also recognized that in order to foster recreational pursuits,
educational opportunities in the arts, lessons in sportsmanship and
superior competition for our youth as well others in the Town of West
Seneca, cooperation and participation of all the people of the Town of
West Seneca working in partnership with local and state officials and
with various public and private institutions, agencies and organizations
is required. Therefore, the establishment of a Recreation Commission is
a necessary step for achieving the goals stated herein.
§ 10-6 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 11-2
10:7
§ 11-2. Establishment of Recreation Commission.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca hereby creates a commission
which shall be known as the "Town of West Seneca Recreation Commission,"
hereinafter called the "Recreation Commission."
§ 11-3. Membership.
§ 11-4. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Recreation Commission shall be to:
A. The Recreation Commission shall consist of 13 members, as follows:
(1) Eight members shall serve on the commission, one member each as
selected by the following organizations: West Seneca Youth
Baseball, West Seneca Girls Softball, West Seneca Youth Hockey,
West Seneca Soccer, West Seneca Little Loop Football, West Seneca
Youth Theater, West Seneca Senior Citizen Center, and West
Seneca Recreation Department.
(2) One member shall be designated by the Friends of the Burchfield
Nature and Art Center or any successor organization, if any.
(3) Each Town Board Member (three) shall select an individual to serve
as a member.
(4) The Town Attorney shall serve as a member of the Commission.
(5) All members shall be residents of the Town of West Seneca.
(6) Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment, except that a vacancy occurring other
than by the expiration of term of office shall be filled only for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
B. Terms of membership. All members shall have their terms of
membership expire the even-numbered year after their appointment.
Members may be reappointed to serve on the Commission.
C. Selection of Chairman and Recording Secretary. At the first meeting of
the Recreation Commission, its members shall elect from among
themselves a Chairman and Recording Secretary. The Commission shall
adopt rules and procedures for its meetings. It shall keep accurate
records of its meetings and activities and shall file an annual report as
provided in § 11-5 of this chapter.
A. Advise the Town Board on issues relating to scheduling of programs and
events, maintenance of Town-owned recreational and other
educational, cultural or artistic facilities and other duties as assigned
by the Town Board from time to time.
§ 11-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 11-4
10:8
§ 11-5. Reports.
The Recreation Commission shall submit an annual report to the Town
Board not later than the first day of April of each year, concerning the
activities and work of the Recreation Commission, and from time to time
shall submit such reports and recommendations as may be necessary to
fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
§ 11-6. Compensation and expenses.
The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services as members thereof, but may be reimbursed from funds raised by
and held for the benefit of the Recreation Commission for reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 11-7. Construction.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Town of West
Seneca to preserve and improve the quality of life on behalf of the present
and future inhabitants thereof. This chapter is not intended and shall not be
deemed to impair the powers of any other public corporation.
§ 11-8. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its enactment by the
Town Board after proper filing, including filing with the office of the State
Comptroller and the office of the Secretary of State.
Chapter 12
ARCHITECTURAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 10.
Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals — See Ch. 28.
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
B. Initiate and develop plans for recommendation to the Town Board,
where appropriate, for artistic, cultural, educational and sporting
activities in and for the benefit of the Town and its residents.
C. Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of municipal agencies or
departments and those of private groups, institutions or individuals
within the Town of West Seneca in accord with the purposes of this
chapter.
D. Hold meetings at least bimonthly.
§ 11-4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 11-8
10:9
§ 12-1. Legislative intent.
The revitalization, preservation and improvement of the vacant land and
developed properties within the Town of West Seneca is found to be of
increasing and vital importance to the health, welfare and economic wellbeing
of present and future inhabitants and requires action by the
governing body of the Town of West Seneca. In order to foster smart growth,
reasoned redevelopment and improvements within the Town, the governing
body of the Town of West Seneca states that the creation of the Town of
West Seneca Architectural Commission is a necessary step for achieving the
goals stated herein.
§ 12-2. Establishment of Commission.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca hereby creates a Commission
which shall be known as the "Town of West Seneca Architectural
Commission," hereinafter called the "Architectural Commission."
§ 12-3. Membership.
A. The Architectural Commission shall consist of five members as follows:
(1) The Town Board will appoint five members which include the
following if available:
(a) Architect.
(b) Planning Board member.
(c) Local contractor.
(d) Resident(s).
(e) A member of the Code Enforcement Office, and the Town
Board will have a liaison attend meetings.
(2) All members shall be residents of the Town of West Seneca.
(3) Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment, except that a vacancy occurring other
than by the expiration of term of office shall be filled only for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
B. Terms of membership. All members shall serve a term of two years, with
the exception of the member of the Building and Plumbing Department,
who shall serve at the pleasure of the Code Enforcement Officer.
Members may be reappointed to the Commission.
C. Selection of Chairman and Recording Secretary. At the first meeting of
the Architectural Commission, its members shall elect from among
themselves a Chairman and Recording Secretary. The Commission shall
§ 11-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 12-3
10:10
§ 12-4. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Architectural Commission shall be to:
§ 12-5. Reports.
The Architectural Commission shall submit an annual report to the Town
Board not later than the first day of April of each year, concerning the
activities and work of the Architectural Commission, and from time to time
shall submit such reports and recommendations as may be necessary to
fulfill the purposes of this chapter.
§ 12-6. Compensation and expenses.
The members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for their
services as members thereof, but may be reimbursed, from funds raised by
and held for the benefit of the Architectural Commission, for reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 12-7. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the powers of the Town of West
Seneca to preserve and improve the quality life on behalf of the present
and future inhabitants thereof. This chapter is not intended and shall not be
deemed to impair the powers of any other public corporation.
§ 12-8. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its enactment by
the Town Board after proper filing, including filing with the office of the
Secretary of State.
Chapter 13
adopt rules and procedures for its meetings. It shall keep accurate
records of its meetings and activities and shall file an annual report as
provided in § 12-5 of this chapter.
A. Give nonbinding advice and counsel to the Town Board on issues
relating to architectural standards, design standards, zoning codes,
property maintenance codes, and development standards within the
Town of West Seneca.
B. Seek to coordinate, assist and unify the efforts of municipal agencies or
departments and those of private groups, institutions or individuals
within the Town of West Seneca in accord with the purposes of this
chapter.
C. Have communications with any future Historical Preservation
Commission.
D. Hold meetings at least quarterly.
§ 12-3 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 12-8
10:11
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 13-1. Legislative intent.
The proper operation of Town government requires that its officers and
employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain;
that public officers and employees observe in their official acts the highest
standards of ethics and discharge faithfully the duties of their public office
regardless of personal consideration; and that the public have confidence
in the integrity of its government and the officers and employees thereof.
It is the policy of the Town of West Seneca and the purpose of this chapter
to establish standards and guidelines for ethical conduct of officers and
employees. Though assurance of such conduct will continue to rest
primarily on personal integrity and community vigilance, the establishment
of standards is another step toward providing the highest caliber of public
administration for the Town and ensuring that government decisions are
arrived at impartially and free of conflict of interests and thereby increasing
confidence in public officials. It is also the purpose of this chapter to protect
officials and employees from unwarranted assaults on their integrity by
separating real conflict from the inconsequential, recognizing that for local
government to attract and hold competent administrators, public service
must not require a complete divesting of all proprietary interests. In
recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a Code of Ethics for
all officers and for all employees of the Town of West Seneca, hereinafter
referred to as the "Town." In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this Code and provisions of Article 18 of the General Municipal
Law, the latter shall control. This chapter shall be enforceable upon all
Town officials, officers and employees. No acknowledgement, service or
acceptance of this chapter shall be necessary for enforcement of its
provisions.
§ 13-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AGENCY — Any Town department, division, board, committee, or
bureau, including the Town Board or any successor thereto.
APPEAR and APPEAR BEFORE — Communicating in any form,
including without limitation, personally, by letter, electronic
communication, telephone or by any other device.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — The same meaning as defined in
the New York State Public Officer's Law1 as well as any information
discussed and/or revealed at an executive session of a Town Board
meeting.
1. Editor's Note: See McKinney's Public Officers Law § 1 et seq.
§ 12-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 13-2
10:12
CONFLICT OF INTEREST — Any action or omission which is in conflict
or gives or may reasonably give the appearance of conflict with the
performance of official Town business or government.
CUSTOMER or CLIENT — Any entity or person to whom an official,
officer or employee of the Town of West Seneca or his or her outside
employer or business has supplied goods or services during the
previous calendar year having, in the aggregate, a value greater than
$2,000.
FINANCIAL BENEFIT — Any money, service, license, permit, contract,
authorization, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, gratuity or other
compensation of anything of value, or any promise thereof.
GOOD FAITH — Information concerning potential wrongdoing is
disclosed in good faith when the individual making the disclosure
reasonably believes such information to be true and reasonably believes
that it constitutes potential wrongdoing.
HOUSEHOLD — All persons living in a single residence, whether
related or not.
INTEREST — Deemed to include the affairs of the official, officer or
employee or their spouse, minor children and dependents, firm,
partnership or association in which such official, officer or employee
is a member or employee; a corporation in which such official officer
or employee is an officer director, or employee; and a corporation of
which any stock is owned or controlled directly by the official, officer or
employee.
PERSONNEL ACTION — Any action affecting compensation,
appointment, promotion, transfer, assignment, reassignment,
reinstatement or evaluation of performance.
RECUSE — The act of abstaining from participation or influencing in an
official action due to a conflict of interest.
RELATIVE — A spouse, parent, grandparent, stepparent, sibling, stepsibling,
sibling's spouse, child, grandchild, stepchild, uncle, aunt,
nephew, niece or household member of a Town official, officer or
employee and individuals having any of these relationships to the
spouse of the Town official, officer or employee.
TOWN EMPLOYEE — All board members, officers and staff employed
by the Town, whether employed full-time or part-time, employed
pursuant to a contract, employed temporarily or employees who are on
probation, paid or unpaid.
WHISTLEBLOWER — Any Town employee (as defined herein) who in
good faith discloses information concerning wrongdoing by another
Town employee or concerning the business of the Town itself.
WRONGDOING — Any alleged corruption, fraud, criminal or unethical
activity, misconduct, waste, conflict of interest, intentional reporting of
§ 13-2 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 13-2
10:13
§ 13-3. Standards of conduct.
Every official, officer and employee of the Town of West Seneca shall be
subject to and abide by the following standards of conduct:
false or misleading information or abuse of authority engaged in by a
Town employee (as defined herein) that relates to the Town.
B. Word usage. The use of the masculine gender shall include the feminine
where applicable.
A. No Town official, officer or employee shall use his or her official position
or office to take or fail to take any action in a manner which he or she
knows or has reason to know may result in a financial benefit or interest
for any of the following persons or entities:
(1) The Town official, officer or employee;
(2) His or her outside employer or business;
(3) A member of his household;
(4) A customer or client; or
(5) A relative.
B. No Town official, officer or employee shall have any interest, financial
or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business or
transaction or professional activity or incur any obligation of any nature
that is in conflict with, or might reasonably tend to conflict with, the
proper discharge of his duties in the public interest. Any officer or
employee who has a direct or indirect financial or other private interest
in any matter before any board of the Town shall publicly disclose in
writing on the official record of such board the nature and extent of
such interest prior to participating in the discussion or before making a
recommendation or giving an opinion to such board on such matter.
C. No Town official, officer or employee shall represent private interests
before any board, department, office or agency of the Town, nor
represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the
interests of the Town or in any litigation to which the Town is a party.
The preceding sentence shall not preclude any such officers or
employees from appearing in the performance of public or civic
obligations or on their own behalf with respect to matters of a personal
nature. All appearing parties before any board of the Town shall make a
disclosure as provided under § 809 of Article 18 of the General
Municipal Law. Every application, petition or request submitted for a
variance, change of zoning, site plan approval or waiver, license or
permit pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance, local law, rule or
regulation constituting the zoning and planning regulations of the Town
in which a Town officer or employee has an interest as defined in this
chapter shall state the name, residence and the nature and extent of the
§ 13-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 13-3
10:14
interest of any officer or employee of the Town, in the person,
partnership or association making such application, petition or request.
D. A Town Board member, official, officer or employee shall promptly
recuse himself or herself from acting on a matter before the Town when
acting on the matter or failing to act on the matter may provide a
financial benefit to the persons or entities listed in § 13-3A above. A
Town Board member shall promptly recuse himself or herself from
voting on the appointment, hiring, or other matter involving a person or
entity described in § 13-3A above.
E. No Town official, officer or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall
directly or indirectly solicit, accept or receive any gift, whether in the
form of money, services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality,
material goods, things, or promise of any other form, under
circumstances in which it could reasonably be inferred or could
reasonably be expected that the gift was intended to influence such
official, officer or employee in the performance of his or her official
duties or was intended to reward official action or inaction. Under no
circumstances shall an official, officer or employee accept any gift
valued in excess of $25. No officer or employee of the Town shall grant
in the discharge of his duties any improper favor, service or thing of
value. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any officer
or employee of the Town from borrowing money from any bank or banks
designated as depositories by the Town Board.
F. No Town official, officer or employee shall disclose any confidential
information or use said information to further their personal interest or
the personal interests of others, unless required to do so by law or court
order.
G. No Town official, officer or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall
engage in or accept private employment or render services for private
interests when such employment or service is in conflict with the proper
discharge of his official duties.
H. No Town official, officer or employee shall accept employment by any
person, firm or corporation with which he or his department, office or
agency is engaged on behalf of the Town in the transaction of business
which is or may be affected by his official action. No officer or employee
of the Town shall, within one year after termination of service or
employment with the Town, appear before any board or agency of the
Town in relation to any case, proceeding or application in which he
personally participated during the period of his service or employment
or which was under his active consideration.
I. No Town official, officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his
official position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for
himself or others or grant any special consideration, treatment or
advantage to any citizens beyond that which is available to every other
citizen.
§ 13-3 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 13-3
10:15
§ 13-4. Penalties.
J. No Town official, officer or employee shall, by his conduct, give
reasonable basis for the impression that any person can unduly
influence him or improperly enjoy his favor in the performance of his
official duties or that he is affected by the kinship, rank, position or
influence of any party or person.
K. No Town official, officer or employee shall direct or cause any officer or
employee of the Town to do or perform any service or work outside of
public work or employment, or accept any such service or work, nor
shall any officer or employee of the Town offer to or perform any such
service or work for such officer or employee.
L. No Town official, officer or employee shall use or permit the use of Town
property (including vehicles, equipment, materials and any other
property) for personal convenience, profit, or political means except
when such use is available to Town citizens generally or is provided as a
matter of written Town policy.
M. No Town official, officer or employee shall require, authorize, or
influence any other Town official, officer, or employee to participate in
an election campaign or contribute to a political committee.
N. No Town official, officer or employee shall induce or aid other officials,
officers or employees of the Town to violate any provisions of this
chapter.
O. All Town Board members, officials, officers, employees, and volunteers
are required to reasonably cooperate with any investigation of the
Board of Ethics. Such reasonable cooperation shall include by way of
example, but not be limited to, participating in investigatory interviews,
producing documents or other tangible information in their possession
or control, and appearing at scheduled hearings and giving testimony.
Employees represented by a union will have the right to have a union
representative present with them for any investigatory interviews and
to seek the advice of their union representative prior to appearing
before or providing information to the Board of Ethics.
P. Every Ethics Board Member shall annually complete two hours of ethics
training.
Q. This Ethics Code shall be annually available to all Town officials, Board
members, employees, and volunteers.
A. In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, a
violation of this chapter may result as follows:
(1) Forfeiture of pay, suspension or removal from office or employment
or such other disciplinary action as the Town Board may consider
advisable.
§ 13-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 13-4
10:16
§ 13-5. Disclosure statements.
§ 13-6. Whistleblower Policy.
(2) Any contract knowingly entered into by and/or with the Town or
any agency thereof in which there is an interest or financial benefit
prohibited by this chapter shall be null, void, and wholly
unenforceable.
(3) Recommend a civil fine, not to exceed $10,000 for each violation,
upon a Town Official, Board member, employee or volunteer found
guilty of a violation of this code. Such fine shall be payable to the
Town.
B. No action expressly or impliedly permitted under Article 18 of the
General Municipal Law shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. The following Town officials, officers and employees of the Town of West
Seneca shall be required to file annual disclosure statements by March
31 of each year in the form set forth in Exhibit "A" attached hereto:2
(1) All elected officials.
(2) All department heads.
(3) Any and all Board members, Commission members, Committee
members, whether elected, appointed, or volunteer.
B. Said forms shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be available for
public inspection.
C. Any independent contractors hired by the Town to perform any work for
the Town shall be required to file annual disclosure statements by
March 31 of each year in a form set forth in Exhibit "B" attached
hereto.3
A. This Whistleblower Policy applies to all board members, officers,
employees of the Town of West Seneca, and the public, and provides
them with a confidential means to report credible allegation of
misconduct, wrongdoing or unethical behavior and to protect those
individuals, when acting in good faith, from personal or professional
retaliation.
B. Town employees who discover or have knowledge of potential
wrongdoing concerning board members, officers or employees of the
Town, or a person having business dealings with the Town, or
concerning the Town itself, shall report such activity in accordance with
the following procedures:
2. Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in Town offices.
3. Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in Town offices.
§ 13-4 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 13-6
10:17
(1) The Town employee shall disclose any information concerning
wrongdoing either orally or in a written report to his or her
supervisor, to the Town Ethics Board Attorney, general counsel,
human resources representative, or the Erie County Whistle
Blower Hotline at (716-858-7722) or email at
whistleblower@erie.gov.
(2) Town employees who discover or have knowledge of wrongdoing
shall report such wrongdoing in a prompt and timely manner. If
reporting through the Town Ethics Board Attorney, then the form
attached hereto as Exhibit "C"4 shall be completed and submitted
to the Town Ethics Board Attorney.
(3) The identity of the whistleblower and the substance of his or her
allegations will be kept confidential to the best extent possible.
(4) The individual to whom the potential wrongdoing is reported shall
investigate and handle the claim in a timely and reasonable
manner, which may include referring such information to the
authorities or an appropriate law enforcement agency where
applicable.
(5) Should a Town employee believe in good faith that disclosing
information within the Town would likely subject him or her to
adverse personnel action or be wholly ineffective; the Town
employee may instead disclose the information to the local
authorities or to an appropriate law enforcement agency, if
applicable.
(6) No Town employee who in good faith discloses potential violations
of the Town's Code of Ethics or other instances of potential
wrongdoing shall suffer harassment, retaliation or adverse
personnel action.
(7) All allegations of retaliation against a whistleblower or interference
with an individual seeking to disclose potential wrongdoing will be
thoroughly investigated by the Town Ethics Board.
(8) Any Town employee who retaliates against or attempts to interfere
with any individual for having in good faith disclosed potential
violations of the Town's Code of Ethics or other instances of
potential wrongdoing is subject to disciplinary action, which may
include termination of employment.
(9) Any allegation of retaliation or interference will be taken and
treated seriously and irrespective of the outcome of the initial
complaint, will be treated as a separate matter.
(10) The Whistleblower Policy is not intended to limit, diminish or
impair any other rights or remedies that an individual may have
4. Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in Town offices.
§ 13-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 13-6
10:18
§ 13-7. Creation of Board of Ethics; composition of membership;
conditions of membership.
under the law with respect to disclosing potential wrongdoing free
from retaliation or adverse personnel action.
(11) Specifically, the Whistleblower Policy is not intended to limit any
rights or remedies that an individual may have under the laws of
the State of New York, including but not limited to the following
provisions: Civil Service Law § 75-b, Labor Law § 740, State
Finance Law § 191 (commonly known as the "False Claims Act")
and Executive Law § 55(1).
(12)With respect to any rights or remedies that an individual may have
pursuant to Civil Service Law § 75-b or Labor Law § 740, any
employee who wishes to preserve such rights shall, prior to
disclosing information to a government body, have made a good
faith effort to provide the appointing authority or his or her
designee the information to be disclosed and shall provide the
appointing authority or designee a reasonable time to take
appropriate action unless there is imminent and serious danger to
public health or safety. [See Civil Service Law § 75-b(2)(b); Labor
Law § 740(3)].
C. Once a complaint has been submitted, the Ethics Board will investigate
the allegations of the complaint. In conducting any such investigation,
the Ethics Board may administer oaths or affirmations, issue subpoenas
pursuant to Article 23 of the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules,
compel witness attendance and require the production of any books or
records which it may deem relevant and material. The Ethics Board
shall require clear and convincing evidence before determining that a
violation has occurred.
A. A Board of Ethics is hereby established pursuant to Article 18, Section
808, Subdivision 3 of the General Municipal Law. The members of the
Board of Ethics shall be appointed by the Town Board and shall receive
no salary or compensation for their services as members of such Board.
A member of the Board of Ethics may be removed for cause. The Board
shall be composed of one member to be appointed by each member of
the Town Board with staggered terms. Three members shall be
appointed in 2021 and two members to be appointed in 2022. The term
of each member shall be five years with three more being appointed or
reappointed in 2026 and two being appointed or reappointed in 2027,
which shall continue on the same scheme. A member of the Town Board
shall not appoint himself or herself or any other current Town Board
member. The seventh member of the Board of Ethics shall be the Town
Clerk, who shall be an ex officio member without the power to vote. The
members of the Board of Ethics shall be residents of the Town of West
Seneca and only one member shall be a current Town official, officer or
employee. The Town Attorney representing the Town shall be an ex
officio member of the Board of Ethics without the power to vote. In the
§ 13-6 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 13-7
10:19
§ 13-8. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter shall be adjudged by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such portion thereof shall be
deemed inoperative and the balance of the code deemed to be in full force
and effect.
§ 13-9. Permissible claims.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to bar or prevent the timely filing by a
present or former Town official, officer or employee of any claim, account,
demand or suit against the Town or any agency thereof on behalf of himself
or any relative or household member arising out of any personal injury or
property damage or for any lawful benefit authorized or permitted by law.
§ 13-10. Compliance required; distribution of copies.
Compliance with this Code of Ethics shall be deemed a condition of
employment for all Town officials, officers and employees. The Town Human
Resources Department must promptly cause a copy of this code, including
any amendments, to be distributed to every person who is or becomes an
official, officer or employee of the Town of West Seneca and a receipt of
the same shall be signed by such official, officer or employee. Such receipts
shall be filed with Human Resources, who shall supply the necessary forms,
and a photocopy shall be filed in the officer's or employee's personnel folder
and with the Board of Ethics.
event that the Town Board increases to five board members, the Board
of Ethics shall become a five-member Board. One member shall be
appointed by each Town Board member and the terms shall be five
years as decided by a majority of the Town Board members.
B. Advisory opinions. Upon written request of any Town official, officer or
employee, the Board of Ethics established herein shall render advisory
opinions regarding this chapter of Ethics or the provisions contained in
Article 18 of the New York State General Municipal Law. The Board of
Ethics shall also make recommendations as to any amendments to this
chapter upon the request and majority vote of the Town Board. The
opinions of the Board of Ethics shall be advisory and under no
circumstances shall the identity of the Town officer, official or employee
be disclosed except to authorized persons and agencies or pursuant to a
court order.
C. Rules and regulations. The Board of Ethics shall promulgate its own
rules and regulations as to its form and procedures and shall maintain
appropriate records of its opinions and proceedings.
D. All recommendations, advisory opinions and rules and regulations of
the Board of Ethics shall be kept in the Town Clerk's Office.
§ 13-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 13-11
10:20
§ 13-11. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon its enactment by the
Town Board after proper filing, including filing with the office of the State
Comptroller and the office of the Secretary of State.
Chapter 18
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL INCENTIVE BOARD
§ 18-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions contained in § 485-b of the Real Property Tax
Law, the Town of West Seneca hereby establishes a board to be known as
the "Industrial and Commercial Incentive Board" (the "ICIB").
§ 18-2. Membership.
The ICIB shall consist of five members, including a Chairman, to be
appointed by the Town Board by resolution.
§ 18-3. Powers and duties; reports.
A. The ICIB shall have the powers and duties prescribed by § 485-b of the
Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York and shall present a plan
to the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca concerning the various
types of business and real property which should be granted eligibility
for such exemption.
B. The ICIB shall, within a time to be fixed by the Town Board, present a
report and plan to the Town Board concerning the following:
(1) The various types of business real property which should be
granted eligibility for exemption from taxation and specific ad
valorem levies authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
(2) Limiting the applicability of the exemption to specific divisions and
major groups as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual published by the United States Government.
(3) Whether the exemption shall be computed in the manner specified
in Subdivision 2 or 12 of Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
(4) Specific geographic areas of the Town within which the exemption
should be offered.
(5) Reduction of the per centum of exemption otherwise allowed
pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 485-b.
(6) The minimum value of construction, alteration, installation or
improvement required to qualify for the exemption.
§ 13-11 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 18-3
10:21
§ 18-4. Considerations for exemptions.
In developing the plan and report to the Town Board, the ICIB shall
consider:
Chapter 25
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 13.
(7) Other actions deemed desirable to improve the economic climate
within the Town.
(8) Other factors as the Town Board may direct.
A. The planning objectives of the Town and the areas thereof within which
exemptions pursuant to Real Property Tax Law § 485-b shall be offered;
B. The necessity of the exemption to the attraction or retention of
business;
C. The creation or retention of permanent private sector jobs;
D. The need to allow the exemption to provide employment opportunities
and broaden the tax base; and
E. Other factors the ICIB deems relevant.
§ 18-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 18-4
10:22
ARTICLE I
Work Safety
[Adopted 10-20-1986]
§ 25-1. Objectives; policy established.
§ 25-2. Reporting of accidents.
Unless incapacitated, employees must report all accidents and injuries in
writing in order to claim town benefits. An employee report of injury form
will be available from the town for this purpose. The report must be signed
by the employee and filed with the employee's department head.
§ 25-3. Injured employees to seek medical treatment; injury
reports.
Injured employees must immediately seek professional medical treatment
for other than first-aid injuries and request their attending physician or
other health-care provider to file a written report of injury and disability
with the town within 48 hours of treatment. If disability is continuing,
employees must ask the physician/health-care provider to send the town
a complete medical report of the injury and disability within 15 days.
Failure of employees to file a written report of injury or failure of the
treating health-care provider to file its reports promptly will prevent or
delay payment of compensation benefits.
§ 25-4. Rehabilitation.
A. The objective and policy of the Town of West Seneca is and has been to
maintain a safe and healthful work environment for all employees. To
that end, on July 25, 1983, the town implemented a Loss Control and
Safety Program which sought to eliminate unsafe conditions and unsafe
behavior that could cause workplace injuries and illnesses. On February
1, 1985, the town retained professional loss control service providers to
further this goal.
B. The town also recognizes that it is every town employee's desire and
responsibility to maintain adequate physical and mental ability so that
work tasks can be completed in a safe and healthful manner. In order to
further these goals, the town now establishes the following Employee
Wellness and Work Safety Policy.
A. Physicians and other health-care providers treating town employee
injuries will be requested to cooperate with the employees and the town
in filing timely injury and treatment reports, recommending
rehabilitative and wellness treatment activities and in permitting
employees safe return to work in modified duty plans adopted by the
town.
B. Employees disabled from work will be expected to follow the doctor's
treatment program and make every effort to rehabilitate themselves as
§ 25-1 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-4
10:23
§ 25-5. Benefits not to accumulate.
Except as provided by contract or law, vacation and sick leave benefits will
not accumulate during periods of employee absence from work, whether
due to accident or illness. Furthermore, the town will not make pension
contributions on employees' behalf which are based on workers'
compensation benefits.
§ 25-6. Job performance standards.
§ 25-7. Employee Assistance Program.
promptly as possible. Employees being paid sick leave or compensation
benefits will be expected to stay in health-care facilities or at home
recuperating when unable to work. Employees found to be engaged in
unhealthful activities while disabled will have benefits terminated.
C. Employees with nondisabling injuries requiring follow-up visits for
medical treatments will schedule such treatments during nonwork
hours. The town will not pay workers' compensation benefits for
nonemergency medical treatment during work hours, except under
very unusual circumstances.
A. The town will implement job performance standards and periodically
review each employee's ability to maintain those standards. The town
expects employees to maintain physical competence to perform
assigned work in a safe and healthful manner and will initiate programs
to facilitate this competence. In this regard, the town received a
Department of Labor education and training grant and has retained
service providers to conduct training in back injury prevention, work
site hazard marking, supervisory safety skills, toxic hazard
communication and advanced driver performance programs. This
training is presently ongoing.
B. The town will consider both an employee's accident record and
attendance record as critical elements in evaluating overall job
performance. Employees with a pattern of repetitive absences and
injuries may be considered incompetent and subject to disciplinary
procedures and discharge where that pattern is not corrected. The
town will make every effort to avoid subjecting employees to
disciplinary actions by recommending use of safety and health training
techniques. However, employees must utilize such information and
training effectively.
A. Recognizing that the health and well-being of its employees is vital to
the success of the Town of West Seneca, an Employee Assistance
Program shall be established to provide responsible confidential
assistance to employees experiencing personal problems which may
adversely affect their job performance.
§ 25-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 25-7
10:24
§ 25-8. Additional remedies.
Nothing in the Employee Assistance Program or in the Wellness and Work
Safety Policy contained in this resolution shall in any way waive
management's right to take appropriate disciplinary or administrative
action, nor shall the use of the program waive a represented employee's
right to use the grievance procedure to contest any such discipline under
existing collective bargaining agreements. Similarly, the use of the program
does not waive a nonrepresented employee's rights under the problemsolving
procedure.
B. As a statement of policy, the town recognizes that a wide range of
human problems not directly associated with one's job function can
affect an employee's job performance and recognizes that many human
problems can be successfully treated, whether the problem be one of
alcohol, drug abuse, physical illness, mental or emotional illness or
financial, marital or family stress. The purpose of the Employee
Assistance Program is to provide effective assistance to those
individuals who are currently experiencing or are at risk of
experiencing personal problems and to help the town and unions deal
more effectively with employees experiencing personal problems which
may cause deterioration of job performance.
C. Since employee work performance can be affected by the problem of an
employee's spouse or other dependents, the Employee Assistance
Program is also available to the dependents of all Town of West Seneca
employees on a voluntary basis. The town encourages employees and/or
their dependents who have a problem to seek help. Employees seeking
help through this program are assured that their job security and
promotional opportunities will not be jeopardized solely as a result of a
request for help with their problem. Further, employees are assured
that referral for assistance with such problems will be handled in a
confidential manner. The decision to participate in the Employee
Assistance Program is voluntary and the personal responsibility of the
employee. Employees participating in this program will be expected to
meet all existing job performance standards and established work rules
as any other nonparticipating employee.
§ 25-7 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-8
10:25

ARTICLE II
Harassment
[Adopted 5-10-1993; amended 11-22-1993]
§ 25-9. Purpose.
The Town of West Seneca is committed to offering employment opportunity
based on ability and performance, in a productive climate, free of
discrimination. Accordingly, harassment of any kind by department heads,
supervisors or co-workers will not be tolerated. In addition, the Town of
West Seneca will endeavor to protect employees, to the extent possible,
from reported harassment by nonemployees in the workplace by
nonemployees.
§ 25-10. Prohibited behavior.
§ 25-11. Sexual harassment.
A. Consistent with Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
guidelines, "harassment" is defined as verbal or physical conduct which
denigrates or shows hostility or aversion to an individual because of his
or her race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, disability,
political affiliation, physical appearance, marital status or veteran
status or that of his or her relatives, friends or associates and which:
(1) Has the purpose or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive work environment;
(2) Has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an
individual's work performance; or
(3) Otherwise adversely affects an individual's employment
opportunities.
B. Harassing conduct includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Epithets, slurs, negative stereotyping or threatening, intimidating
or hostile acts (even if claimed to be jokes or pranks) which relate
to race, color, religion, gender, national origin, age, disability,
political affiliation, physical appearance, marital status or veteran
status; and
(2) Written or graphic material which denigrates or shows hostility or
aversion toward an individual or group because of race, color,
religion, gender, national origin, age, disability, political affiliation,
physical appearance, marital status or veteran status and is
displayed or circulated in the workplace.
C. Any harassment of town employees in violation of the foregoing rules is
absolutely prohibited and will not be tolerated.
§ 25-9 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-11
10:27
§ 25-12. Retaliation.
Retaliation against employees for exercising their rights under this policy
is also strictly prohibited and will not be tolerated. This would include
retaliation against employees for inquiring about their rights or for making
honest complaint of a violation or possible violation or for truthfully
assisting in a complaint investigation.
§ 25-13. Procedures.
A. The equal Employment Opportunity Commission has separate
guidelines dealing with unlawful sexual harassment, which is defined as
follows: unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and
other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual
harassment when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
B. For example, the following kinds of behavior, or others with a similar
harassing effect, are absolutely prohibited:
(1) Abusing an employee through insulting or degrading sexual
remarks, jokes, innuendos or other sexually oriented conduct
(including, among other things, graphic or descriptive comments
relating to an individual's body or physical appearance, sexually
oriented teasing or pranks, improper suggestions, objects or
pictures or unwanted physical contact); or
(2) Threats, demands or suggestions that an employee's work status
depends in any way upon tolerating or accepting sexual advances
or sexually oriented conduct.
A. All employees and employment applicants are encouraged to promptly
report any conduct that they are subject to or that they witness which
violates this policy. If the town does not know about the conduct, it
cannot take responsive action.
B. Complaints or inquiries may be made confidentially to the person
designated by the Town Board as the Compliance Officer under this
policy. Alternatively, you may discuss the matter with the head of your
bargaining unit or your department head or supervisor or the Town
Supervisor; that individual will then bring complaints to the attention of
the Compliance Officer. Complaints will be kept confidential to the
§ 25-11 WEST SENECA CODE § 25-13
10:28
greatest extent practicable, consistent with the need to conduct an
adequate investigation.
C. After initially ascertaining the details, the Compliance Officer will
investigate the matter as discreetly as possible, coordinating with
appropriate supervisory personnel and/or the Town Board as may be
needed for determining the proper action to be taken. Any employee
who is determined after an impartial investigation to have committed
harassment or retaliation in violation of this policy will be subjected to
appropriate disciplinary measures up to and including termination.
§ 25-13 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-13
10:29

ARTICLE III
Nondiscrimination and Affirmative Action
[Adopted 3-13-1995]
§ 25-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth below:
MINORITY GROUP MEMBERS or MINORITIES — A United States citizen
or permanent resident alien who is and can demonstrate membership in one
of the following groups:
MINORITY-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE or MBE — Any business
enterprise, including a sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation, that
is at least 51% owned by one or more minority group members; an
enterprise in which such minority ownership is real, substantial and
continuing; an enterprise in which such minority ownership has and
exercises the authority to control independently the day-to-day business
decisions of the enterprise; and an enterprise authorized to do business in
New York State and is independently owned and operated. The "MBE" shall
be certified under the New York State MBE/WBE Certification Program.
WOMEN-OWNED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE or WBE — Any business
enterprise, including a sole proprietorship, partnership or corporation, that
is at least 51% owned by one or more citizens or permanent resident aliens
who are women; an enterprise in which the ownership interest of such
women is real, substantial and continuing; an enterprise in which such
women ownership has and exercises the authority to control independently
the day-to-day business decisions of the enterprise; and an enterprise
authorized to do business in New York State and is independently owned
and operated. The "WBE" shall be certified under the New York State MBE/
WBE Certification Program.
§ 25-15. Scope.
The Town of West Seneca, herein after referred to as the "town," shall
include all of the following Subsections A through F, with respect to the
performance of its agreement, in every agreement it enters into for work
A. Black persons having origins in any of the black African racial groups.
Hispanic persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Dominican, Cuban, Central
or Southern American of either Indian or Hispanic origin, regardless of
race.
B.
Asian and Pacific Islander persons having origins in any of the far
east countries, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent or the Pacific
islands.
C.
Native American or Alaskan Native persons having origins in any of the
original peoples of North America.
D.
§ 25-14 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-15
10:31
or services in such a manner that such provision shall be binding upon all
parties with whom such agreements are entered into:
§ 25-16. Minority and women business enterprise utilization.
A. The town shall not discriminate against employees or applicants for
employment because of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, sex,
age, disability, sexual orientation or marital status and shall undertake
programs of affirmative action to ensure that such employees and
applicants are afforded equal employment opportunities without
discrimination. Such action shall be taken with reference to but no
limited to recruitment, employment, job assignment, promotion,
upgrading, demotion, transfer, layoff or termination, rates of pay or
other forms of compensation and selection for training or retraining,
including apprenticeships and on-the-job training.
B. The town shall not discriminate in the selection of any consultant on the
basis of the owner's, partner's or shareholder's race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, sex, age, disability, sexual orientation or
marital status.
C. The town shall request each employment agency, labor union and
authorized representative or workers union and collective bargaining
or other agreements or understanding furnish it with a written
statement that such employment agency, labor union consultant or
representative shall not discriminate because of race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, sex, age, disability, sexual orientation or
marital status and that such union or representative shall affirmatively
cooperate in the implementation of the town's obligations hereunder.
D. The town shall state in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
placed by or on behalf of the town that all qualified applicants shall be
afforded equal employment opportunities without discrimination
because of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, age,
disability, sexual orientation or marital status.
E. The town shall comply with the provisions of the Civil Rights Law of the
state and §§ 291 through 299 of the Executive Law of the state, shall
furnish all information and reports deemed necessary by the owner and
shall permit access to its books, records and accounts by the owner for
the purpose of monitoring compliance with these nondiscrimination
clauses, the Civil Rights Law and such sections of the Executive Law.
F. The town shall take such action in enforcing the foregoing provisions as
the town may direct, including sanctions and remedies for
noncompliance. If the town becomes involved in or is threatened with
litigation with any party as a result of such direction, the town promptly
shall notify the aggrieved party of such fact, and thereafter, appropriate
state agencies may intervene in such action.
§ 25-15 WEST SENECA CODE § 25-16
10:32
A. To the extent applicable to the project scope, the town shall make goodfaith
efforts to utilize, where feasible, MBE/WBEs for contracting
opportunities.
B. Consideration shall be given to utilizing MBE/WBEs in joint ventures as
prime corporations and as subconsultants in architectural, engineering,
planning and other professional disciplines, as well as for
subcontracting services and supplies necessary for the performance of
the proposed contract.
C. The town will provide lists of certified MBE/WBE firms which specialize
in areas of expertise which are necessary for the performance of any
contract.
D. The town shall achieve the above through good faith efforts and
measures, which may include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Dividing the town work to be performed in connection with a
project into smaller portions, where economically and technically
feasible.
(2) Actively and affirmatively soliciting bids for subcontractors from
qualified MBEs and WBEs, including circulation of solicitations to
minority contractor associations.
(3) Making plans and specifications for prospective town work to be
performed in connection with the project available to MBEs and
WBEs in sufficient time for thorough review before the required
time for submission of proposals.
(4) Utilizing the services and cooperating with those organizations
providing technical assistance to MBEs and WBEs in connection
with MBE and WBE participation on any project.
(5) Utilizing the qualified MBEs and WBEs referred to the town for the
purpose of soliciting bids for consultants.
(6) Encouraging the formation of joint ventures, partnerships or other
similar arrangements among subconsultants where appropriate to
ensure that the town will meet its obligations hereunder.
(7) Maintaining records detailing the efforts made to involve MBEs and
WBEs, including the names and addresses of MBEs and WBEs who
were contracted and, if not selected, the reason for such decision.
§ 25-16 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-16
10:33

ARTICLE IV
Drug-Free Workplace
[Adopted 4-14-1997]
§ 25-17. Drug-free awareness program.
§ 25-18. Drug-free workplace policy.
A. All employees are strongly encouraged to learn more about the
problems of substance abuse, including the serious threat it poses to
health and safety, the dangers of substance abuse in the workplace,
how to spot the signs of dependency and abuse and the professional
services that are available to help deal with the problems of
dependency and abuse.
B. The town will try to assist this process by providing information on
these topics, including information about community agencies, clinics
and hospitals that provide education, counseling, rehabilitation and
other services to assist persons who have substance abuse problems.
The town may also schedule educational presentations from time to
time which employees at the various locations will be invited or
required to attend.
C. The town will train supervisory and other personnel on topics including:
(1) Alcohol and drug abuse recognition, symptoms and effects.
(2) Methods of identifying employees who may be under the influence
of alcohol and/or drugs.
(3) Safety aspects of alcohol and drug problems in work and social
environments.
D. Employees who have suggestions for improving our drug-free
awareness program or who want further information about these
issues, should see the Town Supervisor.
A. One of the Town's primary objectives is to provide a safe, healthful and
productive working environment for all of its employees. This means
that all employees must be in suitable mental and physical condition at
all times while working for the Town. Our work environment and our
employees must be completely free of substance abuse and its harmful
and dangerous effects. All applicants offered a position, to be hired
after the effective date of this subsection, and those returning for
seasonal employment, will be required to submit to a drug screen as a
condition to their hire. In its sole discretion, the Town Board of the
Town of West Seneca may refuse to hire an individual who fails a drug
test. In its sole discretion, the Town may hire an individual who fails a
drug test and impose conditions, the violation of which may result in all
remedies, up to and including termination. [Amended 6-11-2012 by
L.L. No. 3-2012; 6-1-2015 by L.L. No. 6-2015]
§ 25-17 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-18
10:35
§ 25-19. Drug-free workplace rules.
B. The Town is establishing this policy in order to comply with drug-free
workplace requirements imposed on us by federal contract regulations.
All Town employees are on notice that they must strictly comply with
the rules set forth in this policy.
C. If an employee has a substance abuse problem which could put him or
her in conflict with these policies or any other town rules, the employee
must do whatever is necessary to resolve the problem. The Town would
prefer not to dictate employees' private lifestyle choices, but we cannot
permit anyone's involvement with drugs to affect our other employees,
our residents or the Town's legal standing with the federal government.
D. The Town recognizes substance dependency as a health problem and
will provide information about this issue in an effort to help employees
to avoid this problem or seek professional treatment if needed.
However, it is the responsibility of the individual employee to obtain
whatever assistance may be needed to control a substance abuse
problem and keep drugs and alcohol out of the work environment.
E. Any questions about this policy should be referred to the Town
Supervisor.
A. Any unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession or use
of a controlled substance or other illegal drug in the workplace or while
on Town business away from the workplace is strictly prohibited.
B. If any employee is convicted under a criminal drug statute (including a
plea of nolo contendere) for a violation that occurred in the workplace
or while on Town business away from the workplace, the employee must
notify the Town no later than five days after the conviction. The
notification must be given in writing to the Town Supervisor.
C. Any consumption, possession or use of alcoholic beverages in the
workplace or while on Town business away from the workplace is
prohibited.
D. Reporting to work or working under the influence of a controlled
substance, illegal drug or alcohol is prohibited.
E. Reporting to work with a controlled substance in the employee's system
is prohibited.
F. The foregoing rules are conditions of employment in any program
funded through a federal contract or grant. All employees agree to
comply with these rules as a condition of their continued employment in
such programs. Any violation of these rules will be dealt with by
disciplinary measures or required participation in a substance abuse
rehabilitation program.
§ 25-18 WEST SENECA CODE § 25-19
10:36
ARTICLE V
Background Checks and Physicals
[Adopted 6-11-2012 by L.L. No. 3-2012; amended 6-1-2015 by L.L.
No. 6-20155]
§ 25-20. New hires after June 15, 2012.
A. The objective and policy of the Town of West Seneca is and has been to
maintain a safe and healthful environment for all employees, residents,
and all members of the general public who visit the Town.
B. In order to further effectuate this objective and policy, as of the
effective date of this subsection, all applicants offered a position will
undergo a criminal history check and submit a proof of physical form
completed by a licensed physician. The proof of physical form shall be
provided to applicants by the Supervisor or Human Resources
Coordinator. In its sole discretion, and subject to all other applicable
laws, the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca may refuse to hire an
individual who refuses to undergo a criminal history check, whose
criminal history check reveals a conviction of a misdemeanor or felony
in the State of New York, or equivalent in any other jurisdiction, or
whose proof of physical form indicates he or she is physically unable to
perform the work for which he or she was hired.
C. For all potential new hires whose duties may include the operation of
Town motor vehicles or other motorized equipment, the potential new
hire shall undergo a check into his or her driving history. In its sole
discretion, the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca may refuse to
hire an individual who refuses to permit a check of the individual's
driving history. The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca may
consider the potential new hire's driving record in its hiring decision.
5. Editor’s Note: This local law also changed the name of this Article V from "Background
Checks" to "Background Checks and Physicals."
§ 25-20 ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION § 25-20
10:37
Chapter 28
PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 10.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 25-20 WEST SENECA CODE § 25-20
28:38
ARTICLE I
Creation of Planning Board
[Adopted 6-4-1952]
§ 28-1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 271 of the Town Law, a Planning Board
to consist of seven members is hereby created in the name and style of
"Planning Board, Town of West Seneca." The members first appointed shall
be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, five, six and seven years
as designated in their appointments. The Planning Board shall have all the
powers granted by the Town Law, and the members thereof shall elect their
own Chairman.
§ 28-2. Designation as Zoning Commission. [Added 2-14-1961]
For the purpose of carrying out the powers and duties given to a zoning
commission by Article 16 of the Town Law, the current members of the
Planning Board of the Town of West Seneca are hereby designated a Zoning
Commission. Their terms on the Zoning Commission shall coincide with
their terms as members of the Planning Board, and upon expiration of their
terms of office as members of the Planning Board, their terms of office
as Zoning Commissioners shall also expire. Their successors on both the
Zoning Commission and Planning Board shall be appointed by the Town
Board.
§ 28-3. Powers. [Added 2-14-1961]
Pursuant to Article 16 of the Town Law, the Town Board does hereby
delegate to the Planning Board, which is also the Zoning Commission of the
Town of West Seneca, all of the powers that it is possible to so delegate
pursuant to said Article 16 of the Town Law, including but not limited to the
following powers:
A. To adopt rules and regulations in respect to procedure before it and in
respect to any subject matter over which it has jurisdiction under
Article 16 or any other statute. Said rules and regulations may be
adopted only after public hearing by the Planning Board and subject to
approval of the Town Board.
B. To make necessary reports on an Official Map or changes therein.
C. To take under advisement all matters pertaining to zoning or planning
which shall be referred to it by the Town Board for its recommendation,
and to report back to the Town Board within 30 days. No action shall be
taken by the Town Board until such report of the Planning Board has
been received.
D. To approve or disapprove changes in the lines of existing streets,
highways or public areas shown on subdivision plats or maps filed in the
§ 28-1 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 28-3
28:39
§ 28-4. Powers reserved to Town Board. [Added 2-14-1961]
No power granted hereby shall be deemed to supersede the power of the
Town Board granted by relevant sections of the Real Property Law of the
State of New York.
Erie County Clerk's office. Said Planning Board shall report back to the
Town Board within 30 days.
E. To approve or disapprove the laying out, closing off or abandonment of
streets, highways or public areas under the provisions of the Town and
Highway Laws. Said Planning Board shall report back to the Town
Board within 30 days.
F. To make investigations, maps and reports and recommendations in
connection therewith relating to the planning and development of the
town as to it seems desirable, provided the total expenditures of said
Board shall not exceed the appropriation for its expenses.
G. To approve or disapprove plats showing lots, blocks or sites with or
without streets or highways.
H. To pass on and approve or disapprove the development of plats already
filed in the office of the Clerk of the County of Erie if such plats are
entirely or partially undeveloped; provided, however, the Planning
Board complies with the requirements of Article 16 of the Town Law as
amended.
I. To adopt subdivision regulations after a public hearing on due notice
and subject to the approval of said regulations by the Town Board.6
J. Simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plat, either to confirm
the zoning regulations7 of the land so platted, as shown on the Official
Zoning Maps of the town, or to make any reasonable change therein,
and such Planning Board is hereby empowered to make such change.
Before the Planning Board shall make such change in the zoning
regulations, there shall be a public hearing preceded by the same
notice as in the case of the approval of the plat itself. The Planning
Board shall notify the Town Board, Engineering Department, Building
Inspector, Assessors and Town Clerk of any rezoning done pursuant to
this subsection.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Subdivision of Land.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 28-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 28-4
28:40
ARTICLE II
Mandatory Training for Members of Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Appeals
[Adopted 5-14-2007]
§ 28-5. Training required.
Pursuant to the provisions of Town Law §§ 267 and 271, all Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Appeals members shall be required to complete at least
four hours of suitable training per year.
§ 28-6. Authority to determine training.
Pursuant to the provisions of Town Law §§ 267 and 271, the authority to
determine suitable training is hereby delegated from the Town Board of the
Town of West Seneca to the respective Planning and Zoning Board Chairs,
who shall note annually in Board minutes the selected training.
§ 28-7. Acceptable training.
§ 28-8. Record of training; eligibility for reappointment.
A record of annual completion of training shall be maintained by the Town
Clerk and a copy provided to the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca
prior to considering a Planning Board or Zoning Board member for
reappointment. Eligibility for reappointment to these Boards shall be
conditioned upon completion of training prior to the end of each calendar
year.
A. The training requirement may be satisfied by educational activities
substantially devoted to planning, zoning, the site plan approval
process or other land use issues such as:
(1) Attending conferences, seminars or workshops;
(2) Participating in online training or tutorials;
(3) Attending college courses;
(4) Reading journal articles or books; or
(5) Any other educational activities considered acceptable by the
respective Board Chair.
B. Training may be offered by a municipality, regional or county planning
office or commission, county, regional or state planning federation,
state agency, statewide municipal association, college or university or
other similar entity.
§ 28-5 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 28-9
28:41
§ 28-9. Accumulation and carry-over of training hours.
Suitable training in excess of four hours per year may be accumulated and
carried over into the succeeding year for the purpose of satisfying these
training requirements.
§ 28-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 28-9
28:42
Chapter 30
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Budget — See Ch. 5.
§ 28-9 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 28-9
28:43

ARTICLE I
Procurement and Purchasing Policy
[Adopted 2-29-2016 by L.L. No. 5-20168]
§ 30-1. Background.
§ 30-2. Guidelines.
A. This policy has been developed to ensure that the Town of West Seneca,
New York (the "Town") is in compliance with New York State Municipal
Law concerning the procurement of goods and services as defined
herein.
B. Pursuant to § 104-b of the New York State General Municipal Law, each
municipal governing body is to adopt a procurement policy for all goods
and services which are not required by law to be publicly bid. This
ensures that goods and services which are not required by law to be
procured pursuant to competitive bidding must be procured in a
manner so as to assure the prudent and economical use of public
moneys, in the best interests of the taxpayers, to facilitate the
acquisition of goods and services of maximum quality at the lowest
possible cost under the circumstances, and to guard against favoritism,
improvidence, extravagance, fraud and corruption.
C. In accordance with New York State General Municipal Law § 103, all
purchase contracts involving an expenditure of more than $20,000 and
all contracts for public works involving an expenditure of more than
$35,000 must be publicly bid.
D. In the event that any threshold limits set forth in New York State
General Municipal Law § 103 herein referenced shall change, then the
Town shall follow those limits set forth in New York State General
Municipal Law § 103.
A. Determine aggregates.
(1) Every prospective purchase of goods or services shall be evaluated
to determine the applicability of § 103 of the General Municipal
Law. To determine whether the intended procurement is subject to
competitive bidding, Town officers, board members, department
heads or other personnel must first determine if the expected
Town-wide aggregate will exceed the aforementioned thresholds of
$20,000 for purchase contracts or $35,000 for public works within
12 months of the planned purchase.
(2) Under General Municipal Law § 103, aggregates must be examined
in two ways:
8. Editor's Note: This local law superseded former Ch. 30, Procurement Policy, adopted
7-20-2015.
§ 30-1 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 30-2
28:45
(a) By commodity or service: Every Town officer, board,
department head or other personnel must determine the
reasonably expected aggregate amount of all purchases of the
same commodities, services or technology that will be made
within 12 months of the date of the planned purchase.
(b) By vendor: Every Town officer, board, department head or
other personnel must also determine the reasonably expected
aggregate amount of all purchases of the same commodities,
services or technology within 12 months of the date the
planned purchase will be made from the same vendor.
(3) Every Town officer, board, department head or other personnel
with the requisite purchasing authority (purchaser) shall estimate
the cumulative amount of the items of supply or equipment needed
in a given fiscal year. That estimate shall include the canvass of
other departments and past history to determine the likely yearly
value of the commodity to be acquired. The information gathered
and conclusions reached shall be documented and kept with the file
or other documentation supporting the purchase activity.
B. Quotes and proposals.
(1) The methods used for quotes and proposals shall be as follows:
Estimated Amount of
Purchase Contract Method
$20,000 and above (required) Formally bid pursuant to § 103
of the General Municipal Law
$10,000 to $19,999.99 Require a written request for
proposal (RFP) and written
quotes from 3 vendors
$5,000 to $9,999.99 Require an oral request for the
goods and written/email quotes
from 2 vendors
$2,500 to $4,999.99 Written/email approval from
Town Board liaison as
designated at reorganization
meeting
$0 to $2,499.99 Left to the discretion of the
purchaser
§ 30-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 30-2
28:46
Estimated Public Works
Contract Method
$35,000 and above (required) Formally bid pursuant to § 103
of the General Municipal Law
$10,000 to $34,999.99 Require a written request for
proposal (RFP) and written
quotes from 3 vendors
$5,000 to $9,999.99 Require an oral request for the
goods and written/email quotes
from 2 vendors
$2,500 to $4,999.99 Written/email approval from
Town Board liaison as
designated at reorganization
meeting
$0 to $2,499.99 Left to the discretion of the
purchaser
(2) Any exceptions to the aforementioned thresholds (i.e., sole-source
provider, etc.) and quote requirements must be documented with a
detailed explanation.
C. Documentation.
(1) Any written RFP shall describe the desired goods, quantity and the
particulars of delivery. The purchaser shall compile a list of all
vendors from whom written/fax/oral quotes have been requested
and the written/fax/oral quotes offered.
(2) Any information gathered in complying with the procedures of this
article shall be preserved and filed with documentation supporting
the subsequent purchase of public works contract.
(3) All purchases greater than $4,999.99 require submission of the
Town's standardized quotes form
(4) Electronic documentation shall be held in accord for compliance
with Electronic Signatures and Records Act.
D. Good faith effort. A good faith effort shall be made to obtain the
required number of proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable
to obtain the required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser
shall document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no
event shall the inability to obtain the proposals or quotes be a bar to the
procurement.
E. Claims approval.
(1) All expenditures are subject to the Town's claims approval process.
Each claim shall be individually approved by the department head,
the Finance Department and a Board member. Prior to processing
§ 30-2 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 30-2
28:47
§ 30-3. Exceptions.
for payment, all claims should be reviewed and audited by the
remaining Board members.
(2) After such audit the Town Board shall pass a resolution
acknowledging the claims have been audited.
A. Except when directed by the Town Board, no solicitation of written
proposals or quotations shall be required under the following
circumstances:
(1) Acquisition of professional services. [NOTE: All professional
services contracts shall be examined by the Town Board every five
years; however, such review does not necessitate a written
proposal or quotation.]
(2) Emergencies.
(3) Sole-source situations.
(4) Goods purchased from agencies for the blind or severely
handicapped.
(5) Goods purchased from another governmental agency.
(6) Goods purchased at auction.
(7) Goods purchased for less than $2,500.
(8) Public works contracts for less than $2,500.
B. The decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding
should be documented in writing by the individual making the
purchase. This documentation may include a memo from the purchaser
explaining the decision, a copy of the contract indicating the source
which makes the item or service exempt, a memo from the purchaser
detailing the circumstances which led to an emergency purchase, or
any other written documentation that is appropriate.
§ 30-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 30-3
28:48
ARTICLE II
Responsible Bidder Requirements on Public Works Projects
[Adopted 8-22-2016 by L.L. No. 12-2016]
§ 30-4. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the article to enhance the Town's ability to identify
the lowest "responsible bidder" on public works construction projects by
instituting more comprehensive submission requirements and an evaluation
system which is in compliance with New York State General Municipal
Law. The Town, based on its experience, has determined that quality
workmanship, efficient operation, safety and timely completion of projects
are not necessarily assured by awarding a public works contract solely on
the basis of low price. This article establishing uniformity of guidelines
for determining the responsibility of bidders will assure efficient use of
taxpayer dollars, will promote public safety and is in the public interest.
§ 30-5. Applicability.
This article shall apply to construction projects subject to the competitive
bidding requirements of General Municipal Law § 103 and advertised for
bids on or after effective date.
§ 30-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC WORKS — The following: any constructing, altering,
reconstructing, repairing, rehabilitating, refinishing, refurbishing,
remodeling, remediating, renovating, custom fabricating, maintenance,
landscaping, improving, moving, wrecking, painting, decorating,
demolishing and adding to or subtracting from any public building,
structure, airport facility, highway, roadway, street, alley, bridge, sewer,
drain, ditch, sewage disposal plant, water work, parking facility, railroad,
excavation or other project, development, real property or improvement, or
to do any part thereof, whether or not the performance of the work herein
described involves the addition to or fabrication into any structure, project
or development, real property or improvement herein described of any
material or article of merchandise which is paid for out of a public fund or
out of a special assessment. The term also includes any public works leased
by a political subdivision under a lease containing an option to purchase.
§ 30-7. Responsible bidder questionnaire.
A. New York Vendor Responsibility Questionnaire. Before a public contract
may be awarded, contracting officials shall determine the responsibility
of potential contractors and subcontractors by reviewing uniform
questionnaires submitted by each contractor and subcontractor for the
project. All bidders are required to submit the New York State Vendor
Responsibility Questionnaire For-Profit Construction (CCA-2) form
§ 30-4 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 30-7
28:49
§ 30-8. Requirements.
All general bidders for construction projects funded by the Town as set forth
above in § 30-5, shall, as a condition for bidding, agree in writing that they
shall comply with and require subcontractors to comply with the following
obligations set forth below in this section.
§ 30-9. Local hire credit toward bid award.
(hereinafter "uniform questionnaire") to ascertain information as to
integrity, responsibility and competence.
B. List of subcontractors. Each bidder shall submit a list of the
subcontractors used in the calculation of the bid at the time of the bid.
A. All bidders shall fill out the uniform questionnaire in order to ascertain
the financial responsibility, accountability, reliability, skill, judgment
and integrity of the apparent lowest bidder. All bidders shall require
sub-bidder to fill out the uniform questionnaire within seven days of bid
opening.
B. The Town shall utilize the "Guidelines for Responsibility
Determinations" as set forth in Executive Order No. 170 (9 NYCRR
4.170) in evaluating responsibility of contractors and determining the
lowest responsible bidder.
C. Contractors and all subcontractors shall properly classify their workers
as employees rather than as independent contractors, unless those
workers meet the definition of "independent contractors" as set forth in
the New York Construction Fair Play Act and shall treat such employees
accordingly for purposes of workers' compensation insurance coverage,
unemployment insurance, employment taxes and social security taxes.
D. Contractors and all subcontractors awarded public works contracts
shall require each employee to sign in and out at the beginning and end
of each day and list next to his or her name his or her craft and
apprenticeship status and to provide such information to the Town's
Engineer, or any other designee as appointed by the Town Board, on a
biweekly basis. Such information shall be kept in the Town Engineer's
office for a period of three years and copies of the same shall be made
available to the public immediately upon Freedom of Information Law
(FOIL) request.
A. The following criteria shall be used as a credit toward a bid determining
the lowest responsible bidder. If the Town applies any credit(s) towards
a bid, the credit(s) will not reduce the amount of a contract. Example:
$1,000,000 bid received a $50,000 local bidder credit. For purposes of
determining the lowest bidder, the contractor's bid is $950,000.
However, the contract price will remain $1,000,000.
(1) The Town shall apply a credit equal to 2% or $20,000, whichever is
less, towards the bid of a bidder with a local workforce. "Local
§ 30-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 30-9
28:50
§ 30-10. Procedure.
workforce" means at least 25% of the bidder's construction
employees reside in the county where the work is to be performed
or in a county adjacent to the county where the work is to be
performed. The bidder is not required to have a place of business
in the county where the work is to be performed for this credit to
apply.
B. The bidder is responsible for requesting credit based upon the above
criteria, and upon request by the Town, presenting written proof of
compliance until substantial completion as determined by the Town.
A. The Town's Engineer, or any other designee as appointed by the Town
Board, shall distribute to all bidders a copy of this article and the
uniform questionnaire and thereafter collect from bidders all
information required by this article and keep such information in his/
her offices for a period of three years, review of which will be made
available to the public.
B. If a bidder fails or refuses to provide all the information requested in
this article, or provides false information, the bidder's bid will be
rejected at the bid opening.
C. The Town's Engineer, or any other designee as appointed by the Town
Board, shall post on the Town website one week before the Town makes
an award of work to a contractor or subcontractor for a project of
$10,000 or more, a listing of the three apparent lowest bidders.
D. If any bidding contractor or designated subcontractor is found to have
willfully violated New York Labor Law § 220 ("New York Prevailing
Wage Law"), that bidder shall automatically be deemed
"nonresponsible" and be rejected unless the Town's Engineer, or any
other designee as appointed by the Town Board, determines otherwise.
Otherwise, based on all of the information collected pursuant to this
article and any other factor the Town Board deems relevant, the Town's
Engineer, or any other designee as appointed by the Town Board, shall
determine if the apparent lowest bidder is in fact "responsible."
E. If the apparent lowest bidder is deemed not to be responsible, then the
next lowest bidder will be reviewed and so on until the lowest bidder is
deemed responsible and selected as the lowest responsible bidder. In
the event a bidder fails to furnish the requested information, the bidder
shall be deemed disqualified and determined not responsible and the
next lowest bidder shall become the apparent lowest bidder.
F. If the amount of the lowest responsible bidder appears
disproportionately low when compared with estimates undertaken by or
on behalf of the Town and/or compared to other bids submitted (10% or
greater disparity), the Town reserves the right to inquire further of the
apparent lowest bidder to determine whether the bid contains
§ 30-9 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 30-10
28:51
§ 30-11. Incomplete submissions by bidders and subcontractors.
It is the sole responsibility of the contractor to comply with all submission
requirements at the time it submits its bid to the Town. The submission
requirements also apply to all subcontractors, except that the contractor
shall submit all subcontractor questionnaires to the Town no later than
seven days following the bid opening. Contractor and/or subcontractor
submissions deemed nonresponsive will result in automatic rejection of the
bid.
§ 30-12. Sanctions.
mathematical errors, omissions and/or erroneous assumptions and
whether the apparent lowest bidder has the capability to perform and
complete the contract for the bid amount.
G. No later than five calendar days prior to a final determination that the
apparent lowest bidder is not responsible, the Town will notify the party
of same in writing stating the reasons and setting forth a time, date and
place for the apparent lowest bidder to appear and be heard, but no
later than 10 calendar days thereafter prior to a final determination
being made.
A. Any bidder or subcontractor bidder who fails to comply with any of the
obligations described herein, and only following an opportunity for the
bidder to be heard, may be subject to one or more of the following
sanctions.
(1) Temporary suspension of work on the project until compliance is
obtained;
(2) Withholding by the Town of payment due under the contract until
compliance is obtained;
(3) Permanent removal from any further work on the project; or
(4) Liquidated damages payable to the Town in an amount equal to that
which is set forth in the contract documents.
B. In addition to the above sanctions, any contractor or subcontractor, its
alter ego or control group or principal officer who has been determined
to have violated any of the provisions of this article shall be barred from
performing any work on future contracts awarded by the Town for six
months for the first violation, three months for the second violation and
permanently for the third violation.
C. Any sum collected as a fine or penalty pursuant to this section shall be
applied toward enforcement and administration costs.
§ 30-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 30-13
28:52
§ 30-13. Public records.
All information submitted by a contractor or subcontractor pursuant to this
article is public record and shall be immediately available to any person
upon request.
§ 30-14. Materiality.
The requirements of this article are a material part of the bid documents
and the contract and the successful bidder shall insert this article in all
subcontracts.
§ 30-13 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 30-14
28:53
Chapter 32
RECEIVER OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS, OFFICE OF
§ 32-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to abolish the office of Receiver of Taxes and
Assessments in the Town of West Seneca, New York.
§ 32-2. Abolition; transfer of powers and duties.
The office of Receiver of Taxes and Assessments in the Town of West Seneca,
New York, is hereby abolished. The powers and duties of that office shall be
transferred to the office of the Town Clerk of the Town of West Seneca, New
York, effective January 1, 2011.
§ 32-3. Mandatory referendum.
This chapter shall be subject to a mandatory referendum at the next
regularly scheduled general election.9
§ 32-4. Authority and statutory provisions superseded.
This section is enacted under the authority of Municipal Home Rule Law
§§ 10, 22 and 23. The Town hereby expressly states its intention that this
section shall supersede any provision of the Town Law of the State of New
York to the contrary, including but not limited to Town Law §§ 20, 30 and 37.
§ 32-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon the affirmative vote of a majority of
the qualified electors voting thereon at said general election and the filing
with the office of the Secretary of State in accordance with the applicable
provisions of law.
Chapter 33
RECORDS, PUBLIC
9. Editor's Note: This local law passed at referendum 11-3-209.
§ 30-14 WEST SENECA CODE § 32-5
28:54
ARTICLE I
Records Retention
[Adopted 3-13-1989 by resolution]
§ 33-1. Adoption of schedule.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby
adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal
government records listed therein.10
§ 33-2. Disposal of records.
In accordance with Article 57-A:
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
10.Editor's Note: A copy of Schedule MU-1 is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 33-1 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 33-2
28:55

ARTICLE II
Records Management
[Adopted 9-9-1991 by resolution]
§ 33-3. Records Management Officer.
The Town Clerk is designated as Records Management Officer and shall be
responsible for the records management program established by this article
and subsequent amendments thereto. Said officer will be responsible for
administering the noncurrent and archival public records for the Town of
West Seneca in accordance with local, state and federal laws and guidelines.
Said officer shall also be responsible for overseeing microfilming of town
records according to recognized standards and specifications.
§ 33-4. Powers and duties.
§ 33-5. Records Center.
The Town Clerk shall have at his/her disposal a storage room at the West
Seneca Senior Citizens Center dedicated specifically for the storage,
processing and servicing of all noncurrent and archival records for all town
departments and agencies. The storage room shall be called the "West
Seneca Records Center." The Town Clerk or designee shall operate the West
Seneca Records Center.
§ 33-6. Designation as sole officer.
The Town Clerk or designee of Town Clerk shall be the sole official
designated in the Public Officer's Certification for Using Records Retention
and Disposition Schedules, or its successor, and shall be the sole officer
with authority over the disposition of town records, after receiving approval
of the respective town officer or department head who has custody of the
records of his respective office or department.
§ 33-7. Records Advisory Board.
A. The Town Clerk or designee of the Town Clerk shall have all the
necessary powers to carry out the efficient administration,
determination of value, use, preservation, storage and disposition of the
noncurrent and archival public records kept, filed or received by the
offices and departments of the Town of West Seneca.
B. The Town Clerk or designee of the Town Clerk shall establish guidelines
for proper records management in any department or agency of town
government in accordance with local, state and federal laws and
guidelines.
C. The Town Clerk or designee of the Town Clerk shall report annually to
the Town Board on the powers and duties herein mentioned, including,
but not limited to, the cost/benefit ratio of programs implemented by
the Town Clerk or the designee.
§ 33-3 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 33-7
28:57
§ 33-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARCHIVES — Those official records which have been determined by the
Records Management Officer to have sufficient historical or other value to
warrant their continued preservation by the town.
RECORDS — Any documents, books, papers, photographs, sound
recordings, microforms or any other materials, regardless of physical form
or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in
connection with the transaction of official town business.
RECORDS CENTER — An establishment maintained by the Town of West
Seneca primarily for the storage, servicing, security and processing of
records which must be preserved for varying periods of time and need not
be retained in office equipment or space.
RECORDS DISPOSITION —
A. The West Seneca Town Board shall appoint a nine-member Records
Advisory Board based on recommendations by the Town Clerk. The
Records Advisory Board shall be composed of the Town Clerk, as
Records Management Officer; the Town Supervisor, a representative of
the West Seneca Town Board, the Town Comptroller, the Town Attorney,
the Town Historian or their designees; a representative of the library
located in the Town of West Seneca and two (2) town residents with
expertise in the field of archives programs, records management
programs or a related field.
B. The function of this Board shall be to advise and make suggestions to
the Town Clerk or his/her designee on improvements to be made to the
West Seneca Records Management Program. The Board shall meet at
least twice a year and more so, if needed.
C. The Town Clerk or his/her designee shall be responsible for calling all
meetings of the Records Advisory Board, making progress reports
concerning the Records Management Program to the Records Advisory
Board, and following up on advice and/or suggestions offered by the
Records Advisory Board.
The removal by the town, in accordance with approved records control
schedules, of records no longer necessary for the conduct of business
by such agency through removal methods which may include:
(1) The disposal of temporary records by destruction or donation; or
The transfer of records to the Records Center for temporary
storage of archival records and permanent storage of records
determined to have historical or other sufficient value warranting
continued preservation.
(2)
A.
B. The transfer of records from one town agency to any other town agency.
§ 33-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 33-8
28:58
RECORDS MANAGEMENT — The planning, controlling, directing,
organizing, training, promotion and other managerial activities involved in
records creation, records maintenance and use and records disposition,
including records preservation, records disposal and records centers or
other storage facilities.
SERVICING — Making information in records available to any county
agency for official use or to the public.
§ 33-8 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 33-8
28:59

ARTICLE III
Access to Public Records
[Adopted 12-15-2014 by L.L. No. 14-2014]
§ 33-9. Purpose and scope.
§ 33-10. Designation of records access officers.
A. The people's right to know the process of government decision-making
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law, as well as records
otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflicts among laws governing public access records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Town Board is responsible for insuring compliance with the
regulations herein and designates the following persons as records
access officers:
(1) Town Clerk: all Town records unless otherwise indicated;
(2) Assistant Police Chief: all records maintained by and/or for the
Police Department;
(3) Superintendent of Highways: all records maintained by and/or for
the Highway and Sanitation Departments.
B. The records access officers are responsible for insuring appropriate
Town response to public requests for access to records and shall
employ the assistance of other Town personnel as appropriate to
effectuate the purpose of this article. The designation of records access
officers shall not be construed to prohibit officials who have in the past
been authorized to make records or information available to the public
from continuing to do so.
C. The records access officers shall insure that Town personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist persons seeking records to identify the records sought, if
necessary, and when appropriate, indicate the manner in which the
records are filed, retrieved or generated to assist persons in
reasonably describing records.
§ 33-9 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 33-10
28:61
§ 33-11. Location.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at:
Town Hall
1250 Union Road
West Seneca, New York 14224
§ 33-12. Hours for public inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours regularly open for business.
§ 33-13. Requests for public access to records.
(3) Contact persons seeking records when a request is voluminous or
when locating the records involves substantial effort, so that
personnel may ascertain the nature of records of primary interest
and attempt to reasonably reduce the volume of records requested.
(4) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection; or
(b) Deny access to the records, in whole or in part, and explain, in
writing, the reasons therefore.
(5) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 33-16; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(6) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy; and
(7) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The Town is not the custodian for such records; or
(b) The records of which the Town is a custodian cannot be found
after diligent search.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted
at the discretion of the records access officers when records are readily
available.
B. If records are maintained on the internet, the requester shall be
informed that the records are accessible via the internet and in printed
form either on paper or other information storage medium.
C. A response shall be given within five business days of receipt of a
request by:
§ 33-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 33-13
28:62
(1) Informing a person requesting records that the request or portion
of the request does not reasonably describe the records sought,
including direction, to the extent possible, that would enable that
person to request records reasonably described;
(2) Granting or denying access to records, in whole or in part;
(3) Acknowledging the receipt of a request, in writing, including an
approximate date when the request will be granted or denied, in
whole or in part, which shall be reasonable under the
circumstances of the request and shall not be more than 20
business days after the date of the acknowledgment, or if it is
known that circumstances prevent disclosure within 20 business
days from the date of such acknowledgment, providing a
statement, in writing, indicating the reason for inability to grant
the request within that time and a date certain, within a reasonable
period under the circumstances of the request, when the request
will be granted, in whole or in part; or
(4) If the receipt of request was acknowledged, in writing, and
included an approximate date when the request would be granted,
in whole or in part, within 20 business days of such
acknowledgment, but circumstances prevent disclosure within that
time, providing a statement in writing, within 20 business days of
such acknowledgment specifying the reason for the inability to do
so and a date certain, within a reasonable period under the
circumstances of the request, when the request will be granted, in
whole or in part.
D. In determining a reasonable time for granting or denying a request
under the circumstances of a request, personnel shall consider the
volume of a request, the ease or difficulty in locating, retrieving or
generating records, the complexity of the request, the need to review
records to determine the extent to which they must be disclosed, the
number of requests received by the agency, and similar factors that
bear on the ability to grant access to records promptly and within a
reasonable time.
E. A failure to comply with the time limitations described herein shall
constitute a denial of a request that may be appealed. Such failure shall
include situations in which an officer or employee:
(1) Fails to grant access to the records sought, denies access in writing
or acknowledges the receipt of a request within five business days
of the receipt of a request;
(2) Acknowledges the receipt of a request within five business days but
fails to furnish an approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied, in whole or in part;
(3) Furnishes an acknowledgment of the receipt of a request within
five business days with an approximate date for granting or
§ 33-13 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 33-13
28:63
§ 33-14. Subject matter list.
§ 33-15. Denial of access to records.
denying access, in whole or in part, that is unreasonable under the
circumstances of the request;
(4) Fails to respond to a request within a reasonable time after the
approximate date given or within 20 business days after the date of
the acknowledgment of the receipt of a request;
(5) Determines to grant a request, in whole or in part, within 20
business days of the acknowledgment of the receipt of a request,
but fails to do so, unless the agency provides the reason for its
inability to do so, in writing, and a date certain within which the
request will be granted, in whole or in part;
(6) Does not grant a request, in whole or in part, within 20 business
days of the acknowledgment of the receipt of a request and fails to
provide the reason, in writing, explaining the inability to do so and
a date certain by which the request will be granted, in whole or in
part; or
(7) Responds to a request, stating that more than 20 business days is
needed to grant or deny the request, in whole or in part, and
provides a date certain within which that will be accomplished, but
such date is unreasonable under the circumstances of the request.
A. The records access officers shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in its possession, whether or not
records are available pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public
Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated annually. The most recent
update shall appear on the first page of the subject matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing stating the reason
therefore and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the
individual designated to determine appeals, who shall be identified by
name, title, business address and business phone number.
B. If requested records are not provided in accordance with § 33-13 of this
article, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
C. The following person shall determine appeals regarding denial of
access to records under the Freedom of Information Law:
Town Attorney
Town Hall
§ 33-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 33-15
28:64
§ 33-16. Fees.
1250 Union Road
West Seneca, New York 14224
D. Any person denied access to records may appeal within 30 days of a
denial.
E. The time for deciding an appeal by the individual or body designated to
determine appeals shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal
identifying:
(1) The date and location of requests for records;
(2) A description, to the extent possible, of the records that were
denied; and
(3) The name and return address of the person denied access.
F. A failure to determine an appeal within 10 business days of its receipt
by granting access to the records sought or fully explaining the reasons
for further denial, in writing, shall constitute a denial of the appeal.
G. The person designated to determine appeals shall transmit to the
Committee on Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt.
Such copies shall be addressed to:
Committee on Open Government
Department of State
One Commerce Plaza
99 Washington Avenue, Suite 650
Albany, NY 12231
H. The person designated to determine appeals shall inform the appellant
and the Committee on Open Government of its determination, in
writing, within 10 business days of receipt of an appeal. The
determination shall be transmitted to the Committee on Open
Government in the same manner as set forth in Subsection F of this
section.
A. There shall be no fee charged for:
(1) Inspection of records;
(2) Search for records; or
(3) Any certification pursuant to this part.
B. Copies may be provided without charging a fee.
C. Fees for copies may be charged, provided that:
§ 33-15 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 33-16
28:65
§ 33-17. Public notice.
A notice containing the title or name and address of the records access
officers and appeals person and the location where records can be seen or
(1) The fee for copying records shall not exceed $0.25 per page for
photocopies not exceeding nine inches by 14 inches. This section
shall not be construed to mandate the raising of fees where
agencies or municipalities in the past have charged less than $0.25
for such copies;
(2) The fee for photocopies of records in excess of nine inches by 14
inches shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction; or
(3) The Town has the authority to redact portions of a paper record and
does so prior to disclosure of the record by making a photocopy
from which the proper redactions are made.
D. The fee the Town may charge for a copy of any other record is based on
the actual cost of reproduction and may include only the following:
(1) An amount equal to the hourly salary attributed to the lowest paid
employee who has the necessary skill required to prepare a copy of
the requested record, but only when more than two hours of the
employee's time is necessary to do so; and
(2) The actual cost of the storage devices or media provided to the
person making the request in complying with such request; or
(3) The actual cost to the Town of engaging an outside professional
service to prepare a copy of a record, but only when the Town's
information technology equipment is inadequate to prepare a copy,
and if such service is used to prepare the copy.
E. When the Town has the ability to retrieve or extract a record or data
maintained in a computer storage system with reasonable effort, or
when doing so requires less employee time than engaging in manual
retrieval or redactions from non-electronic records, the Town shall be
required to retrieve or extract such record or data electronically. In
such case, the Town may charge a fee in accordance with Subsection
D(1) and (2) above.
F. The Town shall inform a person requesting a record of the estimated
cost of preparing a copy of the record if more than two hours of an
agency employee's time is needed, or if it is necessary to retain an
outside professional service to prepare a copy of the record.
G. The Town may require that the fee for copying or reproducing a record
be paid in advance of the preparation of such copy.
H. The Town may waive a fee, in whole or in part, when making copies of
records available.
§ 33-16 WEST SENECA CODE § 33-17
28:66
copied shall be posted in a conspicuous location wherever records are kept
and/or published in a local newspaper of general circulation.
§ 33-17 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 33-17
28:67
Chapter 36
TOWN BOARD
Chapter 38
TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 38-1. Authorization; purpose.
Pursuant to Article 14B, Sections 370, 371, 372, 373 of the General
Municipal Law, the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca hereby
authorizes the Justice Court of the Town of West Seneca to establish a
Traffic Violations Bureau to aid said Court in the disposition of traffic
offenses and violations when such offenses shall not constitute a traffic
infraction known as speeding or a misdemeanor or felony.
§ 38-2. Officers; hours of operation.
Said Bureau shall be in the charge of such person or persons and shall be
open at such hours as the Justice Court of the Town of West Seneca may
designate.
§ 38-3. Authority conferred.
Said Traffic Violations Bureau so established is authorized to dispose of
traffic violations of traffic laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the
state or local laws when such offenses shall not constitute the traffic
infraction known as speeding or a misdemeanor or felony, by permitting
a person charged with an offense within the limitations herein stated to
answer, within a specified time, at the Traffic Violations Bureau, either in
person or by written power of attorney as herein prescribed, by paying a
prescribed fine and, in writing, waiving a hearing in Court, pleading guilty
to the charge and authorizing the person or persons in charge of the Bureau
to make such a plea and pay such a fine in Court.
§ 38-4. Procedure. [Amended 11-18-1985]
A. Whenever any motor vehicle owner, operator, chauffeur or driver shall
be found by a police officer in violation of any traffic laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, when such offense shall not constitute the traffic
infraction known as speeding or a misdemeanor or felony, said police
officer may affix to said vehicle a summons, which summons shall
contain a notice of the particular violation, directed to said owner,
§ 33-17 WEST SENECA CODE § 38-4
28:68
§ 38-5. Right to counsel and court appearance.
Said Traffic Violations Bureau of the Town of West Seneca shall not be
authorized to deprive a person of his right to counsel or to prevent him from
exercising his right to appear in Court to answer, explain or defend any
charge of a violation of any traffic law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
§ 38-6. Classes of violations and fines. [Amended 11-18-1985]
§ 38-7. Records.
The Traffic Violations Bureau as herein authorized shall maintain a record
of all fines collected and the disposition thereof. It shall also perform such
other or additional duties and keep such other or additional records as shall
be prescribed by the Court and/or the Town Board of the Town of West
Seneca.
operator, chauffeur or driver, and require such person within 10 days
to make payment as required or enter a plea to the Traffic Violations
Bureau of the Town of West Seneca.
B. Payment may be made in the mailer provided, by certified check or
money order, payable to the Traffic Violations Bureau - West Seneca, or
in person, at West Seneca Police Headquarters, 1250 Union Road, West
Seneca, New York. Payment and acceptance of the prescribed sum by
the Traffic Violations Bureau of the Town of West Seneca shall be
deemed a plea of guilty to the offense.
C. A plea of not guilty may be entered within 10 calendar days by
contacting the West Seneca Justice Court, 1250 Union Road, West
Seneca, New York (716/674-5600) for scheduling of violation before the
Court.
D. Failure to make payment or appear and enter a plea within the time
prescribed shall result in a criminal summons being issued directing
appearance in Court or denial of vehicle registration renewal.
A. All parking violations, as established by state or local law, shall be
grouped into three classifications, with the fine established for Class A
at $15, Class B at $30 and Class C (handicapped parking) at $75.
[Amended 11-3-1986; 1-27-1992; 1-8-2001]
B. In the event that fines are not paid, or a plea entered, within 10 days,
excluding the day of issue, said fines shall be doubled for Class A and B,
with Class A fines increased to $40 and Class B fines to $60. [Amended
11-3-1986; 1-27-1992; 1-8-2001]
C. The Justice Court of the Town of West Seneca shall have authority to
designate fines for offenses disposed of by the Court, provided that such
fines are within limits established as penalties for such violations.
§ 38-4 PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF § 38-8
28:69
§ 38-8. Prescribed form.
All persons who shall appear by written power of attorney must execute
the following form and forward to the Traffic Violations Bureau said form,
together with their operator's license and the sum prescribed by the Justice
Court of the Town of West Seneca:
TO: TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU OF WEST SENECA WEST
SENECA TOWN HALL, 1250 UNION ROAD WEST SENECA, NEW
YORK
_________ 20____
.................................................. the undersigned having been given a tag
or summons by a police officer for an offense payable in the Traffic
Violations Bureau of the Town of West Seneca, hereby pays the sum of
$............. as prescribed by the Justice Court of the Town of West Seneca in
complete satisfaction for the offense and waives a hearing in Court, pleads
guilty to the charge and authorizes the person or persons in charge of the
Bureau to make such a plea and pay such a fine in Court.
State of New York )
County of Erie ) ss.:
Town of West Seneca )
On the........ day of................ 20..... before me personally appeared to me
known and known to me to be the individual described in and who
executed the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he
executed the same.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 46
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 46-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the Town of West Seneca by reducing the
number of avoidable alarms of fire, intrusion, holdup or other emergencies
which contribute to ineffective utilization of police and fire emergency
agencies, require emergency responses which are susceptible to high
accident rates, interfere with genuine emergencies (responses) and
produce unnecessary alarm noise to the surrounding community.
§ 38-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 46-2
46:70
§ 46-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phases shall have
the meanings respectfully ascribed to them by this section:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which is
designated to detect smoke, abnormal rise in temperature, fire, medical
emergency or an entry into or exit from a building, structure or facility
and, by reason thereof, emits an audible response intended to alert persons
outside of the premises and/or transmit a signal or message to an
emergency agency either directly or through a private answering point.
AUTOMATIC DIALER — A device that automatically dials and relays a
prerecorded message to an emergency agency.
EMERGENCY AGENCY — The Police Department or Fire District, central
fire dispatch or other emergency dispatch center.
§ 46-3. Compliance required.
The owners and lessees of premises having alarm systems shall comply with
all provisions of this chapter on or before the first day of August 1993.
§ 46-4. Automatic cutoff system required.
§ 46-5. Connection to enhanced 911 or 911 emergency service
restricted.
§ 46-6. Avoidable alarms.
A. No person shall install or maintain an external audible alarm device
which does not contain an operational automatic cutoff system which
turns off the external audible alarm after a period not to exceed ten (10)
minutes.
B. An automatic dialer connected directly to an emergency agency shall
automatically disconnect and/or terminate its message after the
message has been transmitted a maximum of two (2) times.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the total transmission time of
all messages shall not exceed five (5) minutes.
A. No alarm system shall have an automatic dialer feature or other type of
alarm alter which connects automatically to the enhanced 911
emergency telephone system.
B. There shall be no automatic alarm system with direct communication of
any type to an emergency agency without prior written authorization
from the emergency agency where the alarms terminate.
A. General provisions.
(1) The activation of an alarm system, through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner,
§ 46-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-6
46:71
user, custodian or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees,
requiring an emergency response when, in fact, an emergency
does not exist constitutes an avoidable alarm. An avoidable alarm
also includes intentional activation of an alarm system when the
activator knows an emergency situation does not exist.
(2) Avoidable alarm does not include alarms activated by violent
conditions of nature or similar cases beyond the control of the user,
owner or operator of the alarm system. The activation of an alarm
system under any circumstances in which the activator reasonably
believes that an emergency situation exists shall not be deemed to
be an avoidable alarm.
B. Charges. An owner or lessee of real property to which an emergency
agency responds as a result of avoidable alarm shall pay a fee for each
such response in each calender year as follows:
(1) Police Department response:
(a) First through third avoidable alarm responses: no charge.
(b) Fourth and fifth avoidable alarm responses: fifty dollars ($50.)
for each.
(c) Sixth and over avoidable alarm responses: one hundred dollars
($100.) for each.
(2) Fire District response:
(a) First avoidable alarm response: no charge.
(b) Second and over avoidable alarm responses: fifty dollars
($50.).
(c) Sixth and over avoidable alarm responses: one hundred dollars
($100.) for each.
C. Notice of excessive use. The owner or lessee of real property, which
received an emergency response by reason of an avoidable alarm, shall
be notified in writing by means of first class mail of all avoidable alarms
up to three (3) police alarms and/or one (1) fire alarm in a calendar year.
The letter shall inform the owner or lessee of the times and types of
emergency responses provided to the address location and shall contain
with it a copy of the Alarm Code.
D. Administrative review. The Chief of Police and the Fire Inspector shall
establish a policy and procedures whereby an owner of real property or
lessee thereof on which an alarm system has been installed and who has
been notified of an avoidable alarm may present evidence as to why any
such alarm should not be classified as an avoidable alarm. The Chief of
Police and the Fire Inspector shall designate members of their
departments, not to exceed five (5) in total, to receive such evidence
and make recommendations and finding of fact concerning such
§ 46-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 46-6
46:72
§ 46-7. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police shall enforce this chapter for alarm systems which detect
medical emergencies and entry or exit from a building, structure or facility.
The Fire Inspector shall enforce this chapter for alarm systems which detect
smoke, fire or abnormal rise in temperature.
§ 46-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, business, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity that does not pay the fee as established in this code or who violates
any other provisions of this code shall be subject to a civil penalty, not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.) for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs,
continues or is permitted.
Chapter 47
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
classification. The Chief of Police and Fire Inspector shall make the final
determination concerning a classification, which determination shall
be reviewed only pursuant to procedures under Article 78 of the Civil
Practice Law and Rules. To challenge the classification of an alarm as
an avoidable alarm, the real property owner or lessee thereof shall,
in writing, notify the Chief of Police and/or the Fire Inspector within
twenty (20) days after receipt of notice of the avoidable alarm. The
failure to give timely notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to
review the determination.
E. Payment of charges. Avoidable alarm charges shall be paid to the Town
Clerk of the Town of West Seneca at 1250 Union Road, West Seneca,
New York 14224.
F. Failure to remit fee. Upon the failure of a real property owner or lessee
of property on which an alarm system is installed to pay the avoidable
alarm charge within thirty (30) days from notice of the amount due, he
shall be served with a summons and shall be deemed in violation of this
code.
§ 46-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 46-8
46:73

ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted 10-1-1979]
§ 47-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Town of West Seneca, as an exercise of its police
power, to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Town of West Seneca by enacting this article, since it is the finding
of the Town Board that the possession of open containers of alcoholic
beverages by persons on public lands, except under controlled conditions,
is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town
of West Seneca in that such possession contributes to the development of
unsanitary conditions and the creation of nuisances. It is further the intent
of the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca that this article not be
considered as a traffic regulation insofar as it relates to motor vehicles or
the operation thereof.
§ 47-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes alcohol, liquor, wine, beer, cider and
every liquid, patented or not, containing alcohol, wine or beer and capable
of being consumed by a human being.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any highway, street, sidewalk, park, playground, public
parking lot or other public land.
§ 47-3. Possession on public lands prohibited.
No person shall have in his possession any open container containing an
alcoholic beverage on any public land within the Town of West Seneca.
§ 47-4. Exceptions. [Amended 4-21-2014 by L.L. No. 4-2014]
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply in the event of a fair, picnic or
other community gathering for which special permission has been granted
by the Town of West Seneca, including, but not limited to, a Townsanctioned
farmers market, where consumption of alcoholic beverages shall
be permitted during those hours when such function is open to the public
and subject to such conditions as the Town deems appropriate in granting
said permission.
§ 47-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 47-5
46:75
§ 47-5. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all persons on public lands in the Town, except
as hereinbefore provided, but shall not apply to any person drinking an
alcoholic beverage while operating a motor vehicle upon any public
highway within the Town in violation of § 1227 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law of the State of New York.
§ 47-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this article or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 15 days for each such offense, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 47-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 47-6
46:76
Chapter 47A
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed amusements — See Ch. 48.
Bingo — See Ch. 52.
Noise — See Ch. 82.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 47A-1. Title.
The short title of this chapter shall be "Amusements and Amusement
Businesses."
§ 47A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT CENTER — A building, premises or place which provides
entertainment by means of amusement devices and which contains more
than five (5) such devices.
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE or DEVICE — Any amusement
machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or
similar object for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing
of which a fee is charged. The term "amusement device" does not include
jukeboxes.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who sets up for operation by another any device as herein defined, whether
such setting up for operation, leasing or distributing is for a fixed charge or
retail or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device,
or otherwise.
PROPRIETOR — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
club who, as the owner, lessee or proprietor, has under his or its control
any establishment, place or premises in or at which such device is placed or
kept for use or play or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play.
§ 47A-3. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of a distributor
or proprietor of coin-operated amusement devices, as the terms are herein
defined, without first having obtained the proper license therefor.
§ 47A-4. Fees; expiration.
§ 47-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 47A-4
46:77
§ 47A-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter requiring license fees shall not apply to any
church, fraternal or veterans' organizations or other religious, charitable or
nonprofit organization which operates a coin-operated amusement device
exclusively for the use of its members and their guests and on premises
owned or controlled by it.
§ 47A-6. Application for license.
A. The license fee for each distributor shall be one hundred dollars
($100.), together with a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.) for each such device
leased or distributed to a proprietor.
B. The license fee for each proprietor shall be twenty dollars ($20.) per
year for each device used or played or exhibited for use or play.
C. All license fees shall be payable annually in advance and shall
accompany the application, provided that, where application is made
after the expiration of any portion of any license year, a license may be
issued for the remainder thereof upon payment of a proportionate part
of the annual fee.
D. All licenses shall expire on the 31st of December of each year.
A. Each application for a license hereunder shall be filed with the Town
Clerk in duplicate, together with the required fee, and shall specify:
(1) The name, address, social security number and telephone number
of the applicant, and, if a firm, corporation, partnership or
association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses,
social security numbers and telephone numbers.
(2) The addresses of the premises where the licensed device or devices
are to be operated, together with the character of the business as
carried on at such place.
(3) The name, address and social security number of the registered
agent of the applicant upon whom service of process is authorized
to be made.
(4) The name, address, social security number and telephone number
of the manager of the applicant who shall be in charge of the
applicant's business in the Town of West Seneca.
(5) With respect to each person whose name appears on the
application:
(a) The fact of conviction in any jurisdiction of any offense which
under the laws of New York is denominated a felony,
misdemeanor or an offense involving moral turpitude, and/or
the fact of conviction in any jurisdiction of any offense which
under the New York State Penal Code is denominated as a
§ 47A-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 47A-6
46:78
§ 47A-7. Review of application.
§ 47A-8. Approval or denial.
§ 47A-9. Evidence of ownership.
crime, with a full disclosure of the nature of the offense, time
and place of commission, legal proceedings and penalty
imposed.
(b) Each such person shall voluntarily submit to the taking of his
fingerprints so that a proper investigation will be expedited.
(6) The trade name and general description of the device or devices to
be licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number of
each such device.
B. The application shall contain a certification under oath, made by the
applicant, that the information contained in the application is complete,
accurate and truthful to the best of his knowledge and belief.
A. The Town Clerk shall promptly forward a copy of the application to the
Chief of Police and the Building Inspector for investigation, review and
reports.
B. The purpose of this investigation shall be to establish that the applicant
is capable of conducting the proposed business of distributing or
operating amusement devices within the town in a manner consistent
with the public safety, good morals and general welfare of the
community and that all those persons involved in such business can
reasonably be expected to operate the proposed business in accordance
with law and free from gambling and other illegal or immoral conduct
and unwarranted noise and commotion.
C. No proprietor's license shall be granted unless the licensed premises
shall meet all requirements of the Fire, Building, Sanitary, Electrical
and Plumbing Codes of the Town of West Seneca and State of New York.
A. If the application is approved, the license shall be issued by the Town
Clerk.
B. If the license is denied, seventy-five percent (75%) of the fee shall be
returned to the applicant, the balance going to offset the costs of the
investigation. The grounds for denial shall be set forth in writing. The
applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Town Clerk within
thirty (30) days of the denial of the license, at which time he may submit
pertinent information on his behalf. The applicant shall be given ten
(10) days' notice of the date of such hearing.
A. Any proprietor who owns such device or devices at the time this chapter
becomes effective shall file with the Town Clerk evidence of such
ownership prior to the issuance of a license.
§ 47A-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 47A-9
46:79
§ 47A-10. Use of license.
§ 47A-11. Regulations.
B. Any proprietor purchasing a device or devices after the effective date of
this chapter shall file with the Town Clerk evidence of ownership
thereof before exhibiting or placing said device or devices for use or
play.
A. In the case of proprietors, the license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the establishment of the licensee.
B. In the case of distributors, the license number assigned to each device
shall be permanently affixed to said device so that it can be easily
ascertained.
C. All licenses shall be nonassignable and nontransferable.
A. No proprietor holding a license to operate coin-operated amusement
devices shall permit a person under sixteen (16) years of age to play or
operate a coin-operated amusement device after 10:00 p.m. unless such
person is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. This limitation
shall not apply to the use of mechanical carousel horses or similar
amusement devices designed especially for the amusement of children.
B. The proprietor shall not permit any person to bet or gamble on the
licensed premises.
C. The proprietor shall at all times maintain good order and shall not
permit any disturbance, congestion or loitering upon the licensed
premises.
D. No music machine shall be operated in a manner to be heard out of
doors.
E. No licensed premises shall be without adequate sanitary facilities nor
contain any fire, safety or health hazard.
F. Each distributor and/or proprietor shall, within five (5) days, report in
writing to the Town Clerk any change by addition or deletion of the
information furnished on the license application during the term of any
license or renewal thereof.
G. No distributor or proprietor shall refuse to cooperate fully with the
Town Clerk and any law enforcement officer or agency.
H. Location. [Amended 10-18-1982]
(1) Future amusement centers shall not be located within five hundred
(500) feet of the lot line of a public or private school or within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of any R District boundary.
§ 47A-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 47A-11
46:80
§ 47A-12. Revocation or suspension of license.
§ 47A-13. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 48
AMUSEMENTS, LICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 52.
§ 48-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of West Seneca by the
regulation and licensing of circuses, carnivals, road shows, sideshows and
the like.
(2) The Town Board retains authority to modify limitations set forth
herein upon application and taking into consideration the location
of the licensed premises in conjunction with general development
of the area.
I. No person shall be issued a license who has been convicted of a crime
or gambling offense under the New York State Penal Law, and any
subsequent conviction to a licensee may result in suspension or
revocation.
A. Every license issued hereunder is subject to a revocation or suspension
by the Town Clerk for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. Any material misstated or omitted in the license application
shall constitute grounds for revocation or suspension. The revocation
shall occur only after a hearing.
B. The licensee shall be given ten (10) days' notice of the date of such
hearing, and such notice shall state the grounds therefor. At such
hearing the licensee may submit pertinent information on his own
behalf.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen
(15) days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Upon such conviction, no licensee shall thereafter transact the business
of distributing or operating coin-operated amusement devices in the
Town of West Seneca.
§ 47A-11 AMUSEMENTS, LICENSED § 48-2
48:81
§ 48-2. Definition.
The terms "circus, carnival, road show, sideshow" shall mean any and all
shows and any type of entertainment given, performed or used or operated
under a cover of canvas or within any structure or enclosure intended for
temporary use and capable of easy transfer and removal, including every
type of show or entertainment coming within the ordinary usage of the
words "carnival, circus, road show or sideshow."
§ 48-3. License required; fee.
Entertainments and shows hereinbefore referred to shall be given in the
Town of West Seneca only after the issuance by the Town Clerk of the Town
of West Seneca of a license therefor upon the payment of a license fee in the
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.) per day or any fraction thereof. Such
fee shall accompany the application for the license as hereinafter provided.
No license shall be transferable nor issued for a period longer than one (1)
week; no license shall, however, be issued so as to expire after the first of
January next succeeding the date of issuance.
§ 48-4. Display of license; restrictions.
§ 48-5. Gambling prohibited. [Amended 10-16-1972]
All licenses shall contain a provision that no contests of chance, gambling,
gambling device or lottery (all as defined in Section 225 of the Penal Law
of the State of New York) shall be allowed by the licensee. The licensee, by
receipt and acceptance of the license, will be deemed to have certified to
the Town of West Seneca compliance with the provisions of the license.
§ 48-6. License application procedure; revocation.
A. Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall at all
times for the term for which it is used be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the principal entrance of the premises described in such
license so that the same may be easily seen or read by any person
passing in or out of such premises.
B. Every license granted under the provisions of this chapter and all
privileges pertaining thereto shall at all times be subject to the
ordinances of the Town of West Seneca and laws of the State of New
York in effect when such license shall be issued or which shall be
thereafter adopted so far as the same shall be applicable thereto.
A. Each applicant shall present to the Town Clerk a written application
which shall be sworn to under oath, specifying the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name of the owner of the premises.
(3) Place where the entertainment is to be held.
§ 48-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 48-6
48:82
§ 48-7. Prohibited times of operation; disturbance. [Amended
10-20-1986]
The Town Board shall set the days and hours of operation of a carnival,
circus, road show or sideshow in accordance with issuance of a license for
such operation, and such amusement shall be operated at all times in such
a manner as not to disturb the occupants of the premises in the vicinity
thereof.
§ 48-8. Cleaning of grounds; cash deposit.
Each licensee shall clean up the grounds at the termination of his license
and shall leave said grounds in the same condition as they were prior to
the time of the use by the licensee. In order to ensure compliance with this
section, the licensee shall deposit the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.)
in cash in addition to the license fee with the Town Clerk at the time of
the making of his application, and shall receive the Town Clerk's receipt
thereof, which sum shall be returned to the licensee after an inspection of
the premises by the Building Inspector at the termination of the license,
provided that said premises are restored to the condition they were in prior
(4) The hours during which the entertainment shall be given.
(5) The length of time for which the license is requested.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime.
B. Said application, in addition to being sworn to by the applicant, shall be
signed by the owner of the property upon which the entertainment shall
be held.
C. The Town Clerk shall present such application, when properly signed
and sworn to, to the Town Board at its next meeting for the purpose of
having the Town Board approve or disapprove the location of the
proposed entertainment. The Town Board shall act upon said license
and either approve or disapprove the location. Upon approval, said
license may be issued by the Town Clerk. A license may be refused by
the Town Clerk if applicant shall have been convicted of a misdemeanor
or felony which in the judgment of the Town Clerk renders the applicant
unfit or undesirable to carry on the business involved, and the Town
Clerk may also refuse a license to any person who in his judgment shall
be an undesirable or incapable of properly conducting the business
described. Any applicant who has been refused a license by the Town
Clerk may apply to the Town Board, and the same may be granted or
refused by the Town Board.
D. The Town Board, after a public hearing thereon at which the licensee
shall have an opportunity to be heard, may revoke any license issued
under authority of this chapter to any applicant whom the Town Board
shall determine to be an undesirable person or incapable of properly
conducting the business previously licensed.
§ 48-6 AMUSEMENTS, LICENSED § 48-8
48:83
to the licensing thereof. In the event that the licensee fails to restore the
premises to the condition they were in prior to the time of the making of
the application, the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca shall hire a
sufficient number of persons to clean up the premises and shall deduct the
expense thereof from the deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.) and return
the balance, if any, to the licensee.
§ 48-9. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-6-1974]
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this chapter or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days for
each such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 52
BINGO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensed amusements — See Ch. 48.
§ 52-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bingo Licensing Law."
§ 52-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORIZED ORGANIZATION — Only bona fide religious, charitable or
nonprofit organizations of veterans, volunteer firemen and similar nonprofit
organizations.
BINGO or GAME — A specific game of chance commonly known as "bingo"
or "lotto," in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers
or symbols on a card conforming to numbers or symbols selected at random.
CONTROL COMMISSION — The State Lottery Control Commission.
LICENSE — A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The entire Town of West Seneca.
§ 52-3. Authority to conduct bingo games.
A. The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca does hereby determine
that it shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a
license therefor as hereinafter provided, to conduct the game of bingo
§ 48-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 52-3
52:84
§ 52-4. Restrictions. [Amended 10-14-1963]
The following restrictions upon the conduct of bingo games authorized
hereby are hereby imposed:
within the territorial limits of the Town of West Seneca, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Article 14-H of the General
Municipal Law of the State of New York and the provisions of the State
Lottery Control Commission Law. [Amended 10-14-1963]
B. This chapter shall become operative or effective when it shall have been
approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the Town of West
Seneca voting on a proposition therefor, submitted at a general or
special election held within the Town of West Seneca.11
C. The time, method and manner of submission, preparation and provision
of ballots and ballot labels, balloting by voting machine and conducting
the election, canvassing the result and making and filing the returns
and all other procedure with reference to the submission of and action
upon any proposition for the approval of any such local law or ordinance
shall be the same as in the case of any other proposition to be submitted
to the electors of the Town of West Seneca at a general or special
election in said Town of West Seneca, as provided by law.
A. No person, firm, association, corporation or organization other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 14-H of the General Municipal
Law shall conduct such game or shall lease or otherwise make available
for conducting bingo a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect.
B. No bingo games shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from
the operation of such game.
C. No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article
14-H of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any
supplies or equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the
conduct of bingo games from other than a supplier licensed under the
Bingo Control Law or from another authorized organization.
D. The entire net proceeds of any game of bingo and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct the same.
E. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) in any single game of bingo.
11.Editor's Note: The provisions of this chapter were approved by a majority of the electors
voting at an election held 4-26-1958.
§ 52-3 BINGO § 52-4
52:85
§ 52-5. Application for license.
F. No series of prizes on any one (1) bingo occasion shall aggregate more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
G. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
H. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of bingo.
I. The unauthorized conduct of a bingo game and any willful violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as a
misdemeanor.
A. Each applicant for a license shall file with the Clerk of the Town of West
Seneca a written application therefor in the form prescribed in the rules
and regulations of the Control Commission, duly executed and verified,
in which shall be stated the name and address of the applicant, together
with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and organization to
enable the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca to determine
whether or not it is a bona fide authorized organization; the names and
addresses of its officers; the specific kinds of games of chance intended
to be held, operated and conducted by the applicant, and the place or
places where, the date or dates and the time or times when such games
of chance are intended to be held, operated and conducted by the
applicant under the license applied for; the items of expense intended
to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and
conducting of such games of chance, and the names and addresses of
the persons to whom and the purposes for which they are to be paid;
the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games of
chance are to be devoted and in what manner; that no commission,
salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person
for holding, operating or conducting such game or games of chance or
for assisting therein, except as in this chapter otherwise provided; and
that no prize or aggregate of prizes will be offered or given under such
license of a value in excess of the sum or value authorized to be offered
or given by this chapter, and a description of all prizes to be offered and
given in all such games of chance to be held, operated and conducted
under such license, and such other information as shall be prescribed
by such rules and regulations.
B. In each application there shall be designated an active member or
members of the applicant organization under whom the game or games
of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and
conducted, and to the application shall be appended a statement
executed by the applicant and by the member or members so
designated, that he or they will be responsible for the holding,
operation and conduct of such games of chance in accordance with the
terms of the license and the provisions of the rules and regulations
§ 52-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 52-5
52:86
§ 52-6. Investigation; issuance and duration of license; reports.
governing the holding, operation and conduct of such games of chance
and of this chapter, if such license is granted.
C. In the event that any premises upon which any such game of chance is
to be held, operated or conducted, or which is to be used for any other
purpose in connection with the holding, operating or conducting
thereof, is to be leased from any person, persons or corporation, a
written statement shall accompany the application signed and verified
under oath by such person or persons or executed and verified under
oath on behalf of such corporation, stating his or its address and the
amount of rent which will be paid for such premises and that such
lessor or lessors, or, if a corporation, all of its officers and each of its
stockholders who hold ten percent (10%) or more of its stock issued and
outstanding, are of good moral character and have not been convicted
of crime.
A. The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca shall make an investigation
of the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each
application, with due expedition after the filing of the application, and if
it shall determine that the applicant is duly qualified to be licensed
under this chapter to hold, operate and conduct games of chance under
the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations governing
the holding, operation and conduct thereof in the Town of West Seneca;
that the member or members of the applicant designated in the
application to hold, operate or conduct the games of chance, to hold,
operate and conduct which the license was applied for, are bona fide
active members of the applicant and are persons of good moral
character and have never been convicted of a crime; that such games of
chance are to be held, operated and conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the rules and
regulations governing the holding, operation and conduct thereof, and
that the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of as provided by this
chapter; and if the Town Board is satisfied that no commission, salary,
compensation, reward or recompense whatever will be paid or given to
any person holding, operating or conducting, or assisting in the
holding, operation and conduct of, any such games of chance, except as
in this chapter otherwise provided; and that no prize will be offered and
given in excess of the sum or value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.)
in any single game of chance, and that the aggregate of all prizes
offered and given in all of such games of chance held, operated and
conducted on a single occasion under said license shall not exceed the
sum or value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.), it shall issue a license to
the applicant for the holding, operation and conduct of the specific
kinds of games of chance applied for, accordingly, upon payment of a
license fee or fees of ten dollars ($10.) for each occasion upon which
any games of chance are to be conducted under such license.
§ 52-5 BINGO § 52-6
52:87
§ 52-7. Hearing; amendment of license.
§ 52-8. Form and content of license; display.
Each license shall be in such form as shall be prescribed in the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Control Commission and shall contain a
description of the kind of games of chance authorized to be held, operated
and conducted thereunder, a statement of the name and address of the
licensee, of the names and addresses of the member or members of the
licensee under whom such games of chance will be held, operated and
conducted, of the number of times or the hours during which such games
of chance are authorized to be conducted, and the place or places where
and the date or dates and time or times when such games of chance are to
be conducted, and of the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds
of such games of chance are to be devoted; if any prize or prizes are to
be offered and given in cash, a statement of the amounts of the prizes
authorized so to be offered and given; and any other information which
may be required by said rules and regulations to be contained therein,
and each license for the conduct of any game or games of chance shall be
conspicuously displayed at the place where same is to be conducted at all
times during the conduct thereof.
§ 52-9. Control and supervision; suspension or revocation of
license.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca issuing any license under
this chapter shall have and exercise control and supervision over all games
of chance held, operated or conducted under such license, to the end
that the same are fairly held, operated and conducted in accordance with
B. On or before the thirtieth day of each month, the Supervisor of the
Town of West Seneca shall transmit to the State Comptroller a sum
equal to fifty percent (50%) of all license fees collected by such Town of
West Seneca pursuant to this section during the preceding calendar
month.
C. No license for the holding, operation and conduct of any game or games
of chance shall be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for
a period of more than one (1) year.
A. No application for the issuance of a license shall be denied by the Town
Board until after a hearing, held on due notice to the applicant, at which
the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the
applicant and the merits of the application.
B. Any license issued under this chapter may be amended upon
application made to the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca, if the
subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly
have been included in the original license and upon payment of such
additional license fee, if any, as would have been payable if it had been
so included.
§ 52-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 52-9
52:88
the provisions of such license, the rules and regulations promulgated by
the Control Commission and the provisions of this chapter governing the
holding, operation and conduct of the same, and such Town Board and the
Control Commission shall have the power and the authority to suspend any
license issued by such Town Board and to revoke the same, after notice and
hearing, for violation of any such provision, and shall have the right of entry,
by their respective officers and agents, at all times into any premises where
any such game of chance is being held, operated and conducted or where
it is intended that any such game of chance shall be held, operated and
conducted or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the
conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same.
§ 52-10. Sunday games.
§ 52-11. Participation by persons under eighteen.
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to
participate in any game or games of chance held, operated and conducted
pursuant to any license issued under this chapter unless accompanied by an
adult.
§ 52-12. Frequency of games; alcoholic beverages.
No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under
any license issued under this chapter oftener than on six (6) days in any
one (1) calendar month nor in any room or outdoor area where alcoholic
beverages are sold or served during the progress of the game or games.
§ 52-13. Conduct and operation; equipment: expenses.
No person shall hold, operate or conduct any game or games of chance
under any license issued under this chapter except an active member of
the authorized organization to which the license is issued, and no person
shall assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of
chance under such license except such an active member or a member of an
organization or association which is an auxiliary to the licensee or a member
of an organization or association of which such licensee is an auxiliary or
a member of an organization or association which is affiliated with the
licensee by being, with it, auxiliary to another organization or association
and except bookkeepers or accountants as hereinafter provided, and no
such game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such
as shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation
therefor by the licensee, and no item of expense shall be incurred or paid
A. No games of chance shall be conducted under any license issued under
this chapter on the first day of the week, commonly known and
designated as Sunday, unless it shall be otherwise provided in the
license issued for the holding, operating and conducting thereof.
B. The Town of West Seneca does hereby permit the operation and
conduct of games of chance under this chapter on Sunday.
§ 52-9 BINGO § 52-13
52:89
in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any game of
chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any license issued under
this chapter except such as are bona fide items of reasonable amount
for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered which
are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding,
operating or conducting thereof under any circumstances whatever; no
rental shall be paid for the use of any premises for holding, operating or
conducting any such game of chance thereon or for any other purpose in
connection with the holding, operating or conducting thereof unless the
amount of such rental is stated in a statement annexed to the application
for the license as provided in § 52-5A of this chapter or which is in excess of
the sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement; and
no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall
be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating
or conducting, or assisting in the holding, operation or conduct of, any
game of chance so held, operated or conducted, except that reasonable
compensation may be paid to bookkeepers or accountants for bookkeeping
or accounting services rendered, according to a schedule of compensation
prescribed by the rules of the Control Commission.
§ 52-14. Admission and participation charges; prizes.
Not more than one dollar ($1.) shall be charged by any licensee for
admission to any room or place in which any game or games of chance are
to be held, operated and conducted under any license issued under this
chapter, which admission fee, upon payment thereof, shall entitle the person
paying the same to a card entitling him to participate without additional
charge in all regular games of chance to be played under such license on
such occasion, and no charge in excess of one dollar ($1.) shall be made
for a single opportunity to participate in all special games to be played
under such license on such occasion. No prize greater in amount or value
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) shall be offered or given in any single
game conducted under any such license, and the aggregate amount or
value of all prizes offered or given in all games played on a single occasion
shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($ 1,000.), and all winners shall be
determined and all prizes shall be awarded in any game played on any
occasion within the same calendar day as that upon which the game was
played. No alcoholic beverage shall be offered or given as a prize in any
such game.
§ 52-15. Advertising restrictions.
No game of chance to be conducted under any license issued under this
chapter shall be advertised as to its location, the time when it is to be
or has been played or the prizes awarded or to be awarded, by means of
newspapers, radio, television or sound trucks or by means of billboards,
posters or handbills or any other means addressed to the general public,
except that one (1) sign not exceeding sixty (60) square feet in area may be
displayed on or adjacent to the premises where the game will be played and
an additional sign may be displayed on or adjacent to the premises where
§ 52-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 52-15
52:90
the prize or prizes are displayed and additional signs may be displayed upon
any fire fighting equipment belonging to any licensee which is a volunteer
fire company or upon any first aid or rescue squad equipment belonging
to any licensee which is a first aid or rescue squad, in and throughout the
community or communities served by such volunteer fire company or such
first aid or rescue squad, as the case may be.
§ 52-16. Statements; books and records.
Within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the holding, operating and
conducting of any such game of chance, the authorized organization which
held, operated or conducted the same and its members who were in charge
thereof shall furnish to the Clerk of the Town of West Seneca a duly verified
statement showing the amount of the gross receipts derived from each
game of chance, which shall include receipts from the sale of shares, tickets
or rights in any manner connected with participation in said game or the
right to participate therein, each item of expense incurred or paid and each
item of expenditure made or to be made, the name and address of each
person to whom each such item has been paid or is to be paid, with a
detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered
therefor, the net profit derived from each such game of chance and the use
to which such net profit has been or is to be applied, and a list of prizes
offered and given, with the respective values thereof, and it shall be the
duty of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may
be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such report.
§ 52-17. Examination of records and officers; disclosure of
information.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca and the Control Commission
shall have power to examine or cause to be examined the books and records
of any authorized organization to which any such license is issued so far as
they may relate to any transactions connected with the holding, operating
and conducting of any game of chance thereunder, and to examine any
manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in
relation to the conduct of any such game of chance under any such license,
but any information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as may
be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 52-18. Appeals to Control Commission.
Any applicant for or holder of any license issued or to be issued under
this chapter, aggrieved by any action of the Town Board of the Town of
West Seneca to which such application has been made or by which such
license has been issued, may appeal to the Control Commission from the
determination of said Town Board by filing with the Town Board a written
notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the determination or action
appealed from, and upon the hearing of such appeal, the evidence, if any,
taken before the Town Board and any additional evidence may be produced
and shall be considered in arriving at a determination of the matters in
§ 52-15 BINGO § 52-18
52:91
issue, and the action of the Control Commission upon said appeal shall be
binding upon said Town Board and all parties to said appeal.
§ 52-19. Immunity from prosecution; exception.
No person or corporation lawfully conducting or participating in the
conduct of, or possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of any shares,
tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it of, any game of chance conducted or to be
conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this chapter, shall
be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision of Article
130 of the Penal Law or any other law or ordinance, to the extent that
such conduct is specifically authorized by this chapter, but this immunity
shall not extend to any person or corporation knowingly conducting or
participating in the conduct of any game of chance under any license
obtained by any false pretense or statement made in any application for
such license or otherwise, or possessing, selling or disposing of shares,
tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any
premises owned by him or it of, any game of chance conducted under any
license known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false pretense
or statement.
§ 52-20. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for any such license or in any statement
annexed thereto, or shall pay any rental for the use of any premises for
holding, operating or conducting any game of chance under this chapter
or for any other purpose in connection with the holding, operating or
conducting thereof, unless the amount of such rental is stated in a
statement annexed to the application for the license as provided in § 52-5A
of this chapter, or shall pay or receive any sum for such rental in excess
of the sum stated as the rental to be charged therefor in such statement
executed by him or on its behalf, or shall fail to keep such books and
records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the
holding, operating and conducting of games of chance under any such
license, or shall falsify or make any false entry in any book or record so far
as they relate to any transaction connected with the holding, operating or
conducting of any game of chance under any such license, or shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter or of any term of such license, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit any license issued to it under this
chapter and be ineligible to apply for a license under this chapter for one
(1) year thereafter.
§ 52-21. Approval by electors required.
The provisions of this chapter shall remain inoperative in the Town of West
Seneca unless and until a proposition therefor, submitted at a general or
special election in such town, shall be approved by a vote of the majority
of the qualified electors in such town voting thereon. This chapter shall
§ 52-18 WEST SENECA CODE § 52-21
52:92
become effective immediately upon certification of the results of said
election.
§ 52-22. Amendment or repeal.
This chapter may be amended from time to time or repealed by the Town
Board of the Town of West Seneca, and such amendment or repeal, as the
case may be, may be made effective and operative not earlier than thirty
(30) days following the date of enactment of the ordinance affecting such
amendment or repeal, as the case may be; and the approval of a majority of
the electors of such town shall not be a condition prerequisite to the taking
effect of such ordinance.
§ 52-23. Delegation of authority.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca may delegate, by a resolution,
to an officer or officers of said town designated by the said Town Board
for that purpose, any of the authority granted to the Town Board hereby
in relation to the issuance, amendment and cancellation of licenses, the
conduct of investigations and hearings, the supervision of the operation of
the games and the collection and transmission of fees.
Chapter 54
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 92.
§ 54-1. Maintenance required. [Amended 1-25-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
All lots, plots or property within the Town of West Seneca, whether
improved or vacant, shall be maintained as often as necessary to prevent
the overgrowth of brush, grass and weeds in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, including the accumulation of debris.
§ 54-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BRUSH — Includes all manner and kinds of grass, weeds, shrubs, plants,
vegetation, undergrowth, vines, bushes and small trees which are allowed
to grow wild.
DEBRIS — Refuse, trash, scrap, or things that are no longer useful or
wanted; accumulation that is left to be discarded. At times the code
§ 52-21 BINGO § 54-2
52:93
enforcement office will use its discretion on these items to be
cleaned.[Added 1-25-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
FRONT YARD — The area located between the front of the dwelling unit or
structure and the front property line.
IMPROVED LOT — A lot which has frontage on an improved street and a
dwelling unit located on it or other structure located on it.
IMPROVED VACANT LOT — A lot which has frontage on an improved street.
PERSON — Includes one or more natural persons, corporations,
partnership, associations, joint-stock companies, societies and all other
entities of any kind.
REAR YARD — The area located between the rear of the dwelling unit or
structure and the rear property line.
SIDE YARD — The area located between the side of the dwelling unit or
structure and the side property line.
SUBDIVISION LOT — An improved lot, located in an approved subdivision,
with or without a dwelling unit on it or other structures.
TREE — A large, wooded perennial plant with one main trunk which
develops many branches.
VACANT LAND — A lot which has no frontage on a street.
§ 54-3. Responsibilities of owner.
A. It shall be the duty of every person in control:
(1) Of a subdivision lot or any portion thereof in the Town of West
Seneca to cut, trim, remove or cause to be cut, trimmed or removed
from said lot, plot or property or any portion thereof all brush
thereon so the general height is no greater than six inches during
the months of May through October of each year.
(2) Of an improved lot located in a residential or commercial zoning
location in the Town of West Seneca under three acres in size to
cut, trim, remove or cause to be cut, trimmed or removed all brush
to a height and in a location on said lot, plot or property during the
months of May through October of each year as follows:
(a) Front yard: six inches.
(b) Side yard: six inches.
(c) Rear yard, an area of 60 feet from the rear of the dwelling or
structure: six inches.
(d) All the remaining land: treated as a vacant lot.
(3) Of an improved vacant lot under two acres to treat such as a
subdivision lot. If over two acres and located in a residential or
commercial zoning location in the Town of West Seneca, the person
§ 54-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 54-3
52:94
§ 54-4. Enforcement officer.
The Town of West Seneca Building Inspector is hereby charged with the
responsibility and duty to enforce this chapter.
§ 54-5. Notice of violation. [Amended 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 8-2014]
In the event that the Building Inspector determines that the provisions of
this chapter are being violated, he shall mail a written notice of violation
by first-class mail to the owner of the lot as shown on the latest completed
assessment roll of the Town of West Seneca advising the owner of such
violation.
§ 54-6. Compliance required. [Amended 1-25-2016 by L.L. No.
1-2016]
Any person upon whom notice has been served to cut, trim or remove such
brush and debris that fails to comply within 10 days after service shall be
deemed to have neglected or failed to comply with the provisions of any
such notice and shall be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 54-7. Removal. [Amended 1-25-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of any owner duly notified to
cut, destroy or remove such excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, plant
growth or debris from his or her property within the applicable time period
specified in the notice, the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or his designee
shall have the power to, or contract to, cut, trim or remove such weeds,
grass, brush or plant growth or accumulation of dead weeds, grass, brush,
plant growth or debris on any such parcel. The cost or expense of such
in control shall cut, trim, remove or cause to be cut, trimmed or
removed from said lot, plot or property or any portion thereof all
brush thereon so the general height is no greater than 18 inches
during the months of May through October of each year.
(4) Of a vacant land over 10 acres and located in a residential or
commercial zoning location in the Town of West Seneca to cut, trim,
remove or cause to be cut, trimmed or removed from said lot, plot
or property or any portion thereof all brush thereon so the general
height is no greater than 30 inches during the months of May
through October of each year.
(5) Of a subdivision lot, improved lot, improved vacant lot or vacant
land located in the Town of West Seneca to cut, trim, remove or
cause to be cut, trimmed or removed from said lot, plot or property
any dead trees or portions of them that may be considered by the
Code Enforcement Official to be a hazard.
B. All parcels of any size shall be free of debris. [Added 1-25-2016 by
L.L. No. 1-2016]
§ 54-3 BINGO § 54-7
52:95
work ordered by the Senior Code Enforcement Officer and/or his designee
shall be an annual fee of $200 for administrative costs incurred under this
chapter. This fee will be ordered at the end of the fall of each year. The
expense thereof shall become a lien upon the real property involved and
be added to and become a part of the taxes next so assessed by including
such expense in the next annual tax levy against the property and shall bear
interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected in the same manner
as general Town taxes.
§ 54-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall neglect to cut, trim or remove brush as directed in this
chapter or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions
of any notice herein provided or who shall resist or obstruct the removal of
brush shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $250, and each day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 55
BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 55-1. Purpose; applicability.
This chapter shall provide for the administration and enforcement of the
New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (Uniform Code)
in the Town of West Seneca. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of
Article 2 of the Municipal Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided
within this chapter, state law, or within the Uniform Code, all premises,
regardless of use, are subject to the provisions which follow.
§ 55-2. (Reserved)
§ 55-3. Severability.
If any section of this chapter shall be held unconstitutional, invalid, or
ineffective, in whole or in part, such determination shall not be deemed to
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof.
§ 55-4. Code Enforcement Official; Inspectors.
A. The position of Code Enforcement Official is hereby created and shall
be filled by appointment of the West Seneca Town Board. The Code
Enforcement Official shall possess background experience related to
building construction and/or fire prevention and shall, within the time
constraints prescribed by law, obtain such training as the State of New
York shall require for code enforcement personnel.
B. In the absence of the Code Enforcement Official and his assistants, or in
the case of their inability to act for any reason, the Town Supervisor
§ 54-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 55-4
52:96
§ 55-5. Building permits.
shall have the power, with the consent of the West Seneca Town Board,
to designate a person to act on behalf of the Code Enforcement Official
and to exercise all the powers conferred upon him by this chapter.
C. The Town Supervisor, with the approval of the West Seneca Town
Board, may appoint one Inspector, or more, as the need may appear, to
act under the supervision and direction of the Code Enforcement
Official.
D. The compensation for the Code Enforcement Official or acting Code
Enforcement Official shall be fixed and adjusted as needed by the West
Seneca Town Board.
E. The Code Enforcement Official shall administer and enforce all the
provisions of the Uniform Code and the provisions of this chapter,
including receiving building permit applications, reviewing plans and
specifications, conducting inspections, issuing permits for the erection,
alteration, relocation, addition, repair and/or demolition of buildings
and structures, issuing certificates of occupancy, collecting fees as set
forth by the West Seneca Town Board and maintaining and filing all
records necessary for the administration of the office to the satisfaction
of the West Seneca Town Board. The Code Enforcement Official is
authorized to pursue administrative actions and, in consultation with
the Town Attorney, legal action, as necessary, to abate conditions not in
compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code, this chapter, or other laws, rules or regulations of the
Town of West Seneca or of the State of New York.
A. Permit required.
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm, corporation,
association or partnership shall commence the construction,
enlargement, alteration, improvement, removal, relocation or
demolition of any building or structure or any portion thereof, or
install a solid-fuel-burning heating appliance, chimney or flue in
any building or structure without first having obtained a permit
from the Code Enforcement Official.
(2) Permit requirements for a change in commercial occupant. Prior to
occupying any commercial space within any building in the Town of
West Seneca, a change in commercial occupant permit must be
applied for and approved by the Building Department. If you are
proposing a new store or business within the Town of West Seneca,
whether it involves a purchase or lease of a storefront, commercial
space or portion of an existing building, plans must be presented to
the Building Department for the utilization of such commercial
space/building. Plans are required even if there are no proposed
alterations or renovations. A permit and plan requirement is
necessary so that the Building Department can confirm that the
§ 55-4 BINGO § 55-5
52:97
proposed business is permitted under the Zoning Law12 and that
the intended use of the space/building complies with the existing
Building Code of New York State. [Added 11-28-2011 by L.L. No.
5-2011]
B. Application for permit.
(1) The application for a building permit, and its accompanying
documents, shall contain sufficient information to permit a
determination that the intended work accords with the
requirements of the Uniform Code and the Town Zoning
Ordinance.13
(2) The form of the permit and application therefor shall be prescribed
by the Code Enforcement Official. The application shall be signed
by the owner of the building or his authorized agent and shall
contain at least the following:
(a) Full name and address of the owner and, if by a corporation,
the name and addresses of the responsible officials;
(b) Identification and/or description of the land on which the work
is to be done;
(c) Description of use or occupancy of the land and existing or
proposed building (legal survey);
(d) Description of the proposed work;
(e) Two sets of plans and specifications for the proposed work; and
(f) The required fee.
(3) The Code Enforcement Official may waive the requirement of plans
and specifications when the work to be done involves minor
alterations or is otherwise unnecessary.
(4) The applicant shall notify the Code Enforcement Official of any
changes in the information contained in the application during the
period for which the permit is in effect. A permit will be issued
when the application has been determined to be complete and
when the proposed work has been determined to conform to the
requirements of the Uniform Code. The authority conferred by such
permit may be limited by conditions, if any, contained therein.
Amendments, if any, to the application or to the plans and
specifications accompanying the same shall be filed with the Code
Enforcement Official prior to the commencement of such change of
work.
C. General requirements.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 55-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 55-5
52:98
§ 55-6. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established, and changed as needed, by resolution of
the West Seneca Town Board. Such fees may be charged for the issuance of
permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates of occupancy, and
for fire safety inspections.
§ 55-7. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) A building permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
prominently displayed on the property or premises to which it
pertains.
(2) A building permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be
suspended or revoked if it is determined that the work to which it
pertains is not proceeding in conformance with the Uniform Code
or with any condition attached to such permit, or if there has been
misrepresentation or falsification of a material fact in connection
with the application for the permit.
(3) A building permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one
year from the date of issuance or upon the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy (other than a temporary certificate of occupancy),
whichever occurs first. The permit may, upon written request, be
renewed for successive one-year periods, provided that:
(a) The permit has not been revoked or suspended at the time the
application for renewal is made;
(b) The relevant information in the application is up-to-date; and
(c) The renewal fee is paid.
D. The penalty for commencing work without the required permit shall be
double the normal fee.
A. No building erected subject to the New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code shall be used or occupied, except to the
extent authorized hereunder, until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued. No buildings similarly enlarged, extended, or altered, or upon
which work has been performed, shall be occupied or used more than
30 days after the completion of the alteration or work unless a
certificate of occupancy has been issued. No change shall be made in
the nature of the occupancy of an existing building unless a certificate
of occupancy authorizing the change has been issued. The owner or his
agent shall make application for a certificate of occupancy.
B. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued if the building or
structure, or a designated portion of a building or structure, is
sufficiently complete that it may be put to the use for which it is
intended. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall expire six months
from the date of issuance or at an earlier date if so specified. A
§ 55-5 BINGO § 55-7
52:99
§ 55-8. Inspections.
temporary certificate of occupancy may, at the discretion of the Code
Enforcement Official and upon payment of an additional fee as specified
for a temporary certificate of occupancy, be renewed. The Code
Enforcement Official may place special conditions on temporary
certificates of occupancy, as necessary, to insure safety and to protect
the interest of the Town of West Seneca.14
A. Inspections during construction:
(1) Work for which a building permit has been issued hereunder shall
be inspected for approval prior to enclosing or covering any portion
thereof and upon completion of each stage of construction,
including but not limited to building location, site preparation,
excavation, foundation, framing, superstructure, electrical,
plumbing, and heating and air conditioning. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner, applicant, or his agent to inform the
inspector that the work is ready for inspection and to schedule such
inspection.
(2) For work which requires special inspection during construction it
shall be the responsibility of the owner, applicant, or his agent to
provide a list, at their expense. A statement of the special
inspections, including a complete list of materials and work
requiring such inspections, and a list of the individuals and
approved agencies shall be provided to the Code Enforcement
Official for the permit application file. The reports of such special
inspections shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Official for
the permanent record.
(3) If entrance to make an inspection is refused or cannot be obtained,
the West Seneca Town Board, after being notified by the inspector
of the situation, may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for an order to make an inspection.
B. Fire prevention and property maintenance inspections.
(1) Multiple dwellings shall be inspected for the purpose of
determining compliance with fire prevention and property
maintenance requirements of the Uniform Code at least once every
36 months. Inspections of such buildings shall include the common
areas such as halls, foyers, staircases, etc., and vacant dwelling
units. Where the tenants of occupied dwelling units allow, the
inspection may include such units.
(2) Fire safety inspections of buildings or structures having areas of
public assembly, as defined in Section 303 of the Building Code of
14.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning the requirement for an up-to-date
certificate of occupancy upon transfer of ownership, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 3-26-2012 by L.L. No. 2-2012.
§ 55-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 55-8
52:100
§ 55-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
§ 55-10. Stop-work orders.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Official has reason to believe that the
work on any building or structure is being performed in violation of the
provisions of the applicable building laws, ordinance, rules or regulations,
or not in conformity with the provisions of an application, or in an unsafe
and dangerous manner, he shall notify the owner of the property, or the
New York State (19 NYCRR Part 1221), shall be performed at least
once every 12 months.
(3) All other buildings, uses and occupancies (except one- or twofamily
dwellings) shall be inspected at least once every 24 months.
(4) An inspection of a building or dwelling unit may also be performed
at any other time upon:
(a) The request of the owner, authorized agent, or tenant;
(b) Receipt of a written statement alleging that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code exist; or
(c) Receipt of other reasonable and reliable information that such
a violation exists.
A. Upon determination that a violation of the Uniform Code or this chapter
exists in, on, or about any building or premises, the Code Enforcement
Official shall order, in writing, the remedying of the condition. Such
order shall state the specific provision of the Uniform Code which the
particular condition violates and shall grant such time as may be
reasonably necessary for achieving compliance before proceedings to
compel compliance shall be instituted. Such order shall be served
personally or by notification by certified mail.
B. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law, any person, firm
or corporation who violates any provision of the Uniform Code or any
rule or regulation of this chapter, or the terms or conditions of any
certificate of occupancy issued by the Code Enforcement Official, shall
be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $200 for each day or part
thereof during which such violation continues. The civil penalties
provided by this subsection shall be recoverable in an action instituted
in the name of the Town of West Seneca on its own initiative or at the
request of the Code Enforcement Official.
C. Alternatively, or in addition to an action to recover the civil penalties
provided by Subsection B, the Town Board may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, enjoin, correct,
or abate any violation of, or to enforce any provision of the Uniform
Code or the terms or conditions of any certificate of occupancy issued
by the Code Enforcement Official.
§ 55-8 BINGO § 55-10
52:101
owner's agent, to suspend all work and suspend all building activities until
the stop-work order has been rescinded. Such order and notice shall appear
in writing, shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed
and may be served upon a person to whom it is directed either by delivering
it personally to him, or by posting the same upon a conspicuous portion of
the building where the work is being performed and sending a copy of the
same to him by certified mail at the address set forth in the application for
the permission of the construction of such building.
§ 55-11. Department records and reports.
Chapter 57
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code adminstration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 65.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 57-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the removal or repair of buildings in business,
industrial, residential and agricultural sections15 that from any cause may
now be or shall hereafter become dangerous or unsafe to the public.
§ 57-2. Inspection officials; inspections and reports.
The Town Engineer and the Town Building Inspector are hereby designated
as officials to inspect any structure suspected of being in violation of this
A. The Code Enforcement Official shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by his office, including all
applications received, plans approved, permits and certificates issued,
fees charged and collected, inspection reports, all rules and regulations
promulgated by him with the consent of the West Seneca Town Board,
and notices and orders issued. All such records shall be public records
open for public inspection during normal business hours. All plans and
records pertaining to buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto,
shall be retained for at least the minimum time period so required by
state law and regulation.
B. The Code Enforcement Official shall annually submit to the West
Seneca Town Board a written report and summary of all business
conducted by his office, including approvals, permits and certificates
issued, and fees collected.
15.Editor's Note: For current zoning districts, see Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 55-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 57-2
52:102
chapter, and they shall file a written report with the Town Board, spelling
out in detail the findings of their inspection.
§ 57-3. Notice to remove or repair; filing of notice.
§ 57-4. Duty of owner or person notified.
The owner of the premises or person notified shall commence the securing
or removal of the building or structure within 15 days of the mailing and
posting or service of said notice and shall diligently prosecute said removal
or securing until the project is complete.
§ 57-5. Failure of compliance; hearing. [Amended 4-6-1970;
6-18-1984]
In the event of neglect or refusal of the person served with notice to comply
with the same, a hearing before the Town Board shall be had. The time and
place of such hearing shall be specified in the notice to repair or demolish.
§ 57-6. Report of survey.
A report of the survey on the building and the amount of compensation paid
to the surveyors shall be posted upon the Town Clerk's bulletin board and
upon the premises, and a copy shall be mailed to the person notified as
above; said posted and mailed reports shall be signed by the surveyors.
§ 57-7. Performance of work by Town; costs. [Amended 6-18-1984;
11-9-2015 by L.L. No. 12-2015]
A. In the event that a building is felt to be unsafe, collapsed or in need of
removal or repair, a notice shall be served upon the owner or some one
of the owners, executors, legal representatives, agents, lessees or any
other person having a vested or contingent interest in the property,
either personally or by registered mail, addressed to the last known
address, if any, of the owner or others listed above as shown by the
records of the Receiver of Taxes and/or in the office of the County Clerk.
Said notice shall contain a description of the premises, a statement of
the particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe or
dangerous and an order requiring the same to be made safe and secure
or removed; and if such service is made by registered mail, a copy of
such notice shall be posted upon the premises.
B. Filing of notice. A copy of such notice shall be filed in the office of the
Erie County Clerk in the same manner as a notice of pendency. Such
notice shall be effective for one year and may be vacated upon the order
of a Judge or justice of a court of record, or upon the consent of the
Town Attorney. [Added 6-18-1984]
A. In the event that the owner refuses or neglects to secure or remove said
building or structure, the Town shall do the necessary work involved,
either with Town employees or outside contractors, and the cost of the
§ 57-2 BINGO § 57-7
52:103
Chapter 58
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY
removal or securing and all other expenses in connection with the
proceedings shall be assessed against the land on which the building or
structure is located.
B. In addition to the cost or expense of such work ordered by the Senior
Code Enforcement Officer and/or his designee, there shall be a fee of
$200 for administrative costs for each occurrence.
§ 57-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 57-7
52:104
ARTICLE I
Point-of-Sale Inspections
[Adopted 1-29-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
§ 58-1. Purpose.
The Town of West Seneca has determined that it is in the interest of
protecting the public health, safety and welfare to maintain, preserve and
improve residential housing by requiring point-of-sale inspection of all
vacant and abandoned residential property as a condition of the sale of
housing.
§ 58-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MORTGAGEE — The holder of a mortgage and/or note secured by
residential real property, including, as applicable, the original lender under
a mortgage, its successors and assigns, and the holders of credit
instruments issued under a trust indenture, mortgage or deed of trust
pursuant to which such holders act by and through a trustee therein named.
RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Real property located within the Town
of West Seneca improved by any building or structure that is or may be
used, in whole or in part, as the home or residence of one or more persons
and shall include any building or structure used for both residential and
commercial purposes.
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Shall be
defined pursuant to § 1309 of the New York Real Property Actions and
Proceedings Law or if such property was listed on the statewide vacant
and abandoned property electronic registry pursuant to § 1310 of the New
York Real Property Actions and Proceedings Law one year prior to sale or
transfer.
§ 58-3. Inspection officials.
The Town Code Enforcement Officials are hereby designated as officials to
inspect any property subject to this chapter.
§ 58-4. Duty of owner or mortgagee or purchaser or transferee.
A. No owner or agent or mortgagee of any vacant and abandoned
residential real property shall sell, transfer or otherwise convey an
interest or enter into an agreement to sell, transfer or otherwise convey
an interest in such property, including by land installment contract or a
transfer from a mortgagor to a mortgagee in lieu of foreclosure, or
similar transaction, without first presenting the prospective purchaser
or grantee with a copy of a point-of-sale inspection certificate issued by
the Town of West Seneca inspection officials.
§ 58-1 BINGO § 58-4
52:105
§ 58-5. Fees.
§ 58-6. Point-of-sale inspection certificates.
B. The owner or agent or mortgagee shall arrange to have all properties
subject to the requirements of this chapter inspected by the Town of
West Seneca inspection officials within 10 business days of publication
of the notice of judicial sale. For all other transfers, the owner or agent
or mortgagee shall arrange to have the property inspected by Town of
West Seneca inspection officials not more than 30 days prior to transfer.
C. In the event that the vacant and abandoned residential real property is
sold or transferred or conveyed and no point-of-sale inspection
certificate has been issued within 30 days prior to such sale, the
purchaser or transferee shall have the duty to apply in writing to the
Town of West Seneca Code Inspection Bureau within 30 days of the date
of sale or transfer for an inspection of the property and shall otherwise
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
D. Where the purchaser or transferee has the duty to obtain the point-ofsale
inspection because the owner or agent or mortgagee failed to do
so, any such Building Code or other violations subsequently found shall
be the joint and several liability of the owner or agent or mortgagee or
purchaser or transferee.
E. If the owner or agent or mortgagee or purchaser or transferee fails to
arrange for an inspection, the property shall be inspected by the
inspection officials pursuant to Chapter 57 of the Town of West Seneca
Code.
A. The fee charged for the point-of-sale inspection certificate shall be:
(1) Two hundred dollars for a single-family dwelling;
(2) Three hundred dollars for a two-family dwelling;
(3) Two hundred dollars for the first dwelling unit in a multifamily
dwelling structure and an additional $50 for each additional unit in
a multifamily structure.
B. A reinspection fee of $25 shall be charged for each reinspection.
A. Upon successful inspection, the Town of West Seneca inspection
officials will issue a point-of-sale inspection certificate indicating
compliance with Building, Fire and Safety Codes. Such certificate will
expire after a period of 30 days.
B. If, as a result of the inspection, the inspection officials determine that
Health Code violations, Housing Code violations, hazards, or structural
defects exist on the property, the inspection officials shall provide
written notice either personally or by registered mail addressed to the
address listed in the application for the inspection of the owner or agent
§ 58-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 58-6
52:106
or mortgagee or the purchaser or transferee, informing the parties of
the following:
(1) The need to repair and correct the violations, hazards, or structural
defects prior to sale or transfer;
(2) If the property is not brought into compliance within 90 calendar
days of the issuance of the notice of violation, the Town of West
Seneca may correct or repair some or all of the violations;
(3) If the Town of West Seneca corrects or repairs some or all of the
violations either with Town employees or outside contractors, the
cost and expenses shall be assessed against the land on which the
building or structure is located.
(4) In addition to the cost or expense of such work ordered by the
inspection officials, there shall be a fee of $200 for administrative
costs for each occurrence.
C. Waiver of point-of-sale inspection. The Town's Code Enforcement
Official may temporarily waive the requirement of a point-of-sale
inspection certificate as a prerequisite to transfer of title provided that
no later than 10 business days prior to the expected closing for such
transfer or judicial sale:
(1) The owner or agent or mortgagee makes a written request to the
Town's Code Enforcement Officer and such request includes a
written, itemized quote by a licensed contractor approved by the
Town of West Seneca, which provides for correction of all violations
listed;
(2) The purchaser or transferee files with the Town's Code
Enforcement Officer a written guaranty to correct all violations
within 90 days after the closing or a period of time specified by the
Town's Code Enforcement Officer;
(3) The owner or agent or mortgagee or purchaser or transferee
provides a sum equal to 150% of the estimated costs contained in
the itemized quote above. Such sum shall be payable by certified
check or bank draft to the Town of West Seneca at closing and held
in escrow by the Town of West Seneca; such sum will be returned to
the purchaser or transferee if the corrections are completed within
the time specified in the guaranty, but which sum will be forfeited
to the Town of West Seneca if needed corrections are not
completed within the time frame specified in the written guaranty.
D. Violations. The following types of violations are of particular concern to
the Town of West Seneca's vital interest in maintaining property values,
including but not limited to:
(1) Exterior:
(a) Roof - chimney.
§ 58-6 BINGO § 58-6
52:107
(b) Paint - all related carpentry repairs (house and/or garage).
(c) Porch and step repair.
(d) Downspouts to storm sewers.
(e) Replacement of deteriorated windows and/or doors.
(f) Concrete replacement or major repair.
(g) Garage replacement or major repair.
(h) Dead tree removal.
(i) Fences.
(2) Interior:
(a) Major electrical repair.
(b) Major plumbing repair.
(c) HVAC.
(d) Foundation - support post, block wall bowed or collapsed.
(e) Major breach of ceilings, walls or floor.
(f) Mold remediation.
E. An owner or agent or mortgagee or purchaser or transferee aggrieved
by a notice of violation may appeal from the action to the Town Board,
which shall make a ruling on the appeal.
§ 58-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 58-6
52:108
Chapter 60
DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 102.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 60-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "Development Plan Review Fees."
§ 60-2. Legislative findings; intent and purpose.
The Town Board hereby finds and determines that in order to protect
and safeguard the Town of West Seneca, its residents and their property
with respect to certain land developments within the Town, all should be
designed and constructed in a competent and workmanlike manner and in
conformity with all applicable governmental codes, rules and regulations
and dedicated and conveyed to the Town in a legally sufficient manner. In
order to assure the foregoing, it is essential that the Town have available
to it all necessary professional expertise to assist in the review of plans,
designs, applications and related materials in order to make
recommendations to the Town Board, Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Appeals. The Town of West Seneca takes great pride in the skill and
professionalism of its staff. However, from time to time the staff is called
upon to review and evaluate matters outside the range of staff training.
These situations may require the Town to seek out skills not possessed by
the Town employees but which are not required frequently enough to justify
the hiring of new staff. At the same time, the cost of retaining such outside
expertise should not be borne by the taxpayers of the Town, but rather by
those who seek to profit from the decisions of the Town and its boards.
Therefore, it is the intent of this chapter to establish a mechanism whereby
the Town may hire necessary expertise that is needed infrequently without
imposing the cost on its taxpayers.
§ 60-3. Statutory authority; local supersession.
This chapter is enacted under the authority of Subparagraphs (a)(12) and
(d)(3) of the Municipal Home Rule Law § 10(1)(ii) and Municipal Home Rule
Law § 22. To the extent that the Town Law of the State of New York does
not authorize the Town Board, Town Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals to require the reimbursement to the Town of expenses incurred
by the Town in connection with the professional review of applications
for development and land use approvals, it is the expressed intent of the
Town Board to change and supersede such statutes. More particularly, such
statutes do not authorize the deferral or withholding of such approvals in
§ 58-6 BINGO § 60-3
52:109
the event such expenses are not paid to the Town. It is the expressed intent
of the Town Board to change and supersede Town Law §§ 64(17-a), 264, 265,
267, 267-a, 267-b, 274-a, 274-b, 276, 277, 278, and 280-a to empower the
Town to require such payment as part of the approval process.
§ 60-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, limited liability company or organization of any kind who or
which requests the Town Board, the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Appeals, to approve a land use application or take other action to advance a
proposed land use development project within the Town.
CONSULTANT or EXPERT — Any consultant or professional, including,
but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, accountants, financial advisors,
architects, surveyors, retained by the Town for any purpose authorized
pursuant to this chapter.
LAND USE APPLICATION — An application for subdivision approval, site
plan approval, area variance, use variance, special use permit, or any
similar approval issued pursuant to the Code of the Town of West Seneca,
as amended, and any additional review for those as needed to comply
with any other applicable state or local law, including, but not limited to,
the New York Town Law, General Municipal Law, Highway Law, Municipal
Home Rule Law, Local Finance Law and the State Environmental Quality
Review Act, Environmental Conservation Law Article 8, and any regulations
adopted pursuant to such laws.
TOWN — The Town of West Seneca.
§ 60-5. Retention of experts; reimbursement by applicant.
A. The Town may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the
Town in reviewing a land use application or proposed development
plan.
B. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 120, Zoning, Article IIIB, of
the Code of the Town of West Seneca with respect to applications for
special permits for telecommunications facilities, if, prior to the
completion of a review of a land use application or development
proposal, the Town discovers the need to retain consultant and/or
expert services, the applicant shall deposit with the Town funds in an
amount determined by the Town to be sufficient to reimburse the Town
for the reasonable costs of consultation and/or evaluation in connection
with review of the application. The Town will maintain a separate
escrow account for such funds.
C. Upon receipt of such funds, the Town Clerk shall cause the money to be
placed in an account in the name of the Town and shall keep a separate
§ 60-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 60-5
52:110
§ 60-6. Exceptions.
record of all money so deposited and the name of the applicant and the
project for which the sums were deposited.
D. The Town's consultants and experts shall invoice the Town for services
rendered in reviewing the application. The Town shall furnish a copy of
each invoice received to the applicant upon receipt of the invoice by the
Town.
E. The Town shall review and audit all invoices received and shall approve
payment only of such fees as are reasonable in amount and necessarily
incurred by the Town in connection with a review of a land use
application. For purposes of this chapter, a fee is reasonable in amount
if it bears a reasonable relationship to the average charge by such an
expert to the Town or others for services performed in connection with
the review of a project similar to that involved in the land use
application. In this regard, the Town may take into consideration the
size and type of project involved in the land use application and any
special conditions or considerations as the Town may deem relevant in
connection with review of the particular land use application.
F. Contracts for the retention of experts shall be let pursuant to the
purchasing policy of the Town of West Seneca unless the contract is one
that must be competitively bid.
G. After payment of all outstanding invoices, any funds held by the Town
upon completion of a review of a land use application shall be returned
to the applicant.
A. The following developments are hereby exempt from the application of
this chapter:
(1) Any development of land of one acre or less abutting an existing
public highway.
(2) Any subdivision of land into four or fewer lots abutting an existing
public highway.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, an
applicant or developer shall not be required to reimburse the Town for
any part of a fee incurred by the Town for services performed in
connection with matters, including but not limited to those resulting
from complaints by third parties, as to which the Town determines the
applicant had no responsibility or were beyond the reasonable control
of the applicant.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the negotiation of alternative fee
agreements with any consultant or expert containing different terms
than those contained herein, including without limitation, the timing
and amount of payment, whether such different terms are between the
consultant or expert and the Town or the consultant or expert and the
§ 60-5 BINGO § 60-6
52:111
§ 60-7. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any persons is adjudged invalid, the adjudication shall not affect other
sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof that can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses or provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
Chapter 62
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trespassing — See Ch. 112.
§ 62-1. Purpose and applicability.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined
and shall be construed as hereinafter set out unless it shall be apparent
from the context that a different meaning is intended:
COMPETENT PERSON — A person of sufficient age and physical strength
to be able to restrain the dog within his or her control in the event that said
dog attempts to escape or attack another dog or person.
DOG — Any dog of either sex or any age.
IDENTIFICATION TAG — A tag issued by the Town Clerk which sets forth
the identification number together with the name of the Town and state,
applicant. In the event that such alternative agreement is entered into,
the terms of this chapter shall not apply.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of West Seneca by
providing for:
(1) The licensing and identification of dogs;
(2) The control and protection of the dog population;
(3) The protection of the persons, property, domestic animals and deer
from dog attacks and damage; and
(4) The control of noise by dogs.
B. Applicability. This chapter shall apply to the entire Town of West
Seneca.
§ 60-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 62-2
52:112
the telephone number of the Town Clerk, and any other information deemed
necessary by the Town Clerk.
IMPOUNDED — Having been received into custody of the town police or
any other authorized agent or representative or employee of the town.
OWNER — Any person who harbors or keeps any dog or other animal.
OWNER OF RECORD — The person in whose name a dog was last licensed
pursuant to this chapter.
RESIDENT — An individual who maintains a residence within the Town of
West Seneca.
§ 62-3. Running at large prohibited.
No dog shall be permitted at any time to be on any street or in any
public park or public place or public building or upon any unfenced lot
or area, be it the premises of the owner or another, in the Town of West
Seneca unless effectively muzzled or restrained by a hand chain or hand
leash not exceeding eight feet in length and in the charge and under the
control of a competent person or on a chain or leash or wire of any length;
provided, however, that said dog on said chain, leash or wire cannot leave
the property of the owner, it being the intention that the dog may run freely
upon the owner's property, controlled either by a fence or chain, leash or
wire.
§ 62-4. Nuisances prohibited; disposal of feces.
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking or in charge of any dog
shall cause or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any sidewalk, gutter, street, play area, park or other public
area or on any private property without the permission of the owner of
such property.
(1) Feces shall be picked up with a scoop, shovel, broom, tong, plastic
bag or similar implement and shall be placed directly in an airtight
container, plastic or otherwise, and then deposited in a container
used for the disposal of refuse.
(2) In no event shall any feces be deposited in any storm sewer or
drainage ditch.
B. Exclusion. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog,
hearing dog or service dog accompanying any person with a disability.
C. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by
members of the Police Department, Highway Department, or any other
town agent or employee hereafter designated by the Town Board for
that purpose.
§ 62-2 BINGO § 62-5
52:113
§ 62-5. Seizure of dogs at large.
Any dog found running loose or at large, contrary to the provisions of § 62-3
of this chapter, within the limits of the Town of West Seneca, shall be subject
to seizure by any police officer, Highway Department employees, or any
other Town authority or employee designated for the purpose of seizing and
impounding such dogs.
§ 62-6. Redemption of dogs seized; fees.
§ 62-7. Disposal of unredeemed dogs.
If any dog so impounded is not redeemed as provided in this chapter, the
Police Department, keeper of said dog, Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals, or Town employee designated for the purpose of seizing such
dog may order the destruction of such animal, provided that if said dog is
A. Redemption period; costs of seizure.
(1) Each unidentified dog, licensed or not, must be held for a period of
three days from the date of seizure. Each identified dog where
notification to the owner has been provided personally must be
held for a period of three days from the date of the seizure. A day is
defined as a twenty-four-hour period from 12:00 midnight to 12:00
midnight. The tedemption period starts after 12:00 midnight
following the day of seizure. If the shelter is closed on the last day
of the redemption period, the redemption period is extended one
more day to give the owner the opportunity to redeem his or her
dog. The owner of a dog seized not bearing a license tag may
redeem the dog by producing to the person seizing the dog a
license for the dog and by paying to the Town Clerk of the Town of
West Seneca fees as may be established by the Town Board of the
Town of West Seneca. [Amended 10-22-2018 by L.L. No.
4-2018]
(2) The owner shall pay additional fees as may be established by the
Town Board of the Town of West Seneca for each day after 24 hours
of seizing and impounding for the keeping, feeding and caring for
such dog while in custody.
B. If said dog so seized bears a license tag, the officer or person
designated above in § 62-4 shall ascertain the owner of the dog and
shall give immediate notice by personally serving such owner or a
member of his or her family at least 18 years of age with a notice, in
writing, stating that the dog has been seized and will be destroyed
unless redeemed within the period hereinafter provided.
C. The owner of a dog seized bearing a license tag may redeem the dog
within 12 days by paying to the Town Clerk of the Town of West Seneca
the sums as may be established by the Town Board of the Town of West
Seneca.
§ 62-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 62-7
52:114
not claimed or redeemed by its lawful owner or his duly authorized agent,
then the keeper may deliver said dog to a responsible or proper person upon
the payment of the impounding fee and four days' keep and the production
of a license for the said dog.
§ 62-8. Hours of operation of pound.
The pound of the Town shall be kept open to the public for the transaction
of business from 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. on all days other than Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays, or any additional hours designated by
resolution of the Town Board.
§ 62-9. Records of seizures and redemptions.
The keeper of the dog or other person in charge of such pound shall keep
a record of each animal impounded, a description of the animal, the date
of receipt of such animal and the date and manner of its disposal and, if
redeemed, the name of the person by whom redeemed, the address of such
person and the amounts of all fees received or collected for or because of
the impounding, together with the number of tags and the number of and
date of any license exhibited upon the redemption of such animal.
§ 62-10. Dog licensing, identification, fees and surcharges.
A. Licensing of dogs. All dogs within the Town of West Seneca being four
months of age or older shall be licensed by the Town Clerk's office. The
owner of each dog required to be licensed shall obtain a dog license
from the Town Clerk's office and pay any license fee, applicable license
surcharge and any such additional fee as may be established by the
Town Board of the Town of West Seneca. Each license application shall
be accompanied by proof that the dog has been vaccinated against
rabies or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that such vaccination
would endanger the dog's life, in which case vaccination shall not be
required. Each license shall be valid for a period of one year and shall
not be transferred.
B. Exemptions. Exempted from payment of the license fee are any guide,
hearing, service, war, working search, detection, police and therapy
dogs. The person owning, possessing or harboring such a dog bears the
burden of demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Town Clerk that the
dog is a service dog and exempt from licensing.
C. License fees and surcharges.
(1) License fees and surcharges under this chapter shall be prescribed
from time to time by the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca by
resolution.
(2) In the event that an owner of a dog which is licensed by another
municipality in New York State moves into the Town of West
Seneca, he/she must obtain an identification tag from the Town
§ 62-7 BINGO § 62-10
52:115
§ 62-11. Fee for disposal of dog at request of dog owner.
The owner or duly authorized agent of a dog who requests that the Town of
West Seneca pick up and dispose of such dog, whether dead or alive, shall
pay any such fee as may be established by the Town Board of the Town of
West Seneca.
§ 62-12. Penalties for offenses; severability.
Chapter 63
DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 102A.
Subdivison of land — See Ch. 103.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
Clerk's office. In such instance, there will be no additional fee
owing to the Town of West Seneca until such time as the license
from the other municipality expires.
D. Identification of dogs. Each dog licensed by the Town of West Seneca
shall be assigned, at the time the dog is first licensed, a municipal
identification number. Such identification number shall be carried by
the dog or an identification tag which shall be affixed to a collar on the
dog at all times.
A. Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an
offense against this chapter or any section or provision thereof is guilty
of a violation punishable by a fine not less than $25 and not exceeding
$250 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days for each
such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For a second or
subsequent offense committed within one year of the first offense, there
shall be a minimum fine of not less than $50 and not exceeding $250.
Said fine or period of imprisonment shall be in addition to any
redemption fees herein provided.
B. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or other part of
this chapter shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter, and
it shall be construed to have been the legislative intent to enact this
chapter without such unconstitutional or invalid parts therein.
§ 62-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 63-1
52:116
§ 63-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of residents
of the Town of West Seneca from hazards arising from the use of land
for dumps and dumping and to prevent the destruction or loss of value to
property which may be caused by changes in the natural flow of surface
waters when low property is filled in.
§ 63-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 63-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed or retained Code
Enforcement Officer for the Town of West Seneca or those individuals
properly designated as his agents.
CURRENT SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land having a map on file with
Erie County less than 10 years.
DUMPING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
allowing the placement of suitable fill on any land in Town.
ELEVATION — The relative height of the ground surface above sea level.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice engineering
in the State of New York.
PROFESSIONAL LAND SURVEYOR — A person licensed to practice land
surveying in the State of New York.
SITE/DRAINAGE PLAN — A drawing of a parcel of land, surveyed by a
professional land surveyor and designed by a professional engineer, that
shows the existing and proposed ground elevations, contours, all existing
utilities and other topographical information deemed necessary by the Code
Enforcement Officer (Building Inspector) to ensure proper drainage of that
parcel of land.
SUITABLE FILL — Any inorganic soil material whose composition is suitable
for use in embankment construction, including broken rock, concrete,
asphalt or mixtures thereof, and any other materials deemed suitable by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
TOWN ENGINEER — The duly appointed or retained professional engineer
for the Town of West Seneca.
A. The dumping of any unsuitable fill on any land is hereby prohibited.
B. The use of any land for the purpose of dumping unsuitable fill is hereby
prohibited.
C. The dumping of suitable fill on any land without an approved site/
drainage plan is hereby prohibited.
§ 63-1 BINGO § 63-3
52:117
UNSUITABLE FILL — Any material containing vegetable or organic matter,
such as muck, peat, organic silt, topsoil, sod and certain man-made deposits
of industrial waste, toxic or contaminated materials, sludge, landfill and any
other materials deemed unsuitable by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 63-4. Site/drainage plan and dumping permit required.
§ 63-5. Bond or certified check required.
To insure that any land which was regraded or filled with suitable fill
conforms to the approved site/drainage plan, the person, firm, organization
or corporation must post a bond in the amount of $1,000, or provide a
certified check in the amount of $500, at the time the dumping permit is
A. Any person, firm, organization or corporation intending to dump
suitable fill within the Town of West Seneca must first submit a dumping
permit application with three copies of a required site/drainage plan
stamped by a professional engineer to the Town of West Seneca
Building Department for approval. Once the site/drainage plan has
been approved by the Code Enforcement Officer and Town Engineer, a
dumping permit will be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Any person, firm, organization or corporation intending to advertise or
allow advertisement by sign or otherwise for the dumping of suitable fill
within the Town of West Seneca, on land owned by said person, firm,
organization or corporation must first submit a dumping permit
application with three copies of the required site/drainage plan
stamped by a professional engineer to the Town of West Seneca
Building Department for approval. Once the site/drainage plan has
been approved by the Code Enforcement Officer and Town Engineer, a
dumping permit will be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Any person, firm, organization or corporation intending to change the
grade of any existing land within the Town of West Seneca must first
submit a dumping permit application with three copies of the required
site/drainage plan stamped by a professional engineer to the Town of
West Seneca Building Department for approval, unless the land is part
of a current subdivision. Once the site/drainage plan is approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer and Town Engineer, a dumping permit will be
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
D. A dumping permit issued to any of the above is sufficient compliance.
This section does not apply to land being developed as part of a current
subdivision.
E. A nonrefundable fee of $500 shall accompany each application for a
suitable fill dumping permit.
F. The dumping permit shall be valid from the date of issuance to
December 31 of that same calendar year. A maximum one-year
extension may be granted for an additional nonrefundable fee of $500.
§ 63-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 63-5
52:118
issued. The bond or certified check shall only be released after the Town
Engineer, or his representative, certifies that the filling operation conforms
to the approved plan, is not impacting adjoining properties and the land was
satisfactorily relandscaped. Make certified check payable to: The Town of
West Seneca.
§ 63-6. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter and shall make inspections to ensure compliance
with same.
§ 63-7. Cessation of use.
The present use of any land in violation of this chapter shall cease within
three months from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 63-8. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to municipal or other governmental projects
approved by the Town of West Seneca or to those persons, firms,
organizations or corporations holding valid building permits requiring
suitable fill.
§ 63-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm, organization or corporation that violates the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and be liable for a fine of up to
$500 for each such offense. Each day the offense continues shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 63-10. Severability.
If any section or part thereof of this chapter shall be determined to be void,
unconstitutional or invalid by a proper court of law, such determination shall
not be deemed to affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof.
§ 63-11. Repealer.
The Dumping Ordinance of the Town of West Seneca, adopted by the
Town Board on September 9, 1974, and all amendments thereto, is hereby
repealed.
§ 63-12. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective upon its filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 63-5 BINGO § 63-12
52:119
Chapter 65
ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 57.
Fees — See Ch. 72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 75.
Licensing of plumbers — See Ch. 90.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
§ 65-1. Electrical inspector and assistants; fees.
§ 65-2. Duties of inspector.
A. The supervising Code Enforcement Officer and any deputy thereof shall
be authorized to make inspections and reinspections of all electrical
installations heretofore and hereafter described and to approve or
disapprove the same.
B. The supervising Code Enforcement Officer shall annually propose a fee
schedule for any inspections required pursuant to this chapter, which
schedule shall be subject to approval by the Town Board.
A. It shall be the duty of the inspector to report in writing to the Code
Enforcement Officer, whose duty it shall be to enforce all provisions of
this chapter, all violations or deviations from or omissions of the
electrical provisions of the Building Code applicable to the Town of
West Seneca and of all local laws, ordinances and the Building Code as
referred to in this chapter insofar as any of the same apply to electrical
wiring. The inspector shall make inspections and reinspections of
electrical installations in and on properties in the Town of West Seneca
upon the written request of an authorized official of the Town of West
Seneca or as herein provided. The inspector is authorized to make
inspections and reinspections of electrical wiring, installations, devices,
appliances and equipment in or on properties within the Town of West
Seneca where he deems it necessary for the protection of life and
property. In the event of an emergency, it is the duty of the inspector to
make electrical inspections upon the oral request of an official or officer
of the Town of West Seneca.
B. It shall be the duty of the inspector to furnish written reports to the
proper officials of the Town of West Seneca and owners and/or lessees
of property where defective electrical installations and equipment are
found upon inspection. He shall authorize the issuing of a certificate of
compliance when electrical installations and equipment are in
conformity with this chapter. He shall direct that a copy of the
§ 63-12 WEST SENECA CODE § 65-2
52:120
§ 65-3. Violations enumerated.
§ 65-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this chapter or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 15 days, for each such offense, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
Chapter 66
ELECTRICAL LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 65.
certificate of compliance be sent to the Town of West Seneca to the
attention of the supervising Code Enforcement Officer.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to install or cause to be installed or to alter electrical wiring for light,
heat or power in or on properties of the Town of West Seneca until an
application has been filed with the Town Code Enforcement Office.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation
to connect or cause to be connected electrical wiring in or on properties
for light, heat or power to any source of electrical energy supply prior
to the issuance of a temporary certificate or a certificate of compliance
by the Town Code Enforcement Office.
§ 65-2 BINGO § 65-4
52:121

ARTICLE I
Electrician Licensing and Exemptions; Fees
§ 66-1. License required.
§ 66-2. Form of license.
The license shall be printed on a form determined by the Town Clerk. Said
form shall contain the date of issuance, the license number, the fee paid
and the name of the person licensed. All licenses shall expire on December
31 following the date of issuance. All licenses shall be signed by the Town
Clerk.
§ 66-3. Application for license.
§ 66-4. Conditions for issuance of license.
The Town Clerk shall issue a license authorizing said applicant to conduct
such business in the Town of West Seneca upon having been satisfied that
the applicant has met the following conditions:
A. No person, firm or corporation shall do any electrical work on any
premises in the Town of West Seneca as a contractor or subcontractor
unless licensed as a master electrician or residential electrician in the
manner provided by this chapter.
(1) A licensed master electrician shall be authorized to perform
electrical work subject to the New York State Codes.
(2) A licensed residential electrician shall be authorized to perform
electrical work subject to the Residential Code of New York State.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall desire a license to conduct
electrical work in the Town of West Seneca shall apply in person, or, in
the case of a corporation or limited liability company, by a duly
authorized individual, at the office of the Town Clerk and register its
name and address with the Town Clerk upon application forms provided
by the Town Clerk.
B. Said application shall contain the name, age and address of the
applicant, a statement of the kind of work the applicant has been
engaged in for the past five years, together with the names of
employers and locations of various projects that he has worked upon,
and a statement of the experience and qualifications of the applicant in
doing some electrical work, together with such other information that
the Town Clerk, Town Board and Board of Electrician Examiners shall
deem desirable.
A. Obtaining certificate. A certificate from the Board of Electrician
Examiners stating that such person has satisfactorily passed the
examination held by said Board for such license and upon receipt of the
license fee.
§ 66-1 BINGO § 66-4
52:123
B. Proof of financial responsibility. The applicant shall file with the Town
Clerk certificates of insurance naming the Town of West Seneca and
protecting the same to the extent of the following limits: $1,000,000 for
each occurrence for bodily injury liability; and $500,000 for each
occurrence of property damage liability.
C. The annual fee for a license shall be set by the Town Board pursuant to
adoption of an annual fee schedule. [Amended 1-25-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
D. Upon the adoption of this licensing requirement for electricians, any
electrician who produces a valid electrician's license from another
municipality within New York State shall be deemed to be qualified as a
licensed electrician within the Town and shall be provided with a
license as either a master electrician or a residential electrician as
determined by the Senior Code Enforcement Officer and the Electrical
Inspector of the Town. Any appeal of this determination shall be made
in writing to the Board of Electrician Examiners. The determination of
the Board of Electrician Examiners shall be final. Licenses from other
municipalities shall be considered acceptable only if the license is
based upon a written examination.
E. The applicant for examination for qualification as a master electrician
shall have a minimum of two years' experience of active engagement in
the trade or business of electrical work.
F. The applicant for examination for qualification as a residential
electrician shall have a minimum of one year's experience of active
engagement in the trade or business of residential electrical work.
Proof of satisfactory experience shall be submitted to the Board of
Electrician Examiners before being admitted to the examination.
G. Each person holding a valid certificate of competency or license as a
master electrician or residential electrician shall register with the Town
Clerk each year prior to January 31 by securing a master electrician or
residential electrician license. The fee for a renewal shall be increased
by $25 if renewed subsequent to January 31.
H. The requirements for licensing of a master electrician or a residential
electrician shall not be applicable to electrical work in the following
exempt categories:
(1) Work being performed by the owner-occupant of a single- or twofamily
dwelling unit or a townhouse regulated by the Residential
Code of New York State.
(2) Heating, ventilating or air-conditioning (HVAC) systems limited to
branch circuit wiring only.
(3) Low-voltage wiring associated with:
(a) Circuits operating at 50 volts or less.
§ 66-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 66-4
52:124
(b) Fire alarm systems.
(c) Fiber optic systems.
(d) Communication circuits.
(e) Class 1, 2, and 3 remote control, signaling and power-limited
circuits as regulated by Section 725 of the National Electrical
Code (NEC).
§ 66-4 BINGO § 66-4
52:125

ARTICLE II
Board of Electrician Examiners
§ 66-5. Establishment.
The Board of Electrician Examiners, heretofore established, shall consist
of four members: the Senior Code Enforcement Officer, the Electrical
Inspector of the Town, and two persons who have been actively engaged in
the electrical business for at least 10 years preceding their membership in
such Electricians Board. The last two members shall be appointed by the
Town Supervisor. The last two members shall be residents of the Town of
West Seneca and shall have terms of office for two years. The term of office
of the first two members shall be permanent while they are employed by the
Town. The last two members shall serve as volunteers and shall receive no
compensation as Electricians Board members.
§ 66-6. Powers.
The Board of Electrician Examiners shall have jurisdiction and examination
authority over all persons desiring or intending to engage in the trade,
business or calling of electrical contracting or construction in the Town,
with the power to examine and certify persons applying for certificates of
competency as a master electrician or a residential electrician to determine
their fitness and qualification for acting as such and to issue certificates
of competency to all such persons who shall have satisfactorily passed
examinations before such Board and shall be by it deemed qualified for such
certificate.
§ 66-7. Examinations; fees.
A. The Board shall hold examinations annually to examine persons
applying for such certificates of competency. The entrance fee for
applicants to be certified as a master electrician or residential
electrician shall be $100. A double fee shall be charged if there is only
one applicant for any given examination.
B. Before an applicant shall be admitted to a regular scheduled
examination, he shall file his application therefor, in writing, with the
Town at least 30 days before the examination date and shall pay to the
Clerk the required examination fee.
C. The Town, at least 10 days prior to the examination, shall publish in the
Town newspaper a notice of the date and place where each regular
scheduled examination shall be held.
§ 66-5 BINGO § 66-7
52:127

ARTICLE III
License Restrictions
§ 66-8. Restrictions.
A. No person, firm or corporation holding a license provided for in this
chapter shall allow the use of his, her or its name or license by any
unlicensed person, firm or corporation.
B. Any person, firm or corporation doing work regulated under this
chapter shall exhibit his, her or its license upon request to any peace
officer, Town Board member, member of the Board of Electrician
Examiners, Code Enforcement Officer, or their representative.
C. The dissolution of a firm or corporation shall operate as a cancellation
of the license of such firm or corporation.
D. Licenses shall not be transferable.
E. The Board of Electrician Examiners may revoke any license issued
pursuant to this chapter or suspend it for such term as it may deem
proper if it finds that the holder thereof, if a person, or a member,
officer, agent or employee, if the holder is a firm or corporation, has
violated any provision of this chapter or has made a false statement in
connection with a material fact in an application for any license
required under this chapter. The Board having jurisdiction may further
revoke any such license if it finds that the holder is performing
unacceptable workmanship of the trade licensed. The Board having
jurisdiction may take the foregoing action at any regular meeting
thereof or at a special meeting called for that purpose. The holder of the
license shall be given notice, in writing, setting forth the charge and the
date, time and place of the hearing. The notice shall either be served
personally upon the holder not less than five days prior to the meeting
or hearing at which the charge is to be heard or shall be mailed to the
holder of the license at the last known address thereof at least 10 days
prior thereto. The Board having jurisdiction may adopt such general
rules and regulations for the conduct of such hearings as it shall deem
appropriate. A majority vote of the Board having jurisdiction shall be
required to either revoke or suspend a license. Action taken by the
Board having jurisdiction either to revoke or suspend a license shall be
in addition to any other punishment authorized by this chapter or other
provision of law.
§ 66-8 BINGO § 66-8
52:129
Chapter 67
(RESERVED)
Chapter 68
EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 10.
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Environmental quality review — See Ch. 67.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 70.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 92.
Public improvement construction — See Ch.
93.
Sewers — See Ch. 97.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 106.
§ 66-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 66-8
68:130
ARTICLE I
Regulations, Permits and Fees
[Adopted 12-10-1956]
§ 68-1. Declaration of policy. [Amended 9-12-1994]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town Board to provide for
the proper use of land to prevent all manner of excavations which create
pits, holes or hollows in the earth, leaving it in a hazardous or dangerous
state, or cause soil erosion which depletes the land of its natural vegetative
cover and supply of organic material, renders such land unproductive and
unsuitable for agricultural purposes and undesirable for building homes,
resulting in lower land values. By this Article, the Town Board seeks to
remove the danger to health and life caused by deep excavations remaining
in the ground, the stripping of topsoil and removal of existing or natural
land surfaces thereby resulting in damage to agricultural crops through
dust storms in dry weather, by exposure of the bare earth to wind action
and in wet periods by pools of water, which Article will promote the safety,
health and general welfare of the people of the town.
§ 68-2. Scope.
No excavation for purposes other than the construction of a wall, driveway,
sidewalk, building or part thereof or as permitted by § 68-10 of this Article
shall be commenced except in conformity with the provisions of this Article.
§ 68-3. Application for permit. [Amended 9-10-1973; 9-12-1994]
Before any excavation for purposes other than the construction of a wall,
driveway, sidewalk, building or part thereof, farming or a public use is
commenced and topsoil, earth, sand, gravel, rock or other substance is
removed from the ground, the owner, lessee or agent of the premises shall
obtain a written permit therefor from the Town Board, except that where
operations are being carried on at the time this Article becomes effective, a
period of 30 days shall be allowed for obtaining a permit before operations
continue. However, all such excavations shall be subject to all provisions of
this Article from the date of its adoption. For that purpose, each applicant
shall file with the Town Clerk of the Town of West Seneca, New York, a
verified application for such permit, containing a detailed statement of the
proposed work, together with a plan prepared by a duly licensed engineer
or land surveyor of the State of New York, setting forth in detail the
following information:
A. All information as required on the application form prepared by the
Town Board, including a detailed statement of the proposed work and a
three-dimensional sketch of the proposed excavation and exact
condition of the plot or premises before the work is commenced and
proposed condition of said plot or premises after the work is completed.
§ 68-1 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 68-3
68:131
§ 68-4. Notice and hearing regarding application. [Added 7-8-1957;
amended 9-10-1973]
(1) The plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
100 feet and set forth all streets adjoining the property, the location
and dimensions of the premises upon which it is proposed to
excavate, the location, size and use of any buildings, cross section
of the property, giving elevations thereof at intervals of fifty-foot
squares and also at each break in the grades, and the elevation of
the premises as compared to the elevation of any abutting
highways.
(2) For areas where only topsoil is to be removed, the plan shall show
the provisions that have been made for draining or otherwise
preventing the collection of water on any portion of said plot which
is not restored to original grade.
(3) The owner is to provide an environmental study addressing air
pollution, noise pollution, visible site pollution and results in safety
to local residents.
B. A duly acknowledged consent in writing of the owner or lessee of the
premises and mortgagee, if any, including his or their addresses.
C. Receipted tax bills or a certificate from the Receiver of Taxes of the
Town of West Seneca and the County Treasurer of Erie County, showing
payment of all taxes and assessments to date against the property
described in the application.
D. A certificate signed by the Superintendent of Highways and the Town
Engineer of the Town of West Seneca that such proposed excavation
and the finished grades of said property as shown on said map will not
interfere with the drainage of or endanger any road, street or highway
of the State of New York, the County of Erie or in the Town of West
Seneca or other property of said state, county or town.
A. Except when the application for a permit for topsoil removal is for the
purpose of grading the land to be in conformity with the surrounding
area, upon compliance by the applicant with the provision of § 68-3, the
Town Board shall, by notice published in the official newspaper of the
Town of West Seneca, advertise a public hearing, at which time all
persons shall be heard.
B. The person or persons or corporation seeking the permit shall give
written notice specifying the location and nature of the proposed
excavation, the time, date and location of the proposed hearing, to all
property owners as shown on the latest assessment roll whose property
is located in whole or in part within a distance of 500 feet from any
boundary of the premises on which the proposed permit would be
exercised, and shall file with the Town Clerk at least five days prior to
the public hearing an affidavit setting forth that such notice was given
§ 68-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 68-4
68:132
§ 68-5. Sandbanks and pits.
§ 68-6. Topsoil stripping and removal.
No stripping or removal of topsoil shall be made within 10 feet of any
property line, and upon completion of the work the premises, if below
grade, shall be graded to the level of the abutting highway or the original
grade if the same was below the level of the highway. Dustdown or its equal
shall be spread to prevent dust from flying, and there shall be left upon the
surface of the land from which topsoil is removed not less than five inches
of topsoil. All areas from which topsoil is removed shall, during the period
between April 1 and May 15 or August 15 and October 1, be prepared into
a loose, level seedbed, limed, fertilized and seeded in the following steps:
by registered mail, naming the names and addresses of the persons
notified. Notices of the proposed hearing must be mailed not less than
10 nor more than 20 days prior to the date of the hearing.
C. The requirements of this Article must be fulfilled by applicants for new
permits as well as applicants for renewal of existing permits or permits
granted in prior years.
A. No sandbanks and gravel pits shall be operated and no pit excavations
shall be made:
(1) Within 20 feet of any property line; however, the Town Board may,
within its discretion, allow excavations closer than 20 feet to any
property line, provided that the applicant submits to the Town
Board a duly acknowledged consent in writing of the owner, lessee
and mortgagee, if any, of the adjoining property affected,
consenting to such excavation and stating the distance agreed
upon between the parties.
(2) Within 100 feet of the edge of any highway right-of-way line.
B. Said excavations shall be leveled on the bottom by refilling or grading,
if necessary, all sides being left with a slope from top to bottom of one
and one-half (1 1/2) feet horizontal for each one foot of drop; provided,
that where the material being removed is rock, in lieu of sloping all
sides of the excavation as hereinbefore provided, a permanent fence or
barricade designed to effectively prohibit access to the excavation may
be erected on all sides bordering streets, highways and neighboring
properties, and at the conclusion of operations a permanent fence or
barricade must be erected and maintained on all sides of such
excavation; and further provided that where the pit or excavation is
below the water level, leaving an artificial lake or pond or an
accumulation of water in excess of two feet in depth, a permanent fence
or barricade must be erected and maintained on all sides of such lake,
pond or accumulation.
A. Apply ground limestone at the rate of three tons per acre.
§ 68-4 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 68-6
68:133
§ 68-6.1. Earth removal and excavation. [Added 9-12-1994]
No removal of earth from the existing or natural land surface shall be
allowed without obtaining a permit as herein set forth.
§ 68-7. Bond or cash deposit.
B. Apply 5-10-10 fertilizer at the rate of 600 pounds per acre.
C. Disk area to work limestone and fertilizer into the soil to a depth of at
least three inches.
D. Smooth area with a smoothing harrow.
E. Sow the following seed mixture at the rate of 24 pounds per acre:
Seed Pounds
New York State broadleaf trefoil 7
Timothy 5
Kentucky bluegrass 2
Rye grass 10
24
F. Brush in seed lightly.
G. Roll firm with ground roller.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any site work in conjunction
with development, including but not limited to stripping, grading, earth
moving or filling, without securing a permit.
B. No person shall pave, fill, strip or change the existing grade of any land
nor shall any person disturb, modify, block, divert or affect the natural
overland or subsurface flow of stormwater nor shall any person
reconstruct, erect or install any dam, ditch, culvert, drainpipe, bridge
or other structure or obstruction affecting the drainage of any
premises.
A. Before the issuance of a permit for a sandbank, gravel pit or a pit
excavation, the applicant and the owner of record of the premises shall
execute and file with the Town Clerk a bond, approved by the Town
Board of the Town of West Seneca in an amount to be fixed by said
Board, but not less than $2,000 for topsoil removal nor less than
$15,000 for all others, with a surety company as surety and conditioned
in this Article, the observance of all state, county and municipal
ordinances and laws and the indemnification of the Town of West
Seneca and/or the Superintendent of Highways for any damage to town
property. In the event of a default, such bond shall be forfeited to the
Town of West Seneca. [Amended 9-12-1994]
§ 68-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 68-7
68:134
§ 68-8. Fees.
The Town Clerk, when authorized to do so by the Town Board, shall issue
permits and shall charge and collect for each such permit:
§ 68-9. Expiration of permits. [Amended 9-12-1994]
Permit for sandbanks, gravel pits, pits and excavations and topsoil removal
shall expire by limitation one year from the date of issuance unless extended
by the Town Board. No permit or permits shall be granted for removal
of more than four acres of topsoil from any one tract of land until full
compliance with this article is made under any existing permit for the same
tract, except for the preparation of the ground and seeding as provided in
§ 68-6 hereof.
§ 68-10. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this article shall require a person to obtain a permit
for or prevent a person from removing topsoil from one part of his lands
B. Said bond shall remain in full force and effect until a certificate of
completion has been issued by the Town Board, certifying to the fact
that all provisions of this Article and conditions of the permit have been
fully complied with. Application for such certificate shall be made by
the permittee, owner, lessee or his agent on forms provided by the Town
of West Seneca and shall be accompanied by a map drawn to scale
showing a cross section of the affected property, giving elevations
thereof as provided in § 68-3A(1) of this Article, prepared by a duly
licensed engineer or land surveyor of the State of New York after the
completion of operations, who shall also certify that there is not less
than five inches of topsoil remaining upon the ground from which
topsoil has been removed and that such area has been seeded in
compliance with § 68-6 hereof.
C. In lieu of such bond a cash deposit or deposit of negotiable securities
may be made with the Supervisor of the Town of West Seneca.
A. Sandbank and gravel pits, pits and excavations. A minimum fee of $50
for any pit operation not exceeding 500 cubic yards per year. A
minimum fee of $200 for an excavation volume of over 500 cubic yards
per year and not to exceed 20,000 cubic yards. For excavations
exceeding 20,000 cubic yards, the minimum fee shall be $200 plus
$0.01 for each additional cubic yard or fraction thereof. In lieu of said
one-cent fee for each additional cubic yard or fraction thereof, the
applicant may pay annually to the Town of West Seneca the sum of
$1,000 (together with the minimum fee of $200), which payment shall
be made on the 15th day of May of the calendar year. [Amended
9-12-1994]
B. Topsoil removal. Fifty cents per cubic yard, with a minimum fee of $100.
[Amended 5-10-1999]
§ 68-7 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 68-10
68:135
to another part of the same premises when such removal is necessary as
an accessory use or is made for the purpose of farming or improving said
property.
§ 68-11. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-6-1974]
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this article or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 15 days for each such offense, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 68-12. Variances.
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of this article, the Town Board shall have
the power to vary and modify the application of such article so that the
spirit of the article shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and
substantial justice done.
§ 68-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 68-12
68:136
ARTICLE II
Filling of Excavations
[Adopted 5-1-1967]
§ 68-13. Procedure.
Upon the direction of the Town Board, the Superintendent of Highways
of the Town of West Seneca is hereby authorized and directed to fill in
excavated lands and property if, after a hearing, the existence of such lands
and property is deemed by the Town Board to constitute a hazard to public
safety and if, after giving 30 days' notice by registered mail addressed to
the owner of record of such lands and property at the address shown on the
last preceding assessment roll, such excavated lands and property are not
filled in by or on behalf of such owner.
§ 68-14. Costs.
The cost incurred by the town in carrying out the terms of this article
shall be assessed against such lands and property in accordance with the
provisions of § 157 of the Highway Law.
§ 68-13 EXCAVATIONS AND TOPSOIL REMOVAL § 68-14
68:137
Chapter 70
EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Public improvement construction — See Ch.
93.
Sewers — See Ch. 97.
§ 70-1. Permit required.
No person or corporation shall open or cause to be opened by cutting or
digging the surface or soil in any street, highway or public ground for any
purpose whatever without first securing the written permit from the Town
Clerk on forms to which has been affixed the approval and consent of the
Town Superintendent of Highways, and paying the following prescribed
fees therefor, or without complying with the following provisions relating
thereto.
§ 70-2. Fees and deposits.
§ 70-3. Restoration procedures.
All openings shall be carefully backfilled, tamped and puddled by the owner,
after which the surface of the street will be restored. The deposit will be
retained until the frost has left the ground the following spring, which will
usually be understood to be by May 1. Any repairs or other restoration
which may be necessary will be promptly made by the town and paid for out
of the balance of the deposit then on hand, and any balance then remaining
shall be returned to the person in whose name the permit was originally
issued.
A. The fees for the street openings not exceeding ten (10) square feet in
area are fixed as follows: fifty dollars ($50) to cover the cost of issuing
the permit, records, inspection and supervision, plus a deposit of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.), or such amount as hereafter
established by resolution of the Town Board. [Amended 8-6-1984]
B. Where openings are expected to exceed ten (10) square feet in area, the
cost of restoring the surface will be estimated by the Town
Superintendent of Highways, and a deposit of twice the amount so
estimated, in addition to the fee of fifty dollars ($50.), will be required,
but in no event shall the deposit be less than that specified in the
preceding subsection. Following proper restoration, the deposit shall be
returned to the applicant.
§ 68-14 WEST SENECA CODE § 70-4
70:138
§ 70-4. Permit for public service corporations.
Public utility corporations and other governmental agencies shall obtain a
separate permit from the Town Clerk for each opening, paying therefor a
fee of fifty dollars ($50.) to cover the costs of issuing the permit, recording,
inspection and supervision; but they may, in lieu of making the deposits
hereinbefore specified, file with the Town Clerk a bond, to be approved as to
form, amount and sufficiency of sureties by the Town Attorney, conditioned
upon the proper restoration of highways in accordance with the directions
of the Town Superintendent of Highways, and to his satisfaction; the
payment to the town, upon demand, of any costs and expenses made by
it in restoring the surface of any highway or public place opened by such
corporation; and the saving of the Town of West Seneca, its officers and
servants, harmless from any loss, injury or damage, due to opening
highways or public places, or to any negligence or fault of such corporation,
its servants or agents in connection therewith. In cases of emergency, due to
breakage of pipes, etc., openings may be made before obtaining the permit,
but a permit must be obtained as soon as practicable, and in every case in
less than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of making the opening.
§ 70-5. Restoration by public service corporations.
All trenches or openings made by a public service corporation or other
governmental agency shall be backfilled by it, by tamping or puddling,
or both, and the surface of the street shall be restored first, as soon as
convenient after the opening has been filled, and again, if necessary, after
any settlement, after the succeeding winter, but not longer than one (1)
year after the first surfacings shall be borne by the corporation making the
openings and shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the rendering of a bill
by the town, if any work by the town shall be necessary.
§ 70-6. Insurance policy. [Amended 8-6-1984]
At the time that a request is made to the Town Clerk for a permit, the
applicant therefor shall furnish an insurance policy with the Town of West
Seneca as the named insured to save the town harmless from any public
liability for any acts of the applicant. The limits of such policy shall be in
such amount as the Town Board shall fix, by resolution, but in no event less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.).
§ 70-7. Construction of culverts. [Amended 8-6-1984]
All culverts hereafter constructed along or near to the line of the gutter of
any public highway, under and across any private entrance to any highway
or public place, shall consist of stone, concrete or approved material with
a minimum diameter of twelve (12) inches, to be laid on the line of the
existing highway gutter. No vitrified pipe or clay pipe, wooden box or
wooden cover shall be used for such purpose.
§ 70-4 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 70-8
70:139
§ 70-8. Repair or alteration of culverts.
No existing culvert under private entrance shall be substantially altered
or repaired except to reconstruct the same, and in case any such existing
culvert shall become broken or damaged, or fail to carry off properly the
water flowing thereto, the owner or occupant of the premises for which
such private entrance is provided shall, upon demand of the Town Highway
Superintendent, forthwith reconstruct the same in accordance with the
provisions of said section.
§ 70-9. Consent required.
No such culvert shall be constructed, nor shall any culvert basin or other
structure interfering or tending to interfere with the free and open
operation of any highway gutter be constructed, without the written
consent of the Superintendent of Highways, and all such work shall be
performed and completed under the directions of and to the satisfaction of
said Superintendent of Highways.
§ 70-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this chapter or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days for
each such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 71
FAIR HOUSING
§ 71-1. Policy.
It is the policy of the Town of West Seneca to provide for fair housing
throughout said town.
§ 71-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
HANDICAP — A handicapped person is one who:
MARITAL STATUS — Shall be understood to mean single, married,
divorced, separated or widowed.
Has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1)
or more major life activities;
A.
B. Has a record of such impairment; or
C. Is regarded as having such impairment.
§ 70-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 71-3
70:140
§ 71-3. Acts of discrimination.
It shall be unlawful:
§ 71-4. Applicability of provisions.
This chapter shall apply to all residential structures located within the Town
of West Seneca.
§ 71-5. Exemptions.
A. To refuse to sell or rent or refuse to negotiate for the sale or deny a
dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, age, marital
status, handicap, national origin, source of income or because the
person has a child or children.
B. To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or provision
of services or facilities in connection with the sale or rental of a
dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status,
handicap, national origin, source of income or because the person has a
child or children.
C. To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling
by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion,
sex, age, marital status, handicap, national origin or source of income
or a person or persons with children.
D. For a person offering residential property for sale or rent or anyone
acting on behalf of such a person to print or circulate or cause to be
printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication or to
use any form of application for the sale or rental of a dwelling or to
make any record or inquiry in connection with the sale or rental of a
dwelling which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation,
specification or discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, age,
marital status, handicap, national origin, source of income or the
presence of children in the family or which expresses, directly or
indirectly, any intent so to limit, specify or discriminate.
A. The prohibitions of this chapter shall not apply to a religious institution
or organization limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings
which it owns or operates to persons of the same religion or giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, sex, age, marital status, handicap,
national origin, source of income or the presence of children in the
family.
B. The prohibitions of this chapter against discrimination because of sex
shall not apply to a residential building owned by a public body or by a
private institution or organization and maintained, in whole or in part,
for the exclusive use of one (1) sex.
§ 71-3 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 71-5
70:141
§ 71-6. Enforcement.
§ 71-7. Penalties for offenses.
C. The prohibitions of this chapter against discrimination because of age
shall not apply to a residential building of six (6) or more units
maintained for the exclusive use of the elderly and their immediate
families. For purposes of this subsection, a person shall be considered
elderly who is sixty-two (62) years of age or older.
A. Filing of complaints.
(1) The Town of West Seneca or its designee shall receive, investigate
and refer complaints under this chapter. The Supervisor shall
designate a not-for-profit fair housing organization or the
Affirmative Action Officer of the Town of West Seneca to perform
the function contained in this section.
(2) Any person or organization, whether or not an aggrieved party, may
file with the Supervisor's designee a complaint of a violation of this
chapter.
(3) The Supervisor's designee may investigate individual instances and
patterns of conduct prohibited by this chapter, even without a
complaint from another person or organization, and may initiate
complaints in connection therewith.
B. Investigation. The Supervisor's designee shall notify the accused party,
in writing, within five (5) days of the filing of any complaint. The
designee shall make prompt investigation in connection with the
complaint. If, during or after the investigation, the designee believes
that appropriate action to preserve the status quo or to prevent
irreparable harm is advisable, the designee shall advise the Town
Attorney, in writing, to bring immediately, in the name of the Town of
West Seneca, any action necessary to preserve such status quo or to
prevent such harm, including the seeking of temporary restraining
orders and preliminary injunctions.
C. Action. If, at the conclusion of the investigation, the Supervisor's
designee shall determine that there is probable cause to credit the
allegation of the complaint, the designee shall certify the matter to the
Town Attorney, who shall institute proceedings in the name of the Town
of West Seneca.
A. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the following:
(1) A fine of five hundred dollars ($500.);
(2) Revocation or suspension of any license or permit necessary for the
operation of the dwelling in question;
§ 71-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 71-7
70:142
§ 71-8. Court action.
Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice,
as defined in § 71-3 of this chapter, shall have a cause of action in any court
of competent jurisdiction within one (1) year from the date of occurrence for
damages and such other remedies as may be appropriate. The court may:
§ 71-9. Other remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the rights of the
complainant to pursue, at any time prior to or after the filing complaint, any
other remedies which the complainant may have under any law of the state,
the United States or any jurisdiction. And the pursuit of one (1) or more
remedies available under this chapter shall not preclude the pursuit of any
other remedy available under this chapter.
§ 71-10. Education and promotion of housing goals.
Immediately after the enactment of this chapter, the Town of West Seneca
shall commence educational activities which will explain the law and help to
promote the town's housing goals. Such activities shall continue while this
chapter remains in force.
(3) Costs, expenses and disbursements incurred by the Town of West
Seneca as are necessary to obtain complete compliance by the
respondent with this chapter; and/or
(4) Restraining orders and temporary or permanent injunctions as are
necessary to obtain complete compliance with this chapter.
B. Each day such a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
of this chapter.
C. The Town Attorney may institute criminal action to punish a violation of
this chapter by imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days
if the above proceeding does not result in compliance with this chapter.
A. Award actual damages, including but not limited to damages for mental
anguish, embarrassment and humiliation;
B. Award punitive damages;
C. Award reasonable attorney's fees in the case of a prevailing plaintiff;
and/or
D. Grant as relief, as it deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary
injunction, temporary restraining order or other order. No bond shall be
required prior to the issuance of injunctive relief.
§ 71-7 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 71-11
70:143
§ 71-11. Expedition of proceedings.
Any court in which a proceeding under this chapter is instituted shall assign
the case for hearing at the earliest practicable date and cause the case to
be in every way expedited.
§ 71-12. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law of
the state, the United States or any other jurisdiction that grants, guarantees
or protects the same rights as are granted, guaranteed or protected by this
chapter.
Chapter 72
FEES
Chapter 74
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trespassing — See Ch. 112. Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 74-1. Legislative findings.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca, County of Erie, and State
of New York, finds that the discharge of firearms within said Town is
hazardous to the residents of the Town and the general public.
§ 74-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions.
Except as hereinafter excepted or permitted, no person, firm, association
or corporation shall discharge any firearm or permit any firearm to be
discharged within the Town of West Seneca. The foregoing prohibition shall
not apply to:
A. Duly constituted law enforcement officers engaged in the lawful
performance of their duties; or
B. The discharge of any firearm as part of any approved indoor shooting
facility properly supervised in an area or building occupied and
maintained for that purpose at the following location(s):
(1) 1000 North America Drive, West Seneca, N.Y. 14224.
C. Any person and/or entity who has obtained or obtain a permit as
described in § 74-3 of the West Seneca Town Code.
§ 71-11 WEST SENECA CODE § 74-3
70:144
§ 74-3. Permit required for discharge.
Upon application by the owner or occupier of land within the Town of West
Seneca, the Town Board may issue a permit for the discharge of firearms
thereon. The application shall be referred to the Police Chief for review
and recommendation by the Police Department. If, following such review,
the Town Board determines that the discharge of firearms on the land area
covered by the application is appropriate, it shall issue a permit to the
owner authorizing the discharge of firearms on his land or such part thereof
as the Town Board shall determine. The Town Board may further establish
conditions or restrictions with respect to the permit in order to prevent
hazard to persons or property. Any permits issued pursuant to this section
shall be maintained in the Town Clerk's office. Permits issued under this
section shall be valid for one year and each shall expire on December 31 of
the year.
§ 74-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this chapter or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 15 days for each such offense, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 74-5. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this chapter or the application thereof
to any person is adjudged to be invalid, the adjudication shall not affect
other sections, clauses or provisions or the application thereof which can be
sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause or provision or
application, and to this end the various sections, clauses and provisions of
this chapter are declared to be severable.
§ 74-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon filing with the New York
State Department of State.
Chapter 74A
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 75.
§ 74-3 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 74A-1
70:145
§ 74A-1. Conditions for claims against policy.
Any resolution or ordinance hereinafter adopted by the Town Board
pursuant to General Municipal Law, § 22, for the purpose of claiming
against fire insurance policy proceeds for liens for taxes, special ad valorem
levies, special assessments and municipal charges shall be subject to the
condition that the town shall release or return to the insured any amounts
to which it would otherwise be entitled to claim, provided that the insured
agrees with the town, in writing, to restore the affected premises to the
same or improved condition that it was in prior to the time that the town's
lien against proceeds as provided in General Municipal Law, § 22, arose,
subject to conditions as such resolution or ordinance shall provide to
guarantee performance of such obligation, including but not limited to
an agreement to deposit such proceeds in an escrow account or that the
insured shall obtain a performance bond.
Chapter 75
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 55. Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 57.
§ 75-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a Fire Prevention Bureau and to
delegate the duties of said Bureau relative to fire prevention practices and
service of notices and orders.
§ 75-2. Fire Prevention Bureau established; membership. [Amended
11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
The Town of West Seneca Fire Prevention Bureau is hereby established, and
it shall be compromised of the following:
§ 75-3. Duties of Bureau. [Amended 3-12-2007 by L.L. No. 2-2007]
It shall be the duty of the Fire Prevention Bureau to administer and enforce
the rules, regulations and standards contained in the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (Title 9 of the New York Codes,
Rules and Regulations) Part 1150, Subchapter C, (Title 19 of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations) Part 1203, the most recent revisions to the
New York State Generally Accepted Standards for Fire Prevention and the
most recent version of the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety
Code 101. The Bureau shall also perform such other duties as may be
conferred and imposed upon it from time to time.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer and any of his or her assistants.
§ 74A-1 WEST SENECA CODE § 75-4
70:146
§ 75-4. Jurisdiction of members of Bureau.
The Building Inspector, his assistants and the Fire Inspectors shall have the
power to make inspections and perform any acts required by this chapter
any place in the Town of West Seneca.
§ 75-5. Right of entry.
Any member may, at all reasonable hours, enter any place of public
assembly for the purpose of making any firesafety inspection. In case of an
emergency where there may be imminent danger to life, health or safety,
an inspection of any building or premises may be made at any time upon
proper identification.
§ 75-6. Inspection of buildings and premises.
§ 75-6.5. Firesafety precautions. [Added 3-26-1990]
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Inspectors to inspect all buildings and
premises, except the interiors of one- and two-family dwellings, and it
shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to aid when requested by the
Fire Inspectors or Fire Chief.
B. Before entering a one- or two-family dwelling, the Inspector shall obtain
consent of the occupant thereof or obtain a court warrant, except where
the Inspector has probable cause to believe an emergency exists.
C. Besides inspections, any member of the Bureau shall make a firesafety
inspection upon a written complaint filed with the Building Inspector.
D. The Fire Chief shall notify the Code Enforcement Officers, Building
Inspector and the Fire Inspectors through the Fire Dispatch of any fire
or explosion involving any structural damage pursuant to the Fire Code
of New York State. [Amended 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
E. The Fire Chief shall notify the Building Inspector and Fire Inspectors
immediately of any incident regarding hazardous material, fires,
explosions or spills involving public safety.
A. Fire lanes and access roads on private property, devoted to public use
for fire-fighting and emergency service apparatus, should be
maintained free from obstructions.
B. The marking of fire lanes and access roads on private property, devoted
to public use, shall be approved and enforced by the Fire Inspector or
Building Inspector.
C. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes shall be
prohibited at all times.
D. The operator of said vehicle or obstruction is responsible for its removal
and any penalties for violations.
§ 75-4 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 75-6.5
70:147
§ 75-7. Acceptance of permit implies consent for inspection.
Any application for or acceptance of any permit requested or issued
pursuant to this chapter constitutes agreement and consent by the person
making the application or accepting the permit to allow the members of
the Bureau to enter the premises at any reasonable time to conduct such
inspections as required by this chapter.
§ 75-8. Elimination of dangerous or hazardous conditions.
[Amended 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
Whenever the Bureau shall find in any building or upon any premises
dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials pursuant to any law or
code of the United States or the State of New York, it shall discuss such
violation with the owner, operator, occupant or other responsible person to
determine a schedule and procedure for corrective action. The Bureau shall
also issue written notices to confirm such findings and discussions as may
be necessary to secure compliance with this chapter. Every notice shall set
forth a time limit for compliance.
§ 75-9. Service of notice or orders.
Every notice or order issued with respect to this chapter or the other Fire
Prevention Codes shall be served at least five days before the time for
compliance therewith, except where the Fire Prevention Bureau determines
that a shorter period of time is necessary for the protection of human life
or property. Such notice may be served either personally or by registered
mail and a copy posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises affected.
Such mailing shall be sent to the last known address or place of business
according to the records of the Receiver of Taxes and Assessment.
§ 75-10. Permits required.
E. Signs shall be provided on existing buildings utilizing truss-type
construction. Such signs shall be affixed to all fire exit doors within
such building. [Added 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 9-2014]
F. When emergency lighting is required to be located in structures, the
Town does not permit the combination of exit/emergency lighting. The
intent is to illuminate the exit and exitways. With automatic generator
installations, emergency lighting is not required. [Added 1-25-2016
by L.L. No. 2-2016]
A. No person, firm, corporation or partnership shall purchase, own,
possess, transport or use explosives or blasting agents or have, keep,
store, use, manufacture, sell or handle hazardous chemicals, gases and
flammable materials without first securing a permit from the Building
Inspector.
§ 75-6.5 WEST SENECA CODE § 75-10
70:148
§ 75-11. Issuance of permits.
§ 75-12. Appeals.
B. No person, firm, corporation or partnership shall establish, operate or
maintain establishments defined in the Fire Prevention Codes without
first securing a permit from the Building Inspector.
C. The Town Board shall establish, from time to time, the fee required for
permits under this chapter.
A. A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle
materials or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous
to life or property or to install equipment used in connection with such
activities. Such permit does not take the place of any other license
required by law. It shall not be transferable, and any change in use or
occupancy of the premises shall require a new permit. All permits
expire on the last day of December of that year.
B. Before a permit may be issued, the Bureau shall review all plans
submitted and make such inspections or tests as are necessary to
assure that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Codes are complied
with. Reports of plan reviews, inspections or tests made by the Bureau
shall be filed with the Building Inspector of the Town of West Seneca.
C. Applications for permits are to be made out in triplicate. After payment
of the fee, one copy goes to the Chief of the Fire Department, one copy
to the Building Inspector and one copy to the person applying for the
permit.
D. The Building Inspector shall have the power to revoke, suspend or deny
the granting of any permit required by this chapter if any violation of
the Fire Prevention Codes is found upon inspection or in case there has
been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in
the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
A. Any appeals from a revocation, suspension or denial of a permit shall be
in writing.
B. Such appeal shall be heard by the Fire Prevention Bureau; provided,
however, that the member from the fire district where the premises
affected is located shall not be eligible to vote or otherwise take part in
the decision.
C. Any appeal from the decision of the Building Inspector must be filed
within 30 days from the denial, suspension or revocation of the permit.
D. The Bureau shall hear said appeals within 30 days of the filing of the
notice of appeal with the Building Inspector's office.
§ 75-10 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 75-12
70:149
§ 75-13. Display of permit.
A copy of the permit shall be posted or otherwise readily accessible at
each place of operation or carried by the permit holder, as specified by the
Building Inspector.
§ 75-14. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to hold the Town of West Seneca
responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of the
inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or
reinspect or the permit issued as herein provided or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized herein.
§ 75-15. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation violating the provision of
this chapter, the Fire Prevention Codes or any section or provision thereof
is guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 days for each such offense, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 77
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 80.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 77-1. Findings.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca finds that the potential and/
or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Town of West Seneca and that such damages may include:
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
E. Pending final determination of an appeal, the order of the Building
Inspector shall be stayed unless there is a distinct fire hazard to life or
the property of others based on available data.
§ 75-12 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-2
70:150
§ 77-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 77-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands, and;
F. Qualify and maintain for participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 77-2 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-4
70:151
§ 77-4. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same meaning as "base flood."
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Is a structure used solely for parking
(two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage, represent a
minimal investment of not more than 10% of the value of the primary
structure, and may not be used for human habitation.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Is the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. This area may be designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30,
A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly referred to as the base
floodplain or 100-year floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term
"special flood hazard area (SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the
phrase "area of special flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "Basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
eighteen inches or more in height, which is used to service the
underside of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this
enclosed area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material,
must be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The
enclosed crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the
equalization of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during
periods of flooding.
§ 77-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-4
70:152
CRITICAL FACILITIES —
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case
of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C,
X, or D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means
of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones
V1-V30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that meet the federal
standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along water courses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile,
flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials;
(1)
Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain occupants
who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during
a flood;
(2)
Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for
flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and
(3)
Public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or
restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and after
a flood.
(4)
§ 77-4 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-4
70:153
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
"Flood" or "flooding" also means the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an
unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied
by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a
flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual
and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
§ 77-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-4
70:154
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — Is the person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 77-4 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-4
70:155
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by the community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structure.
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 77-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(3)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 77-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-4
70:156
§ 77-5. Application.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Town of West Seneca.
§ 77-6. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. Substantial damage also
means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. Substantial improvement also means
"cumulative substantial improvement." The term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation's an historic
structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard are identified and defined on the
following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
(1) Flood insurance rate maps: 36029C0218H, 36029C0219H,
36029C0331H, 36029C0332H, 36029C0333H, 36029C0334H,
36029C0341H, 36029C0342H, 36029C0351H, 36029C0352H,
§ 77-4 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-6
70:157
§ 77-7. Interpretation; conflict with other laws.
§ 77-8. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 77-9. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of
West Seneca from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has not
applied for and received an approved variance under §§ 77-21 and 77-22 will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
36029C0353H, 36029C0354H, 36029C0361H, 36029C0362H,
whose effective date is June 7, 2019, and any subsequent revisions
to these map panels that do not affect areas under our community's
jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Erie County, New York (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 7, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file with
the Town Clerk's Office, 1250 Union Road, West Seneca, New York
14224.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997, and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 77-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-10
70:158
§ 77-10. Warning; disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages, This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town
of West Seneca, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 77-11. Designation of local administrator.
The Town Engineer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 77-12. Floodplain development permit.
A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all construction
and other development to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard
in this community for the purpose of protecting its citizens from increased
flood hazards and insuring that new development is constructed in a
manner that minimizes its exposure to flooding. It shall be unlawful to
undertake any development in an area of special flood hazard, as shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 77-6, without a valid
floodplain development permit. Application for a permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the local administrator and may include, but not be
limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing: the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the
location of the foregoing.
A. Fees. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $200. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Town Engineer of the Town of
West Seneca for any additional costs necessary for review, inspection
and approval of this project. The local administrator may require a
deposit of no more than $500 to cover these additional costs.
B. Application for a permit. The applicant shall provide the following
information as appropriate. Additional information may be required on
the permit application form.
(1) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially
improved structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or
Zone A if base flood elevation data are available. Upon completion
of the lowest floor, the permitee shall submit to the local
§ 77-10 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-12
70:159
§ 77-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
administrator the as-built elevation, certified by a licensed
professional engineer or surveyor.
(2) The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
new or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed. Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the
structure, the permitee shall submit to the local administrator the
as-built floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer
or surveyor.
(3) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 77-15C, Utilities.
(4) A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that
any nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 77-17, Nonresidential structures.
(5) A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by
a licensed professional engineer must be submitted that
demonstrate that the altered or relocated segment will provide
equal or greater conveyance than the original stream segment. The
applicant must submit any maps, computations or other material
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
to revise the documents enumerated in § 77-6, when notified by the
local administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed
by FEMA for this purpose. The applicant must also provide
assurances that the conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated
stream segment will be maintained.
(6) A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required
by the local administrator, which shows whether proposed
development to be located in an area of special flood hazard may
result in physical damage to any other property.
(7) In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from
other sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the
permit applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed
developments (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions) that are greater than
either 50 lots or five acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
§ 77-12 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-13
70:160
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 77-12B, Application for a permit, and for
compliance with the provisions and standards of this chapter.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks, to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of § 77-14, Construction standards and, in
particular, Subsection B, Subdivision proposals.
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
§ 77-14, Construction standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
§ state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to paragraph 4.3(7),16 as criteria for requiring
that new construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this chapter.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this chapter.
(3) When an area of special flood hazard, base flood elevation, and/or
floodway data are available from a federal, state or other
authoritative source, but differ from the data in the documents
16.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 77-13 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-13
70:161
enumerated in § 77-6, the local administrator may reasonably
utilize the other flood information to enforce more restrictive
development standards.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent municipalities that may be affected and the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation prior
to permitting any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notification to the Regional Administrator,
Region II, Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 77-9 of this chapter.
§ 77-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-13
70:162
§ 77-14. Construction standards.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this chapter and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 77-9 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 77-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the
use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 77-13E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures
required pursuant to § 77-13D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 77-13D(1), and
whether the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to §§ 77-21, Appeals Board, and 77-22,
Conditions for variances; and,
(5) Notices required under § 77-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
A. General standards. The following standards apply to new development,
including new and substantially improved structures, in the areas of
special flood hazard shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
designated in § 77-6.
B. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
§ 77-13 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-14
70:163
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
C. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Town of West Seneca agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Town of West Seneca for all fees and other
costs in relation to the application. The applicant must also
provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Town of West Seneca for all costs related to the final map
revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 77-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
demonstrates through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that such an encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Town of West Seneca agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received, and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Town of West Seneca for all fees
§ 77-14 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-14
70:164
§ 77-15. Standards for all structures.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 77-6.
and other costs in relation to the application. The applicant
must also provide all data, analyses and mapping and
reimburse the Town of West Seneca for all costs related to the
final map revisions.
(3) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, if any development is found to
increase or decrease base flood elevations, the Town of West
Seneca shall as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, notify FEMA
and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation of the changes by submitting technical or scientific
data in accordance with standard engineering practice.
(4) Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
development, the volume of space occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood elevation shall be compensated for
and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation
taken from below the base flood elevation at or adjacent to the
development site. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain
freely to the watercourse. No area below the waterline of a pond or
other body of water can be credited as a compensating excavation.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE, AO or A, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding, designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
§ 77-14 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-15
70:165
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(a) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings of each enclosed area having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade and;
[3] Openings not less than three inches in any direction.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas sub-grade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation, or at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade in
a Zone A without an available base flood elevation, or be designed
to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the
components during a flood and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring and outlets,
switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated or designed
to prevent water from entering and accumulating within the
components unless they conform to the appropriate provisions of
the electrical part of the Building Code of New York State or the
Residential Code of New York State for location of such items in
wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Storage tanks.
§ 77-15 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-15
70:166
§ 77-16. Residential structures.
Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard, in addition
to the requirements in §§ 77-14B, Subdivision proposals, 77-14C,
Encroachments, and 77-15, Standards for all structures.
§ 77-17. Nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in §§ 77-14B,
Subdivision proposals, 77-14C, Encroachments, and 77-15, Standards for all
structures.
(1) Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
and lateral movement during conditions of the base flood.
(2) Aboveground tanks shall be:
(a) Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
during conditions of the base flood; or
(b) Installed at or above the base flood elevation as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 77-6 plus two feet.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
B. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated at least three feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
C. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on
the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 77-6 plus
two feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified).
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
§ 77-15 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-17
70:167
§ 77-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in §§ 77-14A, General
standards and 77-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in
areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. All structural components located below the base
flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM plus two feet (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified); or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 77-17A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate or
other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 77-17A(2) including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH
shall either: (1) be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days, (2) be fully
licensed and ready for highway use, or (3) meet the requirements for
manufactured homes in § 77-18 B, C, and D. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices
and has no permanently attached additions.
§ 77-17 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-18
70:168
§ 77-19. Accessory structures including detached garages.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved accessory
structures, including detached garages, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 77-6.
§ 77-20. Critical facitilities.
In order to prevent potential flood damage to certain facilities that would
result in serious danger to life and health, or widespread social or economic
dislocation, no new critical facility shall be located within any area of
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation and is
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home chassis is
supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least
equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and are securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
D. Within Zone AO, the bottom of the frame of the manufactured home
chassis shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 77-6 plus two feet (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified).
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE, AO, AH, A, accessory structures must meet
the standards of § 77-15A, Anchoring.
B. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, areas below two feet above the base flood
elevation shall be constructed using methods and practices that
minimize flood damage.
C. Within Zones AO and Zone A, if base flood elevation data are not
available, areas below three feet above the highest adjacent grade shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
D. Structures must be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters
in accordance with § 77-15B(3).
E. Utilities must meet the requirements of § 77-15C, Utilities.
§ 77-18 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-20
70:169
special flood hazard, or within any 500-year flood zone shown as a B zone
or a Shaded X zone on the Community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
§ 77-21. Appeals Board.
A. The Flood Prevention Appeals Board as established by the Town of West
Seneca shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
B. The Flood Prevention Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Flood Prevention Appeals Board
may appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78
of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Flood Prevention Appeals Board
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 77-20 WEST SENECA CODE § 77-21
70:170
§ 77-22. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 77-21D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Town Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lot with existing structures
constructed below he base flood level, providing items in § 77-21D(1)
through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E, and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 77-21 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS § 77-22
70:171
Chapter 78
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo — See Ch. 52.
§ 78-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize, pursuant to the authority of
the New York State Constitution, Article I, Section 9, and the General
Municipal Law, Article 9-A, the conducting by an authorized organization,
upon obtaining a license therefor, of games of chance within the territorial
limits of the Town of West Seneca, subject to the provisions of this chapter,
the provisions of the General Municipal Law, Article 9-A, and the provisions
set forth by the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 77-13H of this chapter.
§ 77-22 WEST SENECA CODE § 78-2
78:172
§ 78-2. Authorization.
It shall be lawful for any authorized organization, upon obtaining a license
therefor as provided by Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law, to conduct
games of chance within the territorial limits of the Town of West Seneca,
subject to the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of Article 9-A of the
General Municipal Law and the provisions of the New York State Racing and
Wagering Board.
§ 78-3. License required.
No person, firm, association, corporation or organization, other than a
licensee under the provisions of Article 9-A of the General Municipal Law,
shall conduct games of chance or shall lease or otherwise make available for
conducting games of chance a hall or other premises for any consideration
whatsoever, direct or indirect, except as provided in the General Municipal
Law, § 190.
§ 78-4. Rental agreements.
No games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted on or within any
leased premises if rental under such lease is to be paid, wholly or partly,
on the basis of a percentage of the receipts or net profits derived from the
operation of such game.
§ 78-5. Suppliers to be licensed.
No authorized organization licensed under the provisions of Article 9-A
of the General Municipal Law shall purchase or receive any supplies or
equipment specifically designed or adapted for use in the conduct of games
of chance from other than a supplier licensed under the New York State
Racing and Wagering Board or another authorized organization.
§ 78-6. Use of proceeds.
The entire net proceeds of any game of chance and of any rental shall be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct the same.
§ 78-7. Prize limits.
§ 78-8. Management or operation of games.
A. No prize shall exceed the sum or value of one hundred dollars ($100.) in
any operation, except a merchandise wheel, which shall not exceed the
value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.). No single wager shall exceed
two dollars ($2.).
B. No series of prizes on any one (1) occasion of games of chance shall
aggregate more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
§ 78-2 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78-8
78:173
§ 78-9. Enforcement and administration.
§ 78-10. Penalties for offenses; when effective.
Chapter 78A
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 63.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 92.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
A. No person except a bona fide member of any such organization shall
participate in the management or operation of such game.
B. No person shall receive any remuneration for participating in the
management or operation of any game of chance.
C. Games of chance shall be conducted in a designated area within a
building, hall, tent or grounds which are reasonably identified so as to
control and exclude minors from the operation of games of chance.
A. The Town Clerk is hereby delegated the authority granted to the Town
Board by the New York State Games of Chance Licensing Law, Article
9-A of the General Municipal Law, in relation to the issuance,
amendment and cancellation of licenses, the conduct of investigations
and hearings, and the collection and transmission of fees.
B. The Chief of Police of the Town of West Seneca shall exercise control
over and supervision of all games of chance conducted under a duly
authorized license. The Chief of Police shall have all those powers and
duties set forth in and for the enforcement of Article 9-A of the General
Municipal Law.
A. The unauthorized conduct of a game of chance shall constitute and be
punishable as a misdemeanor.
B. This chapter shall not become operative and effective unless and until it
shall have been approved by a majority of the electors voting on a
proposition submitted at a general election held within the Town of
West Seneca who are qualified to vote for the officers of such
municipality.17
17.Editor's Note: This chapter was passed at the general election held 11-2-1982.
§ 78-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 78A-1
78:174
§ 78A-1. Intent.
A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is essential to the health, safety
and general welfare of the community and to the maintenance and
continued development of the economy. It is further declared that the
unrestrained operation of junkyards, as defined herein, is a hazard to such
health, safety and general welfare of the community, necessitating the
regulation thereof. At the same time, it is recognized that junkyards are a
useful and necessary business, not to be discouraged when not in conflict
with the express purposes of this section.
§ 78A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING DEPARTMENT — The Building Department of the Town of West
Seneca.
JUNK — Scrapped, dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof,
or other scrap ferrous and nonferrous material.
JUNKYARD — An establishment or place of business which is maintained,
operated or used for storing, buying or selling, dismantling, salvaging or
handling junk.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power, originally intended for use on paved or unpaved surfaces.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, agency or
any other legal entity.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca.
§ 78A-3. Applicability.
Applicants shall comply with all applicable state laws and local laws, such
as but not limited to the following:
A. Section 136 of the General Municipal Law (licensing).
B. Section 415-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law (dismantling registration).
C. Section 89 of the Highway Law (junkyard siting).
D. Sections 1271 and 1276 of the Public Health Law (open burning).18
E. Sections 17-0501 and 17-0701 of the Environmental Conservation Law
(water pollution).
F. Section 120-22A(4) of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of West
Seneca.
18.Editor's Note: Sections 1271 and 1276 of the Public Health Law were repealed L. 1972, c.
664, § 6, effective September 1, 1972. See now § 19-0301 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.
§ 78A-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78A-4
78:175
§ 78A-4. General provisions.
No person shall operate, establish or maintain a junkyard without:
§ 78A-5. Application for license.
§ 78A-6. Public hearing.
A. Obtaining a certificate of zoning compliance.
B. Obtaining a license to operate a junkyard.
C. Obtaining approval of location.
D. Complying with all applicable regulations of other involved agencies as
outlined in § 78A-3.
A. Certificate of zoning compliance. The applicant shall obtain a letter of
zoning compliance, to be issued by the Building Department, prior to
proceeding with the application.
B. License and location requirements. The applicant shall submit an
application for a license to operate a junkyard and for the approved
location of such junkyard using forms supplied by the Building
Department. The applicant shall also follow site plan review
procedures.
A. Date and considerations. The Town Board shall hold a public hearing
not less than two (2) weeks nor more than four (4) weeks from the date
of receipt of the Planning Board's recommendations and shall hear
statements from the applicant and all others wishing to be heard at the
hearing.
(1) Licensing considerations. The Town Board shall consider the
applicant's ability to comply with fencing and any other local
regulations, any record of criminal convictions and any other
relevant information.
(2) Location considerations. The Town Board shall consider proof of
legal ownership or the right to the use of the site, the nature of the
development of the surrounding property and whether or not the
proposed location poses a serious threat to public health and safety.
(3) Other considerations. The Town Board may also take into account
aesthetic considerations. In this connection, the Town Board may
consider the type of road servicing the junkyard and the natural
and/or artificial barriers screening the junkyard from public view.
Upon a negative determination, the availability of other suitable
sites should be considered.
B. Decision. The Town Board shall decide to grant or deny the application
within forty-five (45) days of the hearing date, giving notice of its
decision by mail to the address given on the application.
§ 78A-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 78A-7
78:176
§ 78A-7. Issuance of license; renewal.
§ 78A-8. Existing junkyards.
Owners of junkyards already established shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter and shall comply with such provisions before their licenses
are renewed.
§ 78A-9. Standards and requirements.
A. Issuance of license. If approved and upon payment of a fee established
by the Town Board, the license shall be issued at the direction of the
Town Board and will remain in effect for one (1) year. The license is not
transferable.
B. Renewal. The license may be renewed each year upon payment of the
annual license fee without a hearing, provided that all provisions of this
chapter are complied with, the junkyard does not become a public
nuisance and the licensee is not convicted of any type of larceny or the
receiving of stolen goods. Where any of these situations has occurred,
such license may be revoked by the Town Board after a public hearing
thereon. Upon revocation of a license, the Town Board may require the
removal of all junk on the premises.
A. Standards.
(1) Location. All future junkyards shall be so located that no part
thereof shall be within five hundred (500) feet of a church, school,
hospital or public building.
(2) Fencing and screening. All junkyards shall be completely
surrounded by a fence at least eight (8) feet in height with gates
that can be closed and locked. Such fence shall be a minimum of
fifty (50) feet from a public street. In addition to security, such
fence, including any landscaping, shall also provide a visual screen
or buffer sufficient to conceal all junk and operations from public
view. Fencing and landscaping shall be maintained in such manner
as to present a neat and orderly appearance at all times.
(3) Fire lanes. Fire lanes offering adequate access to building and
storage areas shall be provided and maintained as required under
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code.
(4) Arrangement. All junk shall be piled or arranged in neat rows to
permit easy and clear passage through the area.
B. Requirements.
(1) The licensee shall personally manage the activity for which the
license is granted.
(2) The licensee shall maintain an office and keep permanent books
and records which shall be maintained on the premises at all times.
§ 78A-7 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78A-9
78:177
§ 78A-10. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
relative to the provisions of this chapter, or the Town of West Seneca, may
appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals, as provided in the
Zoning Ordinance of the Town of West Seneca.19
§ 78A-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted hereunder is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.) for the first violation; a minimum of
three hundred fifty dollars ($350.) and a maximum of seven hundred dollars
($700.) for a second violation within five (5) years; and a minimum of seven
hundred dollars ($700.) and a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.)
for a third or subsequent violation within five (5) years; or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or both. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 78A-12. Enforcing official.
The Building Inspector shall be empowered to enforce this chapter and the
regulations set forth herein.
Chapter 78B
ILLICIT DISCHARGES, ACTIVITIES AND CONNECTIONS TO
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 70.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 77.
Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control — See Ch. 102A.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
(3) Gates shall be kept locked in a secure manner whenever the
junkyard is not supervised by the licensee or his employees.
(4) No junkyard shall be used as a dump area nor as a place for
burning and disposal of trash.
(5) The Enforcement Officer or the Town Board or any of its
representatives shall be granted access to any junkyard at all
reasonable hours to inspect for compliance herewith.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 78A-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 78A-12
78:178
§ 78B-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Prohibition of Illicit Discharges,
Activities and Connections to Separate Sewer System Ordinance of the
Town of West Seneca" and shall constitute Chapter 91 of the Code of the
Town of West Seneca.
§ 78B-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of West Seneca through the regulation
of nonstormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the SPDES
General Permit for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The
objectives of this chapter are:
§ 78B-3. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this chapter, the following terms
will have meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02, or as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge
nonstormwater wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 78A-12 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78B-3
78:179
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges From Construction Activity,
CIP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — New York State licensed professional engineer
or licensed architect.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 78B-7 of this chapter.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM — A facility serving one or
more parcels of land or residential households or a private, commercial or
institutional facility, that treats sewage or other liquid wastes for discharge
into the groundwaters of New York State, except where a permit for such
facility is required under the applicable provisions of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES Permit for
Discharges From Industrial Activities Except Construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
Any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
§ 78B-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 78B-3
78:180
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains:
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of West Seneca.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water, which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
A. Owned or operated by the Town of West Seneca.
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
Discharge compliance with water quality standards: the condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under their MS4 permit may have caused or
has the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation
of an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) Listed Waters. The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition, the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy: the condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a water
body or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the discharge
from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations prior
C.
§ 78B-3 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78B-3
78:181
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the municipality
to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans, forward the
plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
use of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants prepared periodically by the Department as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d) listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 78B-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 78B-5. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such powers granted
or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify its
stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any water body or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition, the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 78B-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 78B-6
78:182
§ 78B-6. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
§ 78B-7. Discharge prohibitions; exceptions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in Subsection A. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter, unless the Department or the
municipality has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: water line flushing or other potable water sources,
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, air-conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this chapter.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, water, or order and other applicable
§ 78B-6 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78B-7
78:183
§ 78B-8. Failing individual sewage treatment systems prohibited.
No persons shall operate a failing individual sewage treatment system
in areas tributary to the municipality MS4. A failing individual sewage
treatment system is one which has one or more of the following conditions:
§ 78B-9. Activities contaminating stormwater prohibited.
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's MS4
or allows such a connection to continue.
A. The backup of sewage into a structure.
B. Discharges of treated or untreated sewage onto the ground surface.
C. A connection or connections to a separate stormwater sewer system.
D. Liquid level in the septic tank above the outlet invert.
E. Structural failure of any component of the individual sewage treatment
system that could lead to any of the other failure conditions as noted in
this section.
F. Contamination of off-site groundwater.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 78B-2, Definitions of this chapter.
B. Such activities include failing individual sewage treatment systems as
defined in § 78B-8, improper management of pet waste or any other
activity that causes or contributes to violations of the municipality's
MS4 SPDES permit out authorization.
§ 78B-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 78B-9
78:184
§ 78B-10. Prevention, control and reduction of stormwater
pollutants.
C. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she longer causes or contributes
to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit authorization.
A. Best management practices. Where the SMO has identified illicit
discharges as defined in § 78B-3 or activities contaminating stormwater
as defined in § 78B-9, the municipality may require implementation of
best management practices (BMPs) to control those illicit discharges
and activities.
(1) The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at his or her own expense, reasonable protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural
BMPs.
(2) Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 78B-3 or an
activity contaminating stormwater as defined in § 78B-9, may be
required to implement, at said person's expense, additional
structural and nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the
source of pollutant(s) to the MS4.
(3) Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with
the provisions of this section.
B. Individual sewage treatment systems; response to special conditions
requiring no increase of pollutants or requiring a reduction of
pollutants. Where individual sewage treatment systems are
contributing to the municipality's being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 78B-3 of this chapter, the owner or operator
of such individual sewage treatment systems shall be required to:
(1) Maintain and operate individual sewage treatment systems as
follows:
(a) Inspect the septic tank annually to determine scum and sludge
accumulation. Septic tanks must be pumped out whenever the
bottom of the scum layer is within three inches of the bottom of
the outlet baffle or sanitary tee or the top of the sludge is
within 10 inches of the bottom of the outlet baffle or sanitary
tee.
(b) Avoid the use of septic tank additives.
§ 78B-9 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78B-10
78:185
§ 78B-11. Suspension of access to MS4.
(c) Avoid the disposal of excessive quantities of detergents,
kitchen wastes, laundry wastes, and household chemicals.
(d) Avoid the disposal of cigarette butts, disposable diapers,
sanitary napkins, trash and other such items.
(e) Most tanks should be pumped out every two or three years.
However, pumping may be more or less frequent depending on
use. Inspection of the tank for cracks, leaks, and blockages
should be done by the septic hauler at the time of pumping of
the tank contents.
(2) Repair or replace individual sewage treatment systems as follows:
(a) In accordance with 10 NYCRR, Appendix 75A to the maximum
extent practicable.
(b) A design professional licensed to practice in New York State
shall prepare design plans for any type of absorption area to a
location not previously approved for such.
(c) Relocating or extending an absorption area to a location not
previously approved for such.
(d) Installation of a new subsurface treatment system at the same
location.
(e) Use of alternate system or innovative system design or
technology. A written certificate of compliance shall be
submitted by the design professional to the municipality at the
completion of construction of the repair or replacement
system.
A. Illicit discharges in emergency situations. The SMO may without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. The
SMO shall notify the person of such suspension within a reasonable
time thereafter in writing of the reasons for the suspension, if the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the SMO may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize danger to persons.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this chapter may
have his or her MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
§ 78B-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 78B-11
78:186
§ 78B-12. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 78B-13. Applicability; access to facilities; monitoring of
discharges.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent
its recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has caused to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this chapter.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
chapter.
(3) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this chapter such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The municipality has the right to require the facilities subject to
this chapter to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
§ 78B-11 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78B-13
78:187
§ 78B-14. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the municipality in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the municipality within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 78B-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
facility subject to this chapter is a violation of this chapter. A person
who is the operator of a facility subject to this chapter commits an
offense if the person denies the municipality reasonable access to
the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this chapter.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Notice of violation.
(1) When the municipality's SMO finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, he/she
may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(b) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
§ 78B-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 78B-15
78:188
§ 78B-16. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of
the SMO to the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca within 15 days of
its issuance, which shall hear the appeal within 30 days after the filing of
the appeal, and within five days of making its decision, file its decision in
the office of the municipal clerk and mail a copy of its decision by certified
mail to the discharger.
§ 78B-17. Corrective measures after appeal.
(c) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(d) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(e) Payment of a fine; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
(2) If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
A. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or in the event of an appeal, within five
business days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall request the owner's
permission for access to the subject private property to take any and all
§ 78B-15 GAMES OF CHANCE § 78B-17
78:189
§ 78B-18. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the SMO may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 78B-19. Alternative remedies.
§ 78B-20. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared
and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the
measures reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore
the property.
B. If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek a
warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to enter
upon the property to determine whether a violation has occurred. Upon
determination that a violation has occurred, the SMO may seek a court
order to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. The cost of implementing and
maintaining such measures shall be the sole responsibility of the
discharger.
A. Where a person has violated a provision of this chapter, he/she may be
eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Municipal Attorney and concurrence of the
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(1) The violation was unintentional;
(2) The violator has no history of previous violations of this chapter;
(3) Environmental damage was minimal;
(4) The violator acted quickly to remedy violations; or
(5) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
B. Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(1) Attendance at compliance workshops;
(2) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking; or
(3) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
§ 78B-17 WEST SENECA CODE § 78B-20
78:190
violator's expense and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 78B-21. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within
the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative
remedies.
§ 78B-22. When effective; supersession of conflicting laws.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect 10 days after its filing with the
New York Secretary of State. This chapter supersedes all prior laws and
parts of existing laws in conflict with this chapter.
Chapter 79
LIGHTING, ARTIFICIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 79-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GLARE — Any artificial light which shines with a strong, steady or dazzling
light.
LAND — Comprising not only buildings but the ground, soil or earth as
commonly understood.
STRUCTURE — A dwelling, barn, pole or elevated object or a building or
other structured improvement on any premises of such physical size as to be
capable of having attached thereto or incorporated thereon, on the exterior,
artificial lighting by means of electrical, gas or other luminescent fixtures.
§ 79-2. Light sources facing neighboring property.
A. No artificial lighting shall shine directly upon any neighboring
residential property or be so established that it shall shine directly upon
any residential property or shall shine directly on or into any room or
rooms, porches or patios of any residential property, nor shall any
artificial lighting be maintained or operated from any structure or land
in such a manner as to be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring
residential properties or as to interfere with the physical comfort of the
occupants of residential properties.
§ 78B-20 LIGHTING, ARTIFICIAL § 79-2
79:191
§ 79-3. Nonconforming lights.
§ 79-4. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority given any municipality of
this state to enact ordinances which the governing body deems necessary
and proper for the good government, order or protection of persons and
property and for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare of
the Town of West Seneca and its inhabitants.
§ 79-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons responsible for such nuisance or annoying lighting
as described hereinbefore, whether owner, lessee or lessees or others using
any premises with or without the permission of the owner, violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, a complaint
having been made, be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.) or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15)
days, or to both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each
day a particular violation shall continue to constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 80
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 28. Zoning — See Ch. 120.
B. Lights directly facing a neighboring residential property or located in
close proximity shall be shielded to keep direct glare from said
property.
C. No sources of light shall be maintained or operated in connection with
any building or land in any manner or by any process or method which
transmits an objectionable glare on residential property.
D. In no instance will any glare be permitted if such glare originates from a
light source facing any dwelling unit.
E. The light intensity from illumination of any kind, abutting residential
property, shall not exceed seven thousand (7,000) lumens.
A. Any existing lights which do not conform to the regulations herein
established shall be considered a nonconforming light.
B. All nonconforming lights shall be discontinued within thirty (30) days
from the effective date of this chapter, and their continued use shall be
subject to the regulations of this chapter.
§ 79-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 80-1
80:192
§ 80-1. Regulation; definitions.
A. Regulation. Within the Town of West Seneca, a mobile home may be
used or occupied as a dwelling when located within a mobile home park
established, licensed and conducted in accordance with this chapter.
B. Definitions. Certain words used in this chapter are hereinafter defined
and explained. Other words used in this chapter shall have the
meanings commonly attributed to them.
INTERNAL STREET — A paved road within the boundaries of the
mobile home park.
LICENSE, MOBILE HOME PARK — A written license issued by the
Town Clerk allowing a person to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued
hereunder.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-detached dwelling for one
(1) family suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same
water supply, waste disposal and electrical conveniences as immobile
housing. A "mobile home" is designed and built to be towed on its own
chassis, comprised of a frame and wheels, and is connected to utilities
and designed without a permanent foundation for year-round living.
A unit may contain parts that may be folded, collapsed or telescoped
when being towed and expanded later to provide additional cubic
capacity, as well as two (2) or more separately towable components
designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of being again
separated into the components for repeated towing. A "mobile home" is
not to be confused with a travel trailer which is towed by an automobile,
can be operated independently of utility connections, is limited in width
to eight (8) feet, in length to thirty-five (35) feet and is designed to be
used principally as a temporary vacation dwelling.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land for the placement of a single
mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of a mobile home lot which has
been reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant
structures or additions.
PERMIT — A written permit issued by the Building Inspector permitting
the construction, alteration and/or extension of a mobile home park
under the provisions of this chapter and regulations issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association or corporation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — That portion of designated land set aside for the
installation of utilities and/or sidewalks, curbs, gutters or other
unrestricted uses and maintained by the owner.
§ 80-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 80-1
80:193
§ 80-2. Approval procedure.
SERVICE OR RECREATIONAL BUILDING — A structure housing
operational, office, recreational, park maintenance and other facilities
built to conform to required local standards.
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AREA — A district shown upon the Zoning
Map of the Town of West Seneca and established by the Town Board
pursuant to a Town Zoning Ordinance authorizing a mobile home park.
A. General. In accordance with the procedures, standards and conditions
hereinafter specified, the Town of West Seneca Planning Board may,
when authorized by the Town Board, approve mobile home parks
located in a special development area established for such purpose.
B. Application. Application for a mobile home park shall be submitted to
the Town Clerk, Town of West Seneca, who shall, upon receipt, transmit
the application to the Town Board and a copy thereof to the Planning
Board and Building Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by
the following:
(1) Preliminary layout. A paper design indicating the layout of the
proposed special development area, including but not limited to
area for mobile homes, recreation area, drainage and access roads.
(2) Final plan. A modified plan meeting substantially the requirements
for a final plat under town subdivision regulations and existing
zoning ordinances20 and showing a mobile home park in
accordance with this chapter.
(3) Statement. A written statement describing the proposed method of
providing, financing and administering water supply, drainage and
sewage disposal systems and of owning and administering open
space land. Four (4) copies shall be submitted.
(4) Other. The Town Board or Planning Board may request the
submission of such additional information that it deems necessary
in order to decide on the application.
(5) Application fee. An application fee of five dollars ($5.) for each
building lot shown on the final plan.
C. Petition. In accordance with the town zoning ordinance, the person
applying for mobile home park shall also submit to the Town Board a
petition for the establishment of a special development area for
purposes of authorizing the mobile home park.
D. Initial action. The Planning Board shall first review the preliminary
layout and by resolution determine the number of lots that constitute a
reasonable subdivision of the land. The Planning Board shall then
report to the Town Board its recommendations for approval,
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Subdivision of land, and Ch. 120, Zoning, respectively.
§ 80-1 WEST SENECA CODE § 80-2
80:194
§ 80-3. Standards.
The mobile home park and mobile homes therein shall conform to the
standards hereinafter specified:
modification or disapproval of the plan. The Town Board may, after a
public hearing, thereafter establish the special development area for
the mobile home park and authorize the Planning Board to approve
such park in accordance with the final plan with or without
modifications specified by the Town Board, taking into account, among
other factors, the suitability of plans, financial arrangements and
administrative methods for water supply, drainage and sewage
disposal; the location and suitability of proposed open space land and
the proposed ownership and administrative methods therefor; and the
effect of the mobile home park on the appropriate and orderly
development of the neighborhood, the appropriate use of adjacent
property and the appearance and character of the neighborhood. If
the special development area is established by the Town Board and
the mobile home park is thereby authorized by the Town Board, with
or without modifications and conditions, the Planning Board may then
approve the application subject to modifications and conditions
specified by the Town Board or that the Planning Board deems
necessary to comply with the land subdivision regulations and this
chapter.
E. Final action. Approval of the application authorizes the applicant to
submit to the Planning Board an application for approval of a special
development area for the mobile home park. Upon receipt, the Planning
Board shall transmit to the Town Board a copy of the application for a
mobile home park together with accompanying maps and plans. The
Town Board shall determine compliance with its original authorization.
Upon determination of such compliance, the Planning Board shall act
on the mobile home park in the same manner as required for action on
subdivision plats under the land subdivision regulations.
F. Construction permit. Mobile home parks approved by the Planning
Board under this chapter may be established only after an application
for a construction permit has been submitted to the Building Inspector
and a construction permit has been issued by him. Any fee required
shall be established by the Town Board.
G. Certificate of occupancy. In addition to the license requirements of this
chapter, a mobile home park may be used or occupied and each mobile
home, service building and other accessory building in a mobile home
park may be used or occupied only after a certificate of occupancy
therefor has been issued by the Building Inspector certifying
conformity with this chapter.
A. District and acreage. The mobile home park shall be located in a special
development area established by the Town Board under the Town
§ 80-2 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 80-3
80:195
Zoning Ordinance. The area included in the mobile home park,
excluding existing roads, shall consist of not less than fifteen (15) acres.
B. Number of lots. The number of mobile home lots shown on the mobile
home park plan shall not exceed the number of lots shown on the final
plan and determined by the Planning Board to constitute a reasonable
division of the land under the regular provisions of the zoning
ordinance existing prior to establishment of the special development
area.
C. Size of lots and yards. Each mobile home lot shall contain at least five
thousand (5,000) square feet and shall be of such shape that each
mobile home is placed on the lot so as to meet the following minimum
requirements:
(1) Front yard setback depth from the mobile home development
street: fifteen (15) feet.
(2) Setback from the mobile home lot line on the entry side: twenty
(20) feet.
(3) Side yard setback from the mobile home lot line on the side
opposite from the main entry of the mobile home: five (5) feet.
(4) Rear yard setback from the mobile home lot line: fifteen (15) feet.
D. Accessory buildings on individual lots. One (1) accessory building not
exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet in dimension per park
lot is permitted. No portion of the accessory building shall be located
closer to the internal street than the mobile home. The accessory
building shall be located as indicated on the subdivision plat.
E. Design and construction of mobile homes. Each mobile home shall
conform to the following:
(1) Codes. No mobile home shall be placed or installed in a mobile
home park unless it meets or exceeds the American National
Standard for Mobile Homes (ANSI A119.1-1972, NFPA No.
501B-1976) and the Safety Standard for Liquid Fuel-Burning
Heating Appliances for Mobile Homes and Travel Trailers (ANSI
A-147.1-1969), in addition to New York State and federal codes.
(2) Skirts. Each mobile home owner shall be required to enclose the
open space beneath the mobile home with a skirt constructed of
either metal, wood, masonry or approved material, properly
ventilated, within sixty (60) days after arrival in the park.
F. Parking, roadways and access. The following shall be provided for
vehicular and pedestrian access:
(1) Parking area. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided
for each mobile home lot. Each parking space must have a
minimum of one hundred eighty (180) square feet and may be
§ 80-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 80-3
80:196
grouped with others in a common or semicommon parking bay as
indicated on the approved plat plan.
(2) Access. The entrance road connecting the mobile home park
streets with a public road shall have a minimum paved road width
of twenty-four (24) feet or a total of thirty-six (36) feet, including
rights-of-way.
(3) Internal streets. Internal streets shall conform to the following:
(a) The width of all rights-of-way shall be a minimum of thirty (30)
feet, twenty-four (24) feet of which shall be paved. The
Planning Board may approve one-way traffic for internal
streets with the minimum width and paved area being reduced
accordingly.
(b) Culs-de-sac shall be provided in lieu of closed-end streets and
shall have a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of
at least ninety (90) feet.
(c) All streets shall be well drained and paved.
(4) Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided, with style and
location of lighting fixtures in accordance with final plan.
G. Landscaping. The mobile home park shall present a sightly appearance,
and the park applicant shall present a plan acceptable to the Planning
Board for landscaping the park. Such plan may incorporate the natural
growth and features or provide planted screenings.
H. Sanitation and drainage. The following provisions shall be made for
water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and solid waste disposal:
(1) Water supply. An adequate supply of water shall be provided for
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory buildings as
required by this chapter.
(2) Sewerage system. An adequate and approved system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities.
Such systems must be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with Erie County Department of Health standards and
regulations and with the Town of West Seneca Sewer Ordinance.21
(3) Drainage. An adequate system of storm drainage pipes, ditches and
appurtenances shall be provided and shall be approved by the Town
Engineer and the Planning Board. All runoff shall be conducted to a
suitable natural stream or runoff where the applicant has rights of
discharge.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 97, Sewers.
§ 80-3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 80-3
80:197
(4) Garbage and refuse. Each mobile home park shall make provision
for sanitary equipment to prevent littering of the grounds and
premises with rubbish, garbage and refuse. Each mobile home
shall have containers with tightly fitting covers. Disposal shall be
provided for all rubbish, trash and garbage at least weekly by the
park owner or his agent and in conformance with town disposal
requirements.
I. Electrical distribution and individual systems. The following electrical
systems and services shall be provided:
(1) Distribution. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system
consisting of wiring fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with local electric
power company's specifications and regulations. The design,
installation, inspection and testing of the electric distribution
system and the materials and fixtures used therein shall conform to
the applicable requirements of the National Electrical Code (ANSI
C1-1971, NFPA No. 70-1981) and the utility supplying electrical
service to the mobile home park.
(2) Undergrounding. All utility distribution lines shall be placed below
ground.
(3) Service. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with not less than
a one-hundred-ampere service.
J. Fuel supply and storage. Fuel supply and storage shall be provided as
follows:
(1) Fuel and storage. Fuel supply systems for the mobile home park
may be natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas or fuel oil, or a
combination thereof. Where fuel oil and/or liquefied petroleum gas
is used, the oil service may be provided from a central storage tank
through an underground distribution system. The liquefied
petroleum gas must be supplied from a central storage tank
through an underground distribution system.
(2) Codes. Storage and distribution systems shall conform to the
following code requirements:
(a) Natural, mixed or liquefied petroleum gas distribution systems
shall conform to the applicable requirements of the New York
Codes, Rules and Regulations, Part 255 (16 NYCRR 255).
Storage tanks for liquefied petroleum gas shall conform to the
applicable requirements of NFPA No. 58-1979 and/or 59-1979.
(b) Fuel oil storage and distribution systems shall meet or exceed
the applicable provisions of the American Standard Code for
Pressure Piping, Section 4, Oil Transportation Piping (NFPA
No. 31-1974, ANSI 295.1 - 1974). Storage tanks shall be of
welded steel construction and shall meet or exceed the
§ 80-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 80-3
80:198
§ 80-4. License; register; maintenance; inspection.
requirements of the American Petroleum Institute Standard for
Welded Steel Storage Tanks (API Std. 650).
K. Recreation and open space. In each mobile home park provision shall
be made for recreation and open space as follows:
(1) Every mobile home park shall be provided with a common
recreational area or areas for the use of persons living in the park,
which areas shall contain no less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet per mobile home lot.
(2) The Town Board, as a condition of approval, may establish such
conditions on the ownership, use and maintenance of open spaces
as it deems necessary to assure the preservation of such open
spaces for their intended purposes.
(3) The recreation areas shall have a location acceptable to the
Planning Board and be maintained by the owner.
(4) In lieu of recreation area, the Planning Board in conjunction with
the Town Board may authorize a per lot fee, which shall be placed
in escrow for use by the town to provide a recreation facility for the
general area.
A. License required. After such time that all other rules, regulations, codes
and provisions of this chapter have been met, as attested by the
Building Inspector of the Town of West Seneca, the Town Clerk of the
Town of West Seneca will issue a license for operation and maintenance
of a mobile home park. The applicant will file a licensing fee of ten
dollars ($10.) per mobile home lot. Said license is for a twelve-month
period. Requirements of this section are applicable to all mobile home
parks within the Town of West Seneca.
(1) Renewal of license.
(a) Approval of the license renewal application, accompanied by
the stipulated fee per mobile home lot, shall be based upon
demonstration that the design and maintenance of the park is
in accordance with the requirements at the time of approval of
the construction permit for the park. However, the park owner
shall be required to make changes or improvements as
required by amendments to town laws and ordinances
subsequent to the issuance of the construction permit and
within the effective date of the amendments.
(b) Prior to renewal license being issued, inspection of the mobile
home park shall be completed by the Town Building Inspector
and/or the Town Engineer or such person designated by the
Town Board. Written approval of the inspecting officer shall be
affixed to the renewal application.
§ 80-3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 80-4
80:199
§ 80-5. Applicability; prevalence of higher standards.
§ 80-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this chapter or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a
(2) Transfer of license. Licenses are not transferable except upon
written application to and approval by the Town Board of the Town
of West Seneca.
B. Register. All park owners shall keep a register of the year, make, serial
number and size of mobile homes in their parks, said register to be
maintained in the office of the park owner. The names and addresses of
the mobile home owners shall also be on file and available for
inspection by the Building Inspector or his designee.
C. Maintenance. The person to whom a license has been issued shall
operate the mobile home park in compliance with this chapter and shall
provide adequate supervision on site to maintain the park, its facilities
and equipment in good repair and in a clean, sanitary condition.
D. Inspections. A representative of the Town of West Seneca may inspect a
mobile home park at reasonable intervals and at reasonable times to
determine compliance with this chapter and other regulations or
ordinances of the Town of West Seneca.
A. Existing parks. This chapter shall not apply to trailer parks in existence
at the time of enactment hereof except as specifically noted. Preexisting
mobile home or trailer parks shall, within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the effective date of this chapter, file a plat plan with the Town
Clerk showing existing sites and facilities. Any future expansion beyond
that in existence at the time of enactment of this chapter shall meet the
requirements hereof.
B. Previous laws. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede local laws,
ordinances, codes or regulations to the extent that such laws,
ordinances, codes or regulations are inconsistent with the provisions
hereof; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the adoption and enforcement of a law, ordinance or regulation
which is more restrictive or which establishes a higher standard for
mobile home parks than those provided in this chapter, and such more
restrictive requirement or higher standard shall govern during the
period in which it is in effect.
C. Conflict with other laws. In a case where a provision of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with a provision of a zoning, building, electrical,
plumbing, fire safety or sewage disposal law or ordinance or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto or other local law, ordinance, code or
regulation, the provision or requirement which is more restrictive or
which establishes a higher standard shall prevail.
§ 80-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 80-6
80:200
violation punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days for
each such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 82
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 46.
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 100.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 82-1. Intent.
The West Seneca Town Board determines that the creation of unreasonable
noise within the Town limits is or may be detrimental to the comfort,
convenience, safety, health and welfare of Town residents and to the quality
of life of those residents. The Town, therefore, intends to prohibit
unreasonable noise from all sources subject to its police power in order to
preserve, protect and promote the health, safety and welfare, together with
the peace, quiet and enjoyment of all persons within the Town.
§ 82-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network
by a trained operator. The level so read is designated dB(a) or dBA.
DAY — Any day of the week, that is, Monday through Sunday.
DECIBEL — The practical unit of measurement for sound-pressure level; the
number of decibels of measured sound is equal to 20 times the logarithm to
the base of 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured sound to
the sound pressure of standard sound (20 micropascals); abbreviated dB.
PERSON — An individual, entity, firm or corporation.
PROPERTY BEING USED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL PURPOSES — Any
property, including vacant land, which is not used for residential purposes,
as defined herein.
PROPERTY BEING USED FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES — Property which
contains one or more dwelling units, including but not limited to singlefamily
attached or detached dwelling units, multiple dwellings, hotels,
motels, senior citizen housing, adult residential care facilities, nursing
homes, dormitories, sororities and fraternities.
§ 80-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 82-2
80:201
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY LINE — The imaginary line, including its
vertical extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another,
or the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit located within a
multiple-dwelling-unit building.
SOUND-EMITTING DEVICE — Any device, instrument, mechanism,
equipment or apparatus that emits any sounds discernible to the human ear.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels conforming to American National Standards Institute Type I or II
standards.
SOUND-REPRODUCTION DEVICES — Any device, instrument, mechanism,
equipment or apparatus for the amplification of any sounds from any radio,
phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, musical instrument,
television, loudspeaker or other sound-making or sound-producing device,
or any device or apparatus for the reproduction or amplification of the
human voice or other sound.
STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE — Any device, fixed or movable, which is
located or used on geographically defined real property other than a public
right-of-way.
UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any noise defined in § 82-3 of this chapter.
§ 82-3. Unreasonable noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, cause to be made,
or permit to be made any unreasonable noise within the geographic
boundaries of the Town of West Seneca, or within those areas over which
the Town has jurisdiction. The determination as to the existence of
unreasonable noise may be established by the specific acts considered to be
unreasonable noise enumerated within the subsections hereinafter.
§ 82-4. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing or excessive noise in
violation of this chapter, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive.
A. Amplified sound. The operation, playing or permitting of the operation
or playing of any radio, receiver, television, phonograph, tape player,
compact disc or digital sound systems, sound amplifier, boom box,
musical instrument, loudspeaker, or similar device, whether from a
moving vehicle or stationary location, which reproduces or amplifies
sound in such a manner as to create a sound level across a real property
line or through partitions common to two or more persons within a
building or from a stationary or moving vehicle and which exceeds the
limits set forth in Table I,22 herein. (This subsection does not apply to
commercial enterprises or industrial manufacturing plants in the
regular conduct of their business on their own properties.)
22.Editor's Note: Table I is included in § 82-5, Noise levels by land use.
§ 82-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 82-4
80:202
B. Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn, signaling
device or alarm (except as a danger warning, pursuant to § 375 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York) which results in harsh
or loud sound or repetitive sounds for any unreasonable or unnecessary
period of time so as to create a noise disturbance.
C. Shouting and yelling. Shouting, yelling, singing, calling, hooting or
whistling so as to create a noise disturbance.
D. Engines. The operation, including the stationary idling, of any engine,
including, but not limited to, an automobile, truck, motorcycle,
motorbike, motorboat or minibike engine, so as to create a noise
disturbance, or the use of any automobile, motorcycle or motor vehicle
so out of repair, so loaded or in any manner so as to create excessive or
unusual grating, grinding, rattling or other noise, or the discharge into
the open air of the exhaust from any stationary steam engine, stationary
internal combustion engine or motorboat engine, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive
noises therefrom which exceed maximum permissible sound levels in
Table I23 herein. (This subsection does not apply to commercial
enterprises or industrial manufacturing plants in the regular conduct of
their business on their own properties.)
E. Heavy equipment. The operation of any pile driver, bulldozer,
pneumatic hammer, grinder, or other construction equipment which
creates a noise disturbance, except between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
and except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety.
F. Construction. Any construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair which creates a noise disturbance, except between 7:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. and except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of
public safety.
G. Domestic equipment. The operation of or permitting to be operated any
power saw, drill, sander, router, lawn or garden device, leaf or snow
blower, insect control device or domestic equipment so as to create a
noise disturbance, except between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. However,
the use of snowblowers, chain saws and other domestic tools and
equipment are exempted from these limits when they are being used to
clear driveways, streets, or walkways during and within 24 hours after
snowfalls, rainstorms, ice storms, windstorms, or similar emergencies.
H. Machinery. The operation of any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, airconditioning
apparatus or other mechanical device in such a manner as
to create a noise disturbance which exceeds maximum permissible
sound levels in Table I24 herein. (This subsection does not apply to
commercial enterprises or industrial manufacturing plants in the
regular conduct of their business on their own properties.)
23.Editor's Note: Table I is included in § 82-5, Noise levels by land use.
24.Editor's Note: Table I is included in § 82-5, Noise levels by land use.
§ 82-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 82-4
80:203
§ 82-5. Noise levels by land use.
I. Loading and unloading. The loading or unloading of any materials,
equipment or garbage cans or the handling of bales, boxes, crates,
containers or similar objects so as to create a noise disturbance which
exceeds maximum permissible sound levels in Table I,25 herein.
J. Domestic animals. The howling, barking, whining, squawking, neighing
or other sound of a domestic animal which occurs continuously or
intermittently or so frequently so as to create a noise disturbance. (For
purposes of this subsection, "continuous" shall be a period of 10
minutes and "intermittent" shall be a period of 30 minutes.)
K. The making of any noise for advertising purposes in any street or public
place, or by means of aircraft, or the advertisement or calling attention
to any advertisement, article, business, calling or profession upon any
street, sidewalk or entrance to a place of business by means of any
horn, megaphone, siren, bell, radio or any other sound-producing or
sound-amplifying mechanism, instrument or device.
L. Alarms. The sounding or permitting of the sounding of any exterior
alarm on any building or motor vehicle, unless such alarm shall
terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its being activated.
M. Stationary emergency signaling devices. Testing of only the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall occur at the same time each day when a test is performed,
but not before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. Any such testing shall not
exceed one minute.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated
any noise source in such a manner as to create a sound pressure level in
dB(A)s which exceeds the limits set forth in Table I when measured at
the real property boundary of the complainant.
Table I
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Category
Receiving Land Use (dBA)
Sound Source Land Use Residential Commercial Manufacturing
Residential
7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 95 95 95
11:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 65 65 65
Commercial and
Manufacturing
7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 95 100 100
25.Editor's Note: Table I is included in § 82-5, Noise levels by land use.
§ 82-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 82-5
80:204
§ 82-6. Presumptive evidence of violation.
§ 82-7. Exceptions; construal of provisions.
Table I
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use Category
Receiving Land Use (dBA)
Sound Source Land Use Residential Commercial Manufacturing
11:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 65 75 75
B. The restrictions set forth in this chapter shall not apply to alarms as
defined in § 82-4B of this chapter.
C. In the event that qualified Town personnel approved by the Chief of
Police or Code Enforcement Officer are not available to operate a
sound-level meter, this chapter shall liberally be construed by Town
personnel with proper police power to prevent excessive, unreasonable,
disturbing and unnecessary noise, due consideration being given to the
circumstances, time of day and particular location of each violation and
the demands of the public health, safety and welfare.
A. The use of any sound-producing, sound-reproducing or soundamplifying
device, machinery, domestic equipment, heavy equipment or
engine so as to cause the sound produced thereby to be audible outside
the building or beyond the boundary of the property (real and personal)
where it originates, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day, shall be presumptive, prima facie evidence of a violation
of this chapter.
B. Barking, squawking, whining, neighing or any other domestic animal
sound which is audible at a point beyond the real property boundary
from which such sound emanates and which continues continuously for
10 minutes, or intermittently for over 30 minutes, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be presumptive, prima facie evidence of
a violation of this chapter.
A. The following sounds are exempt from the operation of this chapter:
(1) The sounds created by emergency vehicles, such as fire, police or
ambulance, while on emergency calls using radios, sirens, horns,
bells or whistles.
(2) The sounds created by any governmental agency or by the use of a
public warning device.
(3) The sounds created by sporting events, public organization, private
schools, carnivals, fairs, exhibitions, picnics or parades, provided
that such events shall take place between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight local time.
§ 82-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 82-7
80:205
§ 82-8. On-duty police officers and firemen excepted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to police officers and firemen
while in the discharge of duty.
§ 82-9. Enforcement.
(4) The sounds created by emergency construction work or repair
which is necessary for the protection of life, property or restoration
of utility service.
(5) The sounds created by trains, buses, aircraft or other items of
transportation governed by either the state of federal noise
regulations.
(6) The sounds created by emergency alarms, such as fire alarms, or
burglar alarms, prior to a reasonable opportunity for the owner or
tenant in possession of the premises served by such alarm to turn
off the alarm.
(7) The sounds created by bells or chimes associated with a church,
synagogue or other place of public worship.
(8) The sounds created by municipal refuse collection.
(9) The sounds created by activities that are otherwise governed,
authorized or permitted under state or federal regulations.
(10) The sounds created by any legitimate commercial or industrial use
or activity as long as the noise emanating therefrom does not begin
prior to the hour of 7:00 a.m. and does not regularly run beyond the
hour of 11:00 p.m. local time or is not otherwise scheduled to run
beyond 11:00 p.m. local time.
B. It is the intention of the Town Board that this chapter, while in addition
to and supplementing the federal and state regulations, be construed to
secure for the people freedom from unlawful noise as described herein,
without violating any of the rights secured by the Constitution of the
United States or the Constitution of the State of New York.
A. When the enforcement officer or official seeks to apply the decibel
provisions set forth in the aforementioned Table I26 relative to any
violation of this chapter, such officer shall use a sound-level meter
conforming to ANSI (American National Standards Institute). Type I or
II standards shall be used and shall be calibrated at least annually. Only
qualified Town personnel approved by the Chief of Police of Code
Enforcement Officer shall operate, witness and read the sound-level
meter(s) and related equipment. Qualified Town personnel approved by
the Chief of Police or Code Enforcement Officer shall be able to enforce
this chapter in the event that a sound-level meter is not available.
26.Editor's Note: Table I is included in § 82-5, Noise levels by land use.
§ 82-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 82-9
80:206
§ 82-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a violation and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250
or imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or both. Each day that such
violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense punishable as such.
§ 82-11. Severability.
If any section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence or other portion of this
chapter shall for any reason be held or adjudged to be invalid or illegal
or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the intention
of the Town Board that such section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence or
other portion so adjudged invalid, illegal or unenforceable shall be deemed
separate, distinct and independent and the remainder of this chapter shall
be and remain in full force and effect.
§ 82-12. Repealer.
The Noise Ordinance of the Town of West Seneca, adopted by the Town
Board on October 21, 1974, and all amendments thereto, are hereby
repealed.
§ 82-13. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective upon its filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 83
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
§ 83-1. Responsibility of town; failure to correct. [Amended
1-22-1990]
No civil action shall be maintained against the Town of West Seneca,
hereinafter referred to as the "town," or the Town Superintendent of
Highways of the town or against any improvement district in the town
for damages or injuries to persons or property sustained by reason of
any highway, bridge, culvert, highway marking, sign or device, sidewalk
or crosswalk or any other property owned, operated or maintained by the
town, or any property owned, operated or maintained by any improvement
district therein, being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed, unless written notice of such defective, unsafe, dangerous or
obstructed condition of such highway, bridge, culvert, highway marking,
sign or device, sidewalk or crosswalk or any other property owned,
operated or maintained by the town, or any property owned, operated or
B. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Town of
West Seneca and qualified Town personnel as designated by the Chief of
Police or Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 82-9 NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS § 83-1
83:207
maintained by any improvement district, was actually given to the Town
Clerk of the town or the Town Superintendent of Highways of the town and
there was a failure or neglect within a reasonable time after giving of such
notice to repair or remove the defect, danger or obstruction complained of;
and no such action shall be maintained for damages or injuries to persons
or property sustained solely in consequence of the existence of snow or
ice upon any highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk or crosswalk or any other
property owned by the town or any property owned by any improvement
district in the town unless written notice thereof, specifying the particular
place, was actually given to the Town Clerk of the town or the Town
Superintendent of Highways of the town and there was a failure or neglect
to cause such snow or ice to be removed or to make the place otherwise
reasonably safe within a reasonable time after the receipt of such notice.
§ 83-2. Transmission of notice by Superintendent of Highways.
[Amended 1-22-1990]
The Town Superintendent of Highways shall transmit in writing to the Town
Clerk, within five (5) days after the receipt thereof, all written notices
received by him or her pursuant to this chapter and § 65-a of the Town Law.
§ 83-3. Procedure of Town Clerk. [Amended 1-22-1990]
The Town Clerk of the town shall cause all written notices received by him
or her pursuant to this chapter to be recorded and preserved pursuant to
Subdivision 4 of § 65-a of the Town Law.
§ 83-4. Supersession of statutory provisions.
This chapter shall supersede in its application to the Town of West Seneca,
Erie County, New York, Subdivisions 1 and 3 of § 65-a of the Town Law.
§ 83-5. Effect on other acts.
This chapter does not affect or impair any act done or right accruing,
accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred,
asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted, as fully and to the same extent
as if such law had not been effected.
§ 83-6. Amendment. [Added 1-22-1990]
The Notice of Defects Ordinance, Chapter 83, Part II, of the Code of the
Town of West Seneca, New York, originally adopted, is hereby amended.
§ 83-7. Severability. [Added 1-22-1990]
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter or application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall be adjudged by any court to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof or the application thereof to other persons and circumstances but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or
§ 83-1 WEST SENECA CODE § 83-7
83:208
part thereof and the persons and circumstances directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
Chapter 83A
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 92.
§ 83A-1. Intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect and promote the public
health, safety and general welfare by requiring property owners of private
dwellings or businesses, to affix house numbers on their structures to aid
emergency service personnel in the prompt identification of the affected
structures.
§ 83A-2. Placement.
House numbers shall be affixed to the structure in a prominent location,
facing the principal street, immediately adjacent to the front door or, if no
door is present, adjacent to the corner of the house closest to the driveway.
§ 83A-3. Enforcement.
Enforcement will be the duty of the Town of West Seneca Building Inspector.
A. House numbers shall be at least four inches in height. The numbers
shall be so placed that they will not be obstructed by trees, shrubbery,
porches or other extensions of the building. Wherever practicable, said
numbers shall be placed near some light, or source of illumination, so
that they may be readily seen at night.
B. If the structure is more than 75 feet from a public or private road, the
numbers shall be permanently affixed to a post or a panel immediately
adjacent to the entrance driveway of said structure. The numbers shall
be so placed that trees, shrubs and other obstructions do not block the
line of sight of the numbers from the center of the street.
C. New structures shall have numbers permanently affixed prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
D. Existing structures shall have one year after the adoption of this
ordinance to come into compliance.
A. Noncompliance is deemed a violation. Any person, corporation,
partnership or other entity owning a building within the Town of West
Seneca refusing or neglecting for 60 days after notice from the Building
§ 83-7 NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS § 83A-3
83:209
§ 83A-4. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation of this chapter is hereby deemed and declared an offense,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $250. Each calendar weeks or portion
thereof, that said violation continues shall be a separate violation.
§ 83A-5. Definitions and word usage.
Chapter 84
OUTDOOR FUND-RAISING EVENTS
§ 84-1. Legislative intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Town of West Seneca by regulating outdoor fund-raising
events to be held by community organizations.
§ 84-2. Definitions.
The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION — Any veteran's organization, fire company,
fire district or church owning land in the Town of West Seneca.
Inspector to place the proper designated number on said building shall
be deemed in violation of this chapter.
B. Numbering of building by the town. In the event of the neglect or
refusal of any owner, after notice, to cause said building to be properly
numbered, the Building Inspector of the Town of West Seneca may
cause said building to be properly numbered.
C. The Building Inspector shall report the cost of numbering said building
to the Town Board, and said Board shall order such cost collected in the
same manner as other town assessments and fees.
A. Word usage.
(1) The word "shall" is mandatory.
(2) The word "may" is permissive.
(3) The word "should" is to be interpreted as expressing that which is
essential.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the
meanings indicated:
STRUCTURE — A dwelling or any building used for commercial or
residential purposes.
§ 83A-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 84-2
84:210
OUTDOOR FUND-RAISING EVENT — Any outdoor event held by the
community organization on its land, which is open to the general public
where an admission fee is charged and/or alcoholic beverages are sold.
§ 84-3. Permit required.
No community organization shall hold an outdoor fund-raising event
without first obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector.
§ 84-4. Application for license.
§ 84-5. Hours of operation.
No music shall be played past 11:00 p.m. at an outdoor fund-raising event,
and no event shall be scheduled past 12:00 midnight without prior approval
of the West Seneca Town Board.
§ 84-6. Number of events allowed annually.
No community organization shall hold more than three fund-raising events
per year without prior approval of the West Seneca Town Board.
§ 84-7. Restrictions upon permit.
All events shall be located on the community organization's property at
the location that will have the least impact on any surrounding residential
neighborhood.
A. The application for the permit shall be made at least 21 days prior to
the date of the outdoor fund-raising event.
B. No event shall be scheduled or advertised until a permit is obtained.
C. The application for the permit shall include:
(1) The name and address of the organization.
(2) The name of the chief executive officer of the community
organization.
(3) The name of the individual responsible for coordinating the outdoor
fund-raising event.
(4) The date of the event and proposed hours of operation.
(5) The nature of the entertainment. (Live music is permitted.)
(6) Whether alcoholic beverages will be sold.
(7) Proof of compliance with requirements of New York Liquor
Authority.
(8) The purpose of the fund-raising.
§ 84-2 OUTDOOR FUND-RAISING EVENTS § 84-8
84:211
§ 84-8. License fee.
There shall be no license fee.
§ 84-9. Conflict with other regulations.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit use of land as otherwise
permitted in the West Seneca Town Code or Chapter 120, Zoning.
§ 84-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 85
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trespassing — See Ch. 112. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 85-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Any tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the Town
of West Seneca which is either owned or leased by the Town of West Seneca
and which is designed for public use as a playground, athletic field or picnic
grove.
§ 85-2. Park rules and regulations.
§ 85-3. Penalties for offenses.
A. All park facilities are for the use and benefit of residents of the Town of
West Seneca. Persons not residents of the Town of West Seneca are
prohibited from such facilities.
B. All park facilities are open daily throughout the year. Closing time
throughout the year is determined by sunset. All persons are to vacate
the park facilities at sunset.
C. Alcoholic beverages may not be kept or consumed on town park
facilities.
D. All motor vehicles are prohibited from all park facilities. For purposes of
this subsection, motor vehicles shall include automobiles, motorcycles,
motorbikes, minibikes and any other vehicle powered by motor.
§ 84-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 85-3
85:212
§ 85-4. Posting of rules.
Rules and regulations as prescribed in § 85-2 hereof shall be posted at
entrances to town parks.
Chapter 87
PEDDLING, SOLICITING, TRANSIENT BUSINESS, AND
MOBILE FOOD VENDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 82.
Trespassing — See Ch. 112.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 87-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the community, and to preserve and protect the property
of the Town of West Seneca and its residents.
§ 87-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth unless
the context of their use clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person by or for whom an application is made under this
chapter.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION —
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE — A self-contained mobile food unit in which
ready-to-eat food is prepared, cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or
portioned for service, sale, or distribution.
A. Any person found to be in violation of the above rules and regulations
shall be guilty of a violation as defined in the Penal Law of the State of
New York, Section 10.00.3.
B. In addition to the above penalties, any person found to be in violation of
the above rules and regulations shall be prohibited from further use of
all park facilities in the Town of West Seneca.
Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, military veterans, not-forprofit,
educational or religious association, society or other
organization or any other association, society or organization qualified
as a tax-exempt organization under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue
Code.
A.
Any governmental entity or organization, including, without limitation,
a school district, fire district and fire company.
B.
§ 85-3 PARKS § 87-2
85:213
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — The owner or owner's agent of a mobile food
vehicle.
PEDDLER — A person who engages in peddling.
PEDDLING —
PERSON — A natural person, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, joint venture, society or other organization or
association of any kind, whether acting as principal, agent, employer or
employee.
PROPERTY — Any goods, wares, merchandise or other article or thing of
every kind or nature except newspapers.
SOLICITING —
SOLICITOR — A person who engages in soliciting.
TOWN — The Town of West Seneca.
TRANSIENT BUSINESS — A retail or wholesale business, other than a
mobile food vehicle vendor (as regulated separately in this chapter),
conducted from a temporary structure or tent, truck, van or trailer, stand,
parking lot or vacant parcel of land, in a public right-of-way or in or on any
other place in the Town, but not 1) outdoor sales of property or services
accessory to a business conducted within a permanent structure on a same
premises or 2) the sale of food products raised or produced on the same
premises from a temporary or seasonal stand, provided that the principal
structure or activities otherwise comply with the Zoning Ordinance and
other ordinances of the Town.
§ 87-3. Permit or registration required.
Selling or offering for sale, barter or exchange any property or service,
either for immediate or future delivery or performance upon any street,
road or highway or from house to house in the Town, and including,
without limitation, activities commonly known as "hawking."
A.
Peddling shall not apply to the selling and offering for sale of bread
or bakery products, milk or milk products, ice cream or ice cream
products, daily, weekly or other papers within the Town or the selling
of real estate by real estate agents licensed in the State of New York or
insurance by insurance agents or brokers licensed under the insurance
laws of the State of New York.
B.
Seeking, taking or offering contracts or orders for any property for
future sale or delivery or performance of any service upon any street,
road or highway or from house to house in the Town.
A.
Seeking or taking subscriptions or contributions of money or property,
upon any street, road or highway or from house to house in the Town.
B.
§ 87-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 87-3
85:214
§ 87-4. Exemptions.
No permit under this chapter shall be required:
§ 87-5. Hours. [Amended 6-20-2016 by L.L. No. 9-2016]
No peddling, soliciting or transient business activities shall be conducted
before 9:00 a.m., or after the earlier of 7:00 p.m. or dusk. Mobile food
vending shall not be conducted before 7:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.
§ 87-6. Application requirements.
A. No person shall engage in peddling, soliciting, mobile food vehicle
vending or a transient business without first obtaining a permit or
registering or both as required by this chapter.
B. No motor vehicle shall be used for peddling, mobile food vehicle
vending or conducting a transient business unless a permit shall first
have been obtained, which permit shall at all times be displayed in a
conspicuous location that is visible from the outside of the vehicle.
A. By any charitable organization or its agents or employees or veterans
licensed pursuant to General Business Law § 32.
B. By any business, service or activity licensed under any other ordinance
or law of the Town of West Seneca.
C. For lawn cutting, leaf raking and snow shoveling services for residential
property.
D. By political parties and candidates for public office.
E. For peddlers and solicitors not over 16 years old.
A. Any person desiring a license under this chapter shall first register with
the Town Clerk of the Town of West Seneca and shall file with said Town
Clerk an application, in writing, containing the following information:
(1) The name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant.
(2) A physical description of the applicant, giving date of birth, height,
weight and color of hair and eyes. A photograph may be required.
(3) The name and address of the person, if any, by whom the applicant
is employed and for whom or through whom orders are to be
solicited, cleared, filled and delivered.
(4) A description of the business or activity in which the applicant
intends to engage and of the nature of any property or services
involved.
(5) For peddlers or solicitors, a list of crimes for which the applicant
has been arrested or convicted, including the dates and places.
§ 87-3 PARKS § 87-6
85:215
§ 87-7. Investigation of applicant and issuance of license.
(6) A statement as to the period of time during which the applicant
intends to engage in the business or activity regulated under this
chapter, not to exceed one year.
(7) Proof that the applicant, or his or her employer or principal, is
registered for sales tax purposes, if the business or activity to be
conducted is subject to sales or use tax.
(8) A description of any motor vehicle that will be used for pickup or
delivery of property or for the purpose of bringing any such
property into the Town for peddling, soliciting or transient business
purposes, or from which a transient business will be conducted, to
include the name of manufacturer, year, type of vehicle, vehicle
identification number, registration plate number, title holder and
name of the person other than the title holder to whom the vehicle
is registered, if any.
(9) The location where a transient business or mobile food vending
operation is to be conducted, if known.
(10) Further information required by the Town Clerk, the Police
Department or the Code Enforcement Office.
B. The application shall be signed by the applicant and sworn to before a
notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths.
C. If mobile food vending or a transient business is to be conducted on
private property, the written consent of the property owner, if other
than the applicant, shall be filed with the application or shall be
prominently displayed on the mobile food vending vehicle or at the
transient business site.
A. For peddling or soliciting permit applications, the Town Clerk shall
forward a copy of the application to the Police Department. The Police
Department shall, to the extent possible, determine whether or not the
applicant has accurately reported convictions.
B. A copy of any application for a transient business or mobile food vendor
shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Office. The Code
Enforcement Office shall, to the extent possible, determine whether or
not the equipment or vehicle presents a danger to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community, including preservation and
protection of the property of the Town and its residents.
C. The Police Department and Code Enforcement Office shall report the
results of their investigations of applications to the Town Clerk within
10 business days of the receipt of the copy. The Police Department and
Code Enforcement Office, in their sole discretion, may recommend
denial of a permit should their investigation yield results which indicate
the applicant misrepresented his or her conviction record or the
§ 87-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 87-7
85:216
§ 87-8. Fees. [Amended 6-20-2016 by L.L. No. 9-2016]
The following fees shall be paid to the Town Clerk with an application for a
permit:
Type of Permit Fee
Peddler's or solicitor's permit $75 per month
Transient business permit $50
Mobile food vehicle vendor permit $50 for the first vehicle
$25 for each additional vehicle
$25 for permit renewals in
accordance with § 87-9
§ 87-9. Permit regulations.
equipment or vehicle presents a danger. A denial shall be provided the
applicant in writing, specifically setting forth the grounds for denial.
D. After receiving a determination from the Police Department and the
Code Enforcement Office, the Town Clerk shall thereupon signify
approval or rejection on the reverse side of the application. If approved,
the Town Clerk shall issue the license to such applicant. To such license
shall be affixed one photograph of the applicant, identified by the
applicant's signature, which shall, in part, cover said photograph.
A. After receipt of reports from the Police Department and Code
Enforcement Office, when required, the Town Clerk shall issue the
permit requested unless denied.
B. Solicitor's, peddler's or transient business permits issued pursuant to
this chapter automatically expire 30 days after issuance. [Amended
6-20-2016 by L.L. No. 9-2016]
C. Mobile food vendor permits shall automatically expire one year after
the date of issuance. A mobile food vendor permit may be renewed
within 30 days of expiration. Renewals shall be subject to investigation
as set forth in § 87-7.
D. Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferable.
E. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked if, following its
issuance, the Police Department and Code Enforcement Office, in their
sole discretion, determine the applicant misrepresented his or her
conviction record or the equipment or vehicle presents a danger. A
revocation shall be provided the applicant in writing, specifically
setting forth the grounds for denial.
F. A transient business permit shall be limited to a single location. If the
location is in a public right-of-way, it must be approved by the state,
§ 87-7 PARKS § 87-9
85:217
county or Town authority having jurisdiction. If the location is not in a
public right-of-way, it must be approved by the Building Department.
G. For mobile food vendors:
(1) It shall be unlawful to conduct business from a mobile food vehicle
within a public right-of-way or on private property within the Town
without having first obtained a valid mobile food vendor permit for
each mobile food vehicle.
(2) It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor to conduct business in
a location within 100 feet of the primary entrance of an
establishment that is open to the public and where ready-to-eat
food is prepared, cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or
portioned for service, sale, or distribution. This requirement shall
be waived if permission for the mobile food vending operation is
obtained from the owner of the property that contains the
establishment where ready-to-eat food is prepared, cooked,
wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned for service, sale or
distribution.
(3) Within nonresidential zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for a
mobile food vendor to conduct business at a single location within a
public right-of-way for a duration exceeding three hours. Within
residential zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for a mobile food
vendor to conduct business within a public right-of-way except for
mobile food vehicles that operate for less than 20 minutes at a
single location or that operate within an area where a block party is
being conducted.
(4) At all times, mobile food vendors must abide by the New York State
Transportation Law and all applicable parking, vehicle and traffic
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(5) All signage associated with a mobile food vendor must be
permanently affixed to the mobile food vehicle. No accessory
signage shall be placed outside or around the mobile food vehicle.
(6) All mobile food vendors must provide trash receptacles of sufficient
capacity to contain all trash and waste generated in association
with the business of the mobile food vendor. All waste and trash
shall be placed in the trash receptacles. All trash, waste, litter and
debris shall be removed from the site of the vending operation at
the end of each daily operation.
(7) It shall be unlawful to discharge liquid waste, fats, oils or grease on
the land. Such discharges shall be held in appropriate containers
and then disposed of in a legally permissible manner.
(8) Mobile food vendors shall not conduct operations from a site that
contains a gasoline service.
§ 87-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 87-9
85:218
§ 87-10. Prohibited acts.
§ 87-11. Trespassing.
§ 87-12. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
violation. Each violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.
(9) Each mobile food vehicle shall be inspected annually by the Code
Enforcement Office for firesafety code compliance.
(10) All required permits shall be posted conspicuously on the mobile
food vehicle.
(11) Each mobile food vehicle shall be registered as a commercial
vehicle with the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles.
(12) When parked on a public or private right-of-way, products shall not
be dispensed from the street side of the mobile food vehicle.
(13) When parked on a public or private right-of-way, a mobile food
vehicle shall not be parked within 60 feet of an intersection with
another public or private right-of-way boundary.
A. No person shall use private real property for any activity requiring a
permit under this chapter without the written consent of the owner.
B. No person regulated by this chapter shall hawk or cry property, offers,
contracts or services upon any location in the Town, or use any
loudspeaker, horn or other sound-making device.
C. No person holding a permit under this chapter shall engage in any
activity regulated hereunder unless he or she has the permit on his or
her person or, as it pertains to a mobile food vendor, on the mobile food
vehicle.
A. The owner or occupant of a residential building may post a notice
prohibiting peddlers and solicitors. The notice shall be placed in a
conspicuous place adjacent to the entrance door of the building. The
letters of the notice shall be at least 1/2 inch in height and shall contain
a statement saying in substance that "peddlers or solicitors are
prohibited." No person shall engage in any activity regulated by this
chapter by attempting to enter a building or ringing a doorbell or
knocking on an entrance door to any residence building at which
entrance such a notice has been posted.
B. Any person engaged in an activity regulated under this chapter,
whether that person is exempt or not, who has entered upon private
property, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart therefrom when requested to do so by any occupant.
§ 87-9 PARKS § 87-13
85:219
§ 87-13. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Code
Enforcement Office of the Town of West Seneca. Primary enforcement of
the mobile food vending regulations contained in this chapter shall be
the responsibility of the Code Enforcement Office. Matters concerning the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, the New York State Transportation Law, illegal
parking and trespassing shall be the responsibility of the Police
Department. If the Code Enforcement Office determines an issue to be a
police matter, the Building Department shall refer that issue to the Police
Department.
§ 87-14. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision of this chapter.
Chapter 88
PESTICIDES
§ 88-1. Legislative intent.
In consideration of the potential hazards associated with the use of
pesticides, the Town of West Seneca deems it prudent to employ pestcontrol
strategies that are the least hazardous to human health, safety and
the environment and adopt an integrated pest-management program that
places first priority on the utilization of nonchemical management practices;
and there is a national effort by local governments to reduce and eventually
eliminate the use of pesticides hazardous to human health, safety and the
environment; and this chapter shall apply solely to the actions of the town
or its contractors or subcontractors; and although the Town of West Seneca
government is not the biggest user of pesticides in the town, nonetheless
it is in a unique position to provide leadership and to be a model for
demonstrating pesticide use reduction.
§ 88-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTIMICROBIAL PESTICIDE — A pesticide as defined by 7 U.S.C. 136
(mm).
PEST — Any insect, rodent, fungus, weed, virus, bacteria or other
microorganism (except viruses, bacteria or other microorganisms on or in
living persons or other living animals), that the Commissioner of the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation declares to be a pest.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest and any substance
or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliator or
§ 87-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 88-2
88:220
desiccant registered as such by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and/or the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
§ 88-3. Exclusions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions, this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
§ 88-4. Responsible officials.
The Town of West Seneca hereby charges the Superintendent of Highways
and Buildings and Grounds with the power to recommend least toxic pestcontrol
substances or procedures for the period prior to January 1, 2001,
for pest control on property owned, operated or maintained by the Town
of West Seneca and to recommend nonchemical pest-control substances
or procedures for the period after January 1, 2001, on property owned,
operated or maintained by the Town of West Seneca.
§ 88-5. Prohibitions.
A. Pesticides used for the purpose of maintaining a safe drinking water
supply at drinking water treatment plants, wastewater treatment
plants, reservoirs and related collection, distribution and treatment
facilities.
B. Pesticides used for the treatment of swimming pool water.
C. Antimicrobial pesticides.
D. Pesticides in contained baits for the purpose of rodent control.
E. Pesticides classified by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency as exempt materials under 40 CFR 152.25.
A. Effective immediately, no town department or any contractor or
subcontractor for pest-control purposes shall apply, on property owned,
operated or maintained by the Town of West Seneca, any pesticide
classified as Toxicity Category I by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or any pesticide classified as a known, likely or
probable human carcinogen by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, except as provided in § 88-6 of this chapter.
B. Effective September 30, 2000, no town department or any contractor or
subcontractor employed by the town shall apply, on any property
owned, operated or maintained by the town, any pesticide classified as
Toxicity Category II by the United States Environmental Agency; any
pesticide classified as a possible human carcinogen by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or any pesticide classified as
"restricted use" by the United States Environmental Protection Agency;
or the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation,
except as provided in § 88-6 of this chapter.
§ 88-2 PESTICIDES § 88-5
88:221
§ 88-6. Exceptions.
§ 88-7. Posting.
C. Effective January 2, 2001, no town department or any contractor or
subcontractor employed by the town shall apply any pesticide on any
property owned, operated, or maintained by the Town, except as
provided in § 88-6 hereof.
A. Emergency. Should the Town Supervisor, upon consultation with the
Superintendent of Highways and Buildings and Grounds, to the extent
practicable, determine that a human health or safety emergency
warrants the use of a pesticide that would otherwise not be allowed
under this chapter, the Town Supervisor shall have the authority to
issue an exception based on the following criteria:
(1) The pest infestation poses an immediate threat to human health or
safety;
(2) Viable effective alternatives consistent with this chapter do not
exist;
(3) Any pesticide used, of all available choices, must have the least
acute and chronic toxic effect on human health or safety; and
(4) Underlying causes of the pest infestation are addressed in order to
prevent future outbreaks.
B. Stinging insects. Should the Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds
determine that an infestation of stinging insects warrants the use of a
pesticide that would otherwise not be allowed under this chapter, the
Administrator shall have the authority, without prior consultation with
the Town Supervisor, to use such pesticide if the following criteria are
met:
(1) The pest infestation poses an immediate threat to human health or
safety;
(2) Viable effective alternatives consistent with this chapter do not
exist;
(3) Any pesticide used, of all available choices, must have the least
acute and chronic toxic effect on human health or safety; and
(4) Underlying causes of the pest infestation are addressed in order to
prevent future outbreaks.
A. Should pesticides be used pursuant to § 88-6A of this chapter, the entity
engaged in such application shall conspicuously post at the site of
application and, to the extent practicable, in advance of the actual
application, publish or communicate through local mass media such as
newspapers, Internet, television or radio, the following information:
§ 88-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 88-7
88:222
§ 88-8. Prevention.
Any plans for new construction or remodeling of buildings owned, operated
or maintained by the Town of West Seneca, any plans for designing or
redesigning public parks and recreational areas owned, operated or
maintained by the Town of West Seneca and any plans for landscaping
on property owned, operated or maintained by the Town of West Seneca
shall contain provisions for the prevention of pest problems by means such
as appropriate structural design, pest-resistant vegetation and pest-control
maintenance and planting practices.
Chapter 90
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 65.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 70.
Sewers — See Ch. 97.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
(1) Date of posting.
(2) Organism targeted.
(3) Specific location, date and approximate time of application.
(4) Method of application.
(5) Trade name and the active ingredient of the pesticide used.
(6) Copy of the label.
(7) Name and telephone number of the person responsible for the
application.
(8) Poison control telephone number.
B. Should pesticides be used pursuant to § 88-6B of this chapter, the
Administrator shall conspicuously post for 48 hours, at the immediate
area of application, the following information:
(1) Organism targeted.
(2) Date and time of application.
(3) Trade name and active ingredient of pesticide used.
§ 88-7 PESTICIDES § 90-1
88:223
§ 90-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER or MASTER PLUMBER — Any mechanic who has
served his apprenticeship or learned his trade or handicraft and works at it
mostly by the day, week or month, not on his own account, but as a servant
or employee of another, and shall include any person who holds himself out
to the public as a plumber.
SEWER CONTRACTOR — A person or persons offering their services for the
installation of sewer and drainage pipe, outside of a structure.
§ 90-2. License required.
No person, firm or corporation shall do any plumbing, sewer or drainage
work in any premises in the Town of West Seneca unless such person, firm
or corporation shall first be duly licensed in the manner provided by this
chapter.
§ 90-3. Corporation licenses.
A domestic corporation desiring or intending to conduct the trade, business
or calling of plumbing, sewer or drainage in this Town as employing or
master plumber may do so, provided that one or more officers of such
corporation, separately or aggregately, actually hold and own at least 51%
of the issued and outstanding capital stock of said corporation, and provided
that each of such officers holding such percentage of the stock is the holder
of a certificate of competency issued by the Board of Plumbing Examiners,
and also a plumbing license issued by the Town Clerk. All such corporations
shall register in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 90-4. Form of license.
The license shall be printed on a form to be determined by the Town Clerk.
Said form shall contain the date of issuance, the license number, the fee
paid and the name of the person licensed. All licenses shall expire on
December 31 following the date of issuance. All licenses shall be signed by
the Town Clerk.
§ 90-5. Application for license.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall desire a license to conduct
plumbing, sewer or drainage business within the Town of West Seneca
shall apply in person, or, in the case of a corporation, by a qualified
person, at the office of the Town Clerk and register his or its name and
address with the Town Clerk upon application forms to be approved by
the Town Board.
B. Said application form shall contain the name, age and address of the
applicant, a statement of the kind of work the applicant has been
§ 90-1 WEST SENECA CODE § 90-5
88:224
§ 90-6. Conditions for issuance of license.
The Town Clerk shall issue a license authorizing said applicant to conduct
such business in the Town of West Seneca upon having been satisfied that
the applicant has met the following conditions:
§ 90-7. License renewal.
A renewal license shall be issued by the Town Clerk each year to any person,
firm or corporation holding a license at the expiration of the previous year
without examination upon payment of the license fee of $75 for master
plumber and $50 for sewer contractor and upon filing a renewal of the
required bond and proof of financial responsibility. If, however, the applicant
for the renewal license is not made within 30 days after the expiration of
the prior existing license, such license shall be deemed to have lapsed. A
new license shall not be issued except upon new application made pursuant
to § 90-6 above.
§ 90-8. Use of license.
No license holder shall allow his name or license to be used by any other
person or party either for the purpose of obtaining permits or doing any
work under his name. Plumbers or sewer contractors will be held
responsible for the violation of any rules of the Town Board by journeymen
plumbers or others while in their employ. The forfeiture or suspension of the
license of any plumber shall operate as the forfeiture or suspension of the
license if a copartner or the superintendent of construction of a corporation.
A separate license will not be granted to any person employed by said
engaged in for the past five ears, together with the names of employers
and locations of various projects that he has worked upon, a statement
of the experience and qualifications of the applicant in doing plumbing
work, together with such other and further information that the Town
Clerk, Town Board and Board of Plumbing Examiners shall deem
desirable.
A. Obtaining of certificate. A certificate from the Board of Plumbing
Examiners stating that the applicant has satisfactorily passed the
various examinations and is qualified to be a master plumber or sewer
contractor shall be obtained. Said certificate must be dated within one
year of the date of application to the Town Clerk.
B. Proof of financial responsibility. The applicant shall file with the Town
Clerk certificates of insurance naming the Town of West Seneca and
protecting the same to the extent of the following limits: $500,000 for
each occurrence for bodily injury liability; $100,000 for each
occurrence for property damage liability (effective January 1, 1989).
C. License fee. The annual fee for a license shall be the sum of $175 for the
master plumber and $75 for sewer contractors. [Amended
11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011]
§ 90-5 PESTICIDES § 90-8
88:225
partnership or corporation so long as the license of the offending plumber
or sewer contractor is under forfeiture or suspension and he continues to
be associated with or employed by said partnership or corporation.
§ 90-9. License to terminate upon dissolution.
A license issued to a firm or corporation shall terminate on dissolution
of said firm or corporation or upon termination of employment of the
superintendent of construction of a corporation, unless said corporation
shall have in its employ another person duly licensed under this chapter
who shall succeed said superintendent.
§ 90-10. Transferability.
A license cannot be transferred to any successor in the business or to any
person whomsoever under any circumstances.
§ 90-11. Expiration of license.
All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year issued and
may be renewed within 30 days preceding expiration and may be renewed
pursuant to § 90-7.
§ 90-12. Revocation of license.
The Town Clerk may revoke any license issued to any person under the
provisions of this chapter for cause after a hearing on three days' notice to
said person.
§ 90-13. Examining Board of Plumbers.
A. The Examining Board of Plumbers is hereby established and hereinafter
called the "Board" and shall consist of five members: Town Building
Inspector or Plumbing Inspector as the Town Board may dictate; one
member of the Town Board; and three persons who have actively
engaged in the plumbing business for at least 10 years next preceding
their membership on such Board.
B. The last four members shall be appointed by resolution of the Town
Board and must be residents of the Town of West Seneca. The term of
office of the last-mentioned two members shall be two years. Said two
years shall coincide with the term of office of the Town Board, and that
of the first three members shall be the term to which each has been
appointed or elected, as the case may be. Vacancies shall be filled by
the Town Board for unexpired terms.
C. The two members who are not, in their primary capacity, Town officials
shall receive as compensation as such Board member such amount as a
majority of said Board shall determine, but, in no event, shall such
compensation for any one member total more than $500 per year. The
§ 90-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 90-13
88:226
§ 90-14. Examinations of qualifications.
§ 90-15. Apprentices.
To establish a record of his beginning in apprenticeship, every plumbing
apprentice or learner, regardless of age, who contemplates filing an
application for a plumber's license shall, within 60 days after the beginning
of such apprenticeship, register with the Town Clerk and the Board of
intent of this subsection is that the Building Inspector or Plumbing
Inspector and Town Board member shall serve without compensation.
A. The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall have jurisdiction over and
examine all persons desiring or intending to engage in the plumbing
and sewer business or employing plumbers in the Town of West Seneca
with the power of examining persons applying for examination for
certificates of competency as such employing or master plumbers to
determine their fitness and qualifications for conducting the business of
master plumbers and to issue certificates of competency to all such
persons who shall have satisfactorily passed the examination or
examinations before such Board and shall be, by it, determined to be
qualified for conducting the business as employing or master plumbers
in such Town.
B. The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall hold one examination a year
during February, for which the entrance fee shall be set by the Town
Board pursuant to adoption of an annual fee schedule. [Amended
11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 8-2011; 1-25-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
C. A special examination may be held at any time at the discretion of the
Board of Plumbing Examiners. The expense of such examination shall
be the sum of $175, which shall be deposited with the Town Clerk by the
applicant for such examination. [Amended 11-28-2011 by L.L. No.
8-2011]
D. The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall have the power to examine by
written examination and/or oral examination and/or demonstrative
examination. A "written examination" within the meaning of this section
shall mean an examination of all applicants who apply for such and shall
be held on the same day at the same time and same place. Such
examination shall be uniform for all applicants.
E. All applications to take the examination shall be made with the Town
Clerk upon payment of the necessary fee. All applications shall be made
at least five days before the date set for the examination.
F. The Board of Plumbing Examiners shall publish in the official
newspaper of the Town, at least 10 days before the examination date,
notice of the date and place where such examination shall be held. The
Board of Plumbing Examiners shall, in its discretion, determine the
nature, extent and type of examination to be held.
§ 90-13 PESTICIDES § 90-15
88:227
Plumbing Examiners on a blank to be furnished by said Board, setting forth
the date on which the apprenticeship will begin, age, by whom employed
or trade school which he has attended and such other information as the
Board may require. Such registration shall be considered evidence by the
Board of Plumbing Examiners in determining experience. An apprentice
shall not be placed in charge of work or of installing plumbing, nor shall
he do such work alone. Neither can such apprentice install plumbing under
the supervision of a master plumber when such master plumber is not also
physically present and taking an active part in the installation.
§ 90-16. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter or any regulation
adopted hereunder is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding
$350 for the first violation; a minimum of $350 and a maximum of $700 for
a second violation within five years; and a maximum of $1,000 for a third or
subsequent violation within five years; or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both. Each week's continued violation shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 90-17. Overlapping licenses.
A person or firm holding a master plumber's license in the Town of West
Seneca will be exempt from obtaining a sewer contractor's license and may
do said sewer work under his master plumbing license.
§ 90-18. Severability.
If any section or part thereof of this chapter shall be determined to be void,
unconstitutional or invalid by a proper court of law, such determination shall
not be deemed to affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof.
Chapter 92
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 57.
Dumping — See Ch. 63.
§ 90-15 WEST SENECA CODE § 90-18
88:228
Part 1
Maintenance [RAedqoupitrdem1-e2n1t-s1 9A8n0d] Enforcement
ARTICLE I
Maintenance Requirements
§ 92-1. Conformance with provisions required.
All residential, commercial and industrial premises within the Town of West
Seneca, whether improved or vacant, shall be maintained in conformity with
the provisions of this part so as to assure the desirable character of the
property.
§ 92-2. Definitions.
As used in this part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS UNIT — A building or combination of buildings and the lot
on which the same is located, used in whole or in part for commercial
purposes, including but not limited to offices, places of public assembly,
shopping centers, supermarkets, retail stores, warehouses, manufacturing
or fabrication plants, gasoline stations and other business uses.
COURT — An open and unoccupied space on a lot and enclosed on at least
three sides by the walls of a building.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
JUNK VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including a trailer, which is without a
current inspection sticker, insurance, valid license plate or plates and/or
is in either a rusted, wrecked, discarded, dismantled, partly dismantled,
inoperative or in an abandoned condition.[Amended 2-5-1990]
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as herein defined, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
LOT — Plot, tract, premises or parcel of land, with or without buildings or
structures located thereon, as surveyed and apportioned for sale or other
purpose.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, junked vehicles
and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
UNOCCUPIED HAZARD — Any building or part thereof which remains
unoccupied for a period of more than two years, with either doors, windows
§ 92-1 PESTICIDES § 92-2
88:229
or other openings broken, removed, boarded or sealed up, or any building
under construction upon which little or no construction work has been
performed for a period of more than two years.
YARD — An open space on the same lot which contains a building and
is located between the building line and the lot line which the particular
building line faces.
§ 92-3. More restrictive standards to apply.
The provisions of this part shall supplement local laws, codes or regulations
existing in the Town of West Seneca and the other statutes and regulations
of municipal authorities having jurisdiction applicable thereto. Where a
provision of this part is found to be in conflict with any provision of a local
law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision or requirement which is
more restrictive or which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
§ 92-4. Maintenance of open areas and parking spaces.
A. Surface and subsurface water shall be appropriately drained to protect
buildings and structures and to prevent the development of stagnant
ponds. Gutters, culverts, catch basins, drain inlets, stormwater sewers
or other satisfactory drainage systems shall be utilized where
necessary. No roof, surface or sanitary drainage shall create a
structural, safety or health hazard by reason of construction,
maintenance or manner of discharge.
B. Fences and other minor construction shall be maintained in a safe and
substantial condition.
C. Steps, walks, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas shall
be maintained so as to afford safe passage under normal use and
weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards that may exist shall be
filled and necessary repairs or replacement carried out. The owner or
occupant of any premises fronting or abutting on any street or highway
shall repair, keep safe and maintain any sidewalk abutting the premises
and keep it free and clear from snow, ice, dirt or other obstruction. All
trees, shrubs, plants and other vegetation must be cut back to a height
of eight feet directly above the surface of any sidewalk. Any such owner
or occupant shall be liable for any injury or damage by reason of
omission or failure to repair, keep safe and maintain such sidewalk or to
remove snow, ice, dirt or other obstructions therefrom or negligence in
performing those functions. [Amended 12-17-2001]
D. Yards, courts and vacant lots shall be kept clean and free of physical
hazards, rodent harborage and infestation. They shall be maintained in
a manner that will prevent dust or other particles from being blown
about the neighborhood. Open wells, cesspools or cisterns shall be
securely closed or barricaded from access to the public.
E. Heavy undergrowth and accumulation of plant growth which are
noxious or detrimental to health shall be eliminated. Any trees or
§ 92-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 92-4
88:230
§ 92-5. Maintenance of business units.
§ 92-6. Maintenance of buildings and structures.
portions thereof located on private property and constituting a hazard
to persons or property shall be removed.
F. A junked vehicle may not be parked, stored or left in the open.
G. Firewood shall not be stored in any required yard and no higher than
the fencing allowed in said yard. Firewood must be stacked in a manner
not to cause rodent harborage. [Added 11-28-2011 by L.L. No.
9-2011]
A. Business units, as defined herein, shall at all times be maintained in
compliance with the provisions of this part regulating open spaces,
buildings or structures and littering.
B. No outside storage or accumulation of garbage, crates, rubbish, refuse
or debris shall be permitted at any time, and all such garbage, crates,
rubbish, refuse or debris shall be kept inside the building or buildings
on the premises or in an acceptable enclosure and shall be regularly
collected and removed from the premises.
C. No shopping baskets, carts or wagons shall be left unattended or
standing in open areas and shall be collected at the close of business
each day by the occupant of such unit and removed to the interior of the
building or buildings.
D. No mobile refrigeration unit shall be operated on the premises after the
closing of the business conducted thereon unless such mobile
refrigeration unit is electrically operated.
E. No truck or other vehicle shall be loaded or unloaded outside the
confines of the building or buildings on the premises before 7:00 a.m. or
after the business conducted on the premises has been closed to the
public, in such a manner as to cause excessive noise or disturbance to
the adjoining properties. For the purposes of this subsection, a noise
rating exceeding 25 decibels as read on the A-scale of a standard soundlevel
meter at the nearest residence to the premises shall be deemed
excessive.
F. All fences and planting areas installed on the premises shall be
maintained by the owner of the property. Such maintenance shall
include but not be limited to the replacement of trees and shrubs which
may die and/or otherwise be destroyed, the maintenance and cutting of
lawns and the replacement and/or repair of fences which may become
in disrepair.
A. All exterior exposed surfaces not inherently resistant to deterioration
shall be repaired, coated, treated or sealed to protect them from
deterioration or weathering.
§ 92-4 PESTICIDES § 92-6
88:231
§ 92-7. Infestation; screening.
B. Floors, walls, ceilings, stairs, furnishings and fixtures of buildings shall
be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. Every floor,
exterior wall, roof and porch or appurtenance thereto shall be
maintained in a manner so as to prevent the collapse of the same or
injury to the occupants of the building or to the public.
C. The foundation walls of every building shall be maintained in good
repair and shall be structurally sound.
D. Exterior walls, roofs and all openings around doors, windows, chimneys
and other parts of a building shall be so maintained as to keep water
from entering the building and to prevent undue heat loss from
occupied areas. Materials which have been damaged or show evidence
of dry rot or other deterioration shall be repaired or replaced and
refinished in a workmanlike manner. Exterior walls, roofs and other
parts of the building shall be free from loose and unsecured objects and
material and improperly secured objects and material. Such objects or
materials shall be removed, repaired or replaced.
E. The owner of a vacated building shall take such steps and perform such
acts as may be required of him from time to time to ensure that the
building and its adjoining yards remain safe and secure and do not
present a hazard to adjoining property or to the public. All openings
shall be provided with painted, exterior-grade plywood closures,
securely fastened.
F. Buildings and structures shall be maintained in such a condition so that
they shall not become unoccupied hazards as defined in this part. All
graffiti or defacing shall be removed and the surface finish restored
within a five-day period.
G. All signs and lighting systems shall be maintained in a completely
operable, clean and safe condition.
H. All decorative pools and similar devices shall be maintained free of
litter and operated as intended. Should the maintenance costs of such
devices prove unacceptable, the device shall be converted to
landscaped planting beds.
I. Any senior adult complex or assisted living facility shall be supplied
with emergency power capable of providing necessary heat and light to
house residents within the facility during times of electrical power
failures. [Added 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 9-2011]
A. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect,
vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Methods used for
exterminating insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with generally
accepted practice.
§ 92-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 92-7
88:232
§ 92-8. All premises to be maintained free of litter.
§ 92-9. Responsibilities of occupants.
An occupant of the premises shall be responsible for compliance with this
section in regard to the following:
B. Where the potential for rodent or vermin infestation exists, windows
and other openings in basements and cellars shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials.
C. In order to prevent infestation of rodents or vermin, lots, yards and
grounds shall be kept free of garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, pet food,
food scraps or other food items; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of garbage, litter, refuse, pet food, food
scraps or other food items in authorized receptacles provided for
collection. [Added 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
D. Bird feeders shall be maintained so as to prevent the infestation of
rodents or vermin. [Added 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
A. Residential, commercial and industrial premises, whether improved or
vacant, shall be maintained free of litter; provided, however, that this
section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
B. Adequate sanitary facilities and methods shall be used for the
collection, storage, handling and disposal of garbage and refuse in
accordance with the provisions of applicable ordinances.
C. No refrigerator may be discarded, abandoned or stored in a place
accessible to children without first completely removing any locking
devices and all doors.
D. Dumpsters and similar large receptacles shall be shielded from the
public view by means of appropriate landscaping or architectural
screening.
E. Shopping centers, supermarkets and similar business units shall
provide permanent, attractive, decorated litter receptacles within the
premises for public use in sufficient quantity to prevent a person from
walking in excess of 50 feet to use one such receptacle.
A. Limiting the occupancy of that part of the premises which he occupies
or controls to the maximum permitted by town ordinance.
B. Maintenance of that part of the premises which he occupies or controls
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition.
C. Maintenance of all plumbing, cooking and refrigeration fixtures and
appliances, as well as other building equipment and storage facilities in
that part of the premises which he occupies or controls, in a clean and
§ 92-7 PESTICIDES § 92-9
88:233
§ 92-10. Responsibilities of owners.
sanitary condition and providing reasonable care in the operation and
use thereof.
D. Keeping exits from his building clear and unencumbered.
E. Disposal of garbage and refuse into provided facilities in a clean and
sanitary manner in accordance with the provisions of the town.
F. Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests within his premises.
G. Maintenance of yards, lawns and courts in a clean, sanitary and safe
condition and free from infestation insofar as said occupant occupies or
controls said yards, lawns and courts or any parts thereof.
H. The installation and removal of required screens.
I. Keeping his domestic animals and pets in an appropriate manner and
under control.
J. Elimination of all prohibited uses for that part of the premises which he
occupies, controls or has accessibility thereto.
K. Occupants shall be responsible for compliance with § 92-7A to D of this
part. [Added 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
A. Owners of premises shall be responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this part and shall remain responsible therefor, regardless
of the fact that this part may also place certain responsibilities on
operators and occupants and regardless of any agreements between
owners and operators or occupants as to which party shall assume such
responsibility.
B. Owners and operators of buildings shall be responsible for the proper
installation, maintenance, condition and operation of service facilities
and for furnishing adequate heat and hot-water supply where they have
contracted to do so.
C. Whenever any person or persons shall be in actual possession of or have
charge, care or control of any property within the town as executor,
administrator, trustee, guardian, operator or agent, such person shall
be deemed and taken to be the owner or owners of said property within
the true intent and meaning of this part and shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this part to the same extent as the record owners,
and notice to any such person or any order or decision of the Building
Inspector shall be deemed and taken to be a good and sufficient notice
as if such person or persons were actually the record owner or owners
of such property. In instances where an occupant is responsible or
shares responsibility with the owner for the existence of one or more
violations of this part, said occupant shall be deemed and taken to be an
owner within the true intent and meaning of this part.
§ 92-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 92-10
88:234
§ 92-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation committing an offense
against this part or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a violation
punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by imprisonment for a period
not exceeding 15 days for each such offense, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
D. Owners shall be responsible for compliance with § 92-7A to D of this
part. [Added 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 2-2014]
§ 92-10 PESTICIDES § 92-11
88:235

ARTICLE II
Enforcement
[Added 8-20-2001]
§ 92-12. Order to abate nuisances.
Whenever it appears that any lands or property contains such quantity of
brush, grass, rubbish or weeds as to constitute a fire or health hazard or
poisonous shrubs or weeds, the Town Board may order the owner of the
lands or property to cut, trim, remove or spray the brush, grass, rubbish,
weeds or poisonous shrubs or weeds. A copy of the order shall be personally
served upon the owner or mailed to him by certified mail at his address as
shown by the records of the Town Assessor. A copy of the order may also be
served on or mailed by certified mail to the last known address to any other
person having or claiming an interest in the lands or property as occupant,
mortgagee or otherwise.
§ 92-13. Failure to comply.
In the event that the order is not complied with within 10 days following
personal service or 14 days following mailing of the order, the Building
Inspector shall cause the work therein required to be done or completed.
§ 92-14. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any lands or highway
easements owned by another municipal corporation or political subdivision
of the state.
§ 92-15. Assessment of costs.
The expense of any action subsequent to preliminary inspections taken
pursuant to this part shall be assessed against the real property involved.
Those expenses shall be reported to the Assessor within 20 days following
completion of the proceedings herein authorized. The Assessor shall cause
a notice to be given of the time and place where he will assess the expense
against the property. A copy of the notice shall be served upon or mailed
by certified mail to the owner and other persons having or claiming any
interest in the real property who has appeared in any proceeding under this
article. Except as hereinafter provided, personal service shall take place at
least eight days before the hearing.
§ 92-16. Conduct of hearings of Assessor.
At the time and place specified in the notice, and upon any adjourned
dates, the Assessor shall hear all interested parties. At the conclusion of
the hearing, the Assessor shall complete the assessment, stating therein
the name of the owner and the account number of the amount assessed to
each parcel of real property. Thereafter, he shall return the assessment to
the Town Clerk, who shall present it to the Town Board. The Town Board
§ 92-12 PESTICIDES § 92-16
88:237
shall certify the assessment to the County Legislature, which shall cause
the amount stated therein to be levied against the property. The amount
assessed shall be a lien on the real property until collected. It shall be levied
and collected at the same time and in the same manner as other town taxes
and shall be paid to the Town Supervisor to be applied in reimbursing the
fund from which the expenses were paid.
§ 92-17. Service of notice.
Any notice directed to a corporation may be served upon it at its principal
place of business, upon a duly designated agent within the town or upon the
Secretary of State. The time for service shall be extended four days for any
notice served on the Secretary of State.
§ 92-18. Extension of deadlines.
Any period of time fixed for performance hereunder may be extended by the
Building Inspector for a period not exceeding 14 days.
§ 92-19. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this part or the application thereof
to any person or lands is adjudged to be invalid, the adjudication shall
not affect other sections, clauses or provisions nor the application thereof
which can be sustained or given effect without the invalid section, clause
or provision or application, and to this end the various sections, causes and
provisions of this part are declared to be severable.
§ 92-16 WEST SENECA CODE § 92-19
88:238
Part 2
[AdoptedS6i-d2e0w-2a0lk1 6MBaiynLte.Ln.a Nncoe. 10-2016]
ARTICLE III
Specifications
§ 92-20. Sidewalks to be one-course and constructed as required.
Sidewalks in the Town of West Seneca shall be a one-course sidewalk and
shall hereafter be constructed as follows.
§ 92-21. Materials specifications.
§ 92-22. Construction specifications.
A. Cement shall meet the requirements of the standard specifications of
the American Society for Testing Materials (serial designation C9-26).
B. Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or screenings from hard,
tough, crushed rock, gravel or slag and must be clean and well graded.
All fine aggregate shall pass a one-fourth-inch screen and 95% shall be
retained on a one-hundred-mesh screen.
C. Coarse aggregate may be pebbles, broken stone or blast furnace slag
and must be clean, hard, durable and uncoated. All coarse aggregate
shall pass a one-inch screen and 95% shall be retained on a one-fourthinch
screen.
D. Proportions of mix. Proportions are to consist of one part portland
cement, two parts sand or stone screenings, three parts crushed stone
or pebbles, and 6 1/4 gallons of water (maximum) per sack of cement.
This mix is a 1:2:3 mix and is to be determined by volume, that is, one
cubic foot of cement (one bag), two cubic feet of sand and three cubic
feet of gravel.
E. Gravel alternate. In case it is decided to use local combined aggregate
for this work, an analysis shall be made so that the material supplied
shall conform to Subsections B and C.
F. Water to be used shall be clean enough to drink.
G. Forms shall be of lumber two inches thick or steel forms of equal
strength. Flexible strips may be used on curves. They shall be rigidly
held to line and grade by stakes or braces.
H. Division of plates shall be of one-eighth-inch steel as wide as the depth
of the slab and as long as the width of the walk.
A. Subbase. The subbase shall be thoroughly rammed and all soft spots
removed and replaced by some hard material. When a fill exceeding one
foot in thickness is required, it shall be thoroughly compacted by
flooding and tamping in layers not exceeding six inches. The top of all
§ 92-20 PESTICIDES § 92-22
88:239
§ 92-23. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officers of the Town of West Seneca.
§ 92-24. Penalties for offenses.
Any violation by any person, firm or corporation of any provision of this
article shall be deemed an offense punishable by a fine not less than $25 nor
more than $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both,
for the conviction of the first offense; for conviction of a second offense,
punishable by a fine not less than $50 nor more than $500 or imprisonment
fills shall extend at least 12 inches beyond the sidewalk. A subbase of
cinders or gravel must be placed and compacted to a minimum depth of
four inches if the Town Engineer deems it necessary.
B. Thickness. The walk shall not be less than four inches thick. Across
driveways it shall be increased to six inches thick.
C. Concrete shall be mixed until each particle of fine aggregate is coated
with cement and each particle of coarse aggregate is coated with
mortar and shall be mixed not less than one minute.
D. Placing and finishing. Concrete shall be placed immediately after
mixing. It shall be tamped and struck off with a template and shall be
floated with a wood float until the surface has a true contour. Care shall
be taken to not bring to the surface an excess of water and fine sand by
over finishing.
E. Jointing. The walk shall be cut into separate rectangular slabs not
greater than six feet on any one side. The surface edges of each slab
shall be rounded to a one-fourth-inch radius. Markings shall be exactly
at cuts between slabs.
F. Finish. Finish shall be brush finish.
G. Protection. When completed, the sidewalk shall be kept moist and
protected from traffic and the elements for at least three days. The
forms shall be removed with great care, and upon their removal, earth
shall be banked against the edges of the walk.
H. The walk must have a pitch of 1/4 inch per foot.
I. The minimum width of any walk shall be four feet, or such other width
as the Town Board may determine for a particular location or locations.
J. Temperature. No concrete is to be laid when the temperature is lower
than 45° F.
K. Heaving. Where trees are growing and are likely to cause drainage to a
proposed sidewalk from upheaval, sidewalks shall be reinforced with
steel if the Town Engineer deems it necessary.
§ 92-22 WEST SENECA CODE § 92-24
88:240
for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both; for conviction of a third and
subsequent offense, punishable by a fine not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or both.
§ 92-25. Severability.
The declaration of any portion of this article by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid shall not invalidate the entire article but only that
part thereof so declared to be invalid and the remainder of said article shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 92-24 PESTICIDES § 92-25
88:241

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Repair Costs
§ 92-26. Assessment of costs.
Whenever the West Seneca Town Board shall have adopted an order
pursuant to § 200-a of the Town Law directing the owner(s) of parcels
adjoining on any Town, county or state highway, along which it is desired
that sidewalks be relaid or repaired, to relay or repair such sidewalks, and
the owner neglects or refuses to do so, the Town of West Seneca may cause
such work to be done. The expense of relaying or repairing such sidewalks
shall be assessed to the owner of the adjoining parcel.
§ 92-27. Assessment against property.
The owner's share of the cost of relaying or repairing sidewalks shall
be assessed against the owner's benefited property via three annual
installments with interest as provided by state law.
§ 92-28. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
§ 92-26 PESTICIDES § 92-28
88:243
Chapter 93
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 70.
Sewers — See Ch. 97.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
§ 92-28 WEST SENECA CODE § 92-28
93:244
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 10-8-1956]
§ 93-1. Permit required; fee.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall install or construct, or
perform any work incident to the installation and/or construction of, any
public improvement upon real property in the Town of West Seneca without
first having obtained a permit therefor, to be issued by the Town Clerk with
the approval of the Town Board after certification by the Town Engineer
that the plans and specifications as submitted by the applicant comply with
the specifications and requirements of the Town of West Seneca. The fee for
such permit shall be the sum of ten dollars ($10.).
§ 93-2. Application for permit.
§ 93-3. Supervision and inspection.
§ 93-4. Cash deposit or surety bond.
A. The application for such permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
Town of West Seneca and shall contain such information as the Town
Engineer of the Town of West Seneca shall require to determine that the
proposed improvement will conform with the specifications and
requirements of the Town of West Seneca for such proposed
improvement.
B. All applications shall be accompanied by a map or survey, together with
specifications, prepared by a civil engineer duly licensed by the State of
New York or a licensed land surveyor, two (2) copies of which shall be
filed with the Town Engineer and the Superintendent of Highways and
one (1) copy shall be filed with the Planning Board of the Town of West
Seneca, Building Inspector and the Assessors' office.
C. The Town Engineer shall provide such applicant with a set of standard
specifications and requirements of the Town of West Seneca for such
work, for which a charge of five dollars ($5.) per copy shall be made,
and no work shall be performed except in accordance therewith.
A. No work shall be performed except under the supervision and
inspection of an inspector designated by the Town Board. The wages or
fees of such inspector shall be fixed and paid to the Town of West
Seneca prior to the issuance of such permit.
B. The contractor shall give notice to the Town Engineer at least twentyfour
(24) hours before starting actual work or before continuing work
previously started but delayed for any reason, and no work shall be
done unless the inspector designated by the town is present or gives
permission in writing for work to continue in his absence.
§ 93-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 93-4
93:245
§ 93-5. Compliance required.
§ 93-6. Storm drainage.
Storm drainage shall be provided so that in no case will surface water be
carried on the pavement more than five hundred (500) feet. The minimum
size for storm drain sewers shall be twelve (12) inches.
§ 93-7. Sidewalk specifications.
Sidewalks are not required, but if placed within the street right-of-way they
shall meet the Town of West Seneca specifications and be at least four
(4) feet back of the face of the curb and shall not be directly over either
sewer or water mains. But if a sidewalk has been laid in the block, it shall
be continued in the same line. All sidewalks shall be at least four (4) feet
wide with a pitch toward the curb of one-fourth (1/4) inch to one (1) foot.
Sidewalks shall be laid so that the strip of land between sidewalk and curb
will have a slope of one-half (1/2) inch per foot. Sidewalk location and
grades shall be approved or supplied by the Town Engineer.
A. If the improvements to be installed or constructed are upon real
property to which the Town of West Seneca has acquired title, the
holder of the permit, before commencing any work in connection
therewith, shall deliver to the Town of West Seneca cash or a surety
bond, executed by a solvent surety corporation authorized to do
business in the State of New York, in a sum equal to the cost of the work
to be performed, which bond shall be approved by the Town of West
Seneca, guaranteeing the faithful performance of all work in
accordance with the specifications and requirements of the Town of
West Seneca.
B. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect until the certificate of
completion and satisfactory compliance with this Article shall have
been issued by the Town Engineer.
C. In the event that the holder of such permit shall fail or refuse to comply
with the provisions of this Article, the above-described bond shall be
forfeited to the Town of West Seneca.
A. The holder of a permit shall comply with all the ordinances of the Town
of West Seneca and shall also comply with all laws of the State of New
York now in force or hereafter adopted applicable to the work to be
performed thereunder.
B. Compliance with the provisions of this Article shall be a condition
precedent to the acceptance of any street, highway or other public
improvement by the Town of West Seneca for the purpose of
maintenance.
§ 93-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 93-8
93:246
§ 93-8. Street acceptance requirements.
Before a street or portion thereof shall be accepted by the Town Board,
the developer must satisfy the Board that all improvements have been
paid for and shall protect the town from any liens. He shall also furnish a
maintenance bond for one (1) year for improvements which he has installed.
§ 93-9. Sanitary laterals.
Sanitary laterals to main sewer shall be provided for each lot where sewers
now exist so that it shall not be necessary to open the pavement for sewer
connections. Said laterals shall be adequately plugged so as to prevent the
entrance of surface or underground waters.
§ 93-10. Improvement specifications.
Improvements of any nature must be constructed according to the Town of
West Seneca specifications which shall be established by resolution of the
Town Board and must follow approved plans of the Town Board, and all work
must be done under the supervision of the Town Engineer and/or Highway
Superintendent of the Town of West Seneca.
§ 93-11. Inspection fees. [Amended 5-18-1987]
Inspection fees have been set at the following percentage of the cost:
Cost Fee
Under $10,000.00 6%
$10,000.00 to $50,000.00 $600.00, plus 5% of the cost over $10,000.00
All over $50,000.00 $2,000.00, plus 4% of the cost over $50,000.00
§ 93-8 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 93-11
93:247

ARTICLE II
Dedication and Acceptance
[Adopted 8-4-1954]
§ 93-12. Procedure for dedication and acceptance.
§ 93-13. Effect of conveyance to town.
The mere filing of a deed conveying property to the Town of West Seneca
will not in any way obligate the Town of West Seneca to accept same for
maintenance purposes.
§ 93-14. Inspection prior to backfiring.
Prior to backfilling of any cut containing a tap into any sewer, water or
storm drain excavation, applicant shall notify the Building Inspector of the
Town of West Seneca for an inspection thereof.
§ 93-15. Plug for sewer lateral.
A four- or six-inch plug is required to be sealed into place with cement at the
point where sewer lateral enters a dwelling. This plug must not be removed
until rough plumbing is to be connected or until the cellar floor is ready to
be poured. Application must be made to the Superintendent of Sewers prior
to the breaking of any lateral plug.
A. Upon the completion of any installation and/or construction of public
improvements upon real property within the Town of West Seneca, the
owners thereof shall submit to the Superintendent of Highways a
descriptive letter containing a description of the installation or
construction completed, covering, for example, the size and length and
type of pipe, mains or sewers, or, for example, the type of construction,
width of actual paved portion, width of highway right-of-way and length
completed.
B. Said letter must also state and contain an accurate legal description of
the property involved, said description to be sufficient for recording as
a conveyance of real property.
C. Said letter shall further state that the improvements have been
constructed in accordance with the rules, regulations and specifications
appertaining to the construction of public improvements in the Town of
West Seneca, Erie County, New York. Upon receipt of such letter, the
Highway Superintendent shall then recommend the approval or
disapproval thereof and acceptance for maintenance of the proposal by
the Town of West Seneca.
D. Said letter shall further contain a statement, signed by the designated
inspector, setting forth the date or dates of inspections, together with a
statement that the work done therein was according to the plans and
specifications filed.
§ 93-12 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 93-16
93:249
§ 93-16. Backfilling excavations.
§ 93-17. Forfeiture of escrow deposits.
All moneys deposited in escrow with the Town of West Seneca to ensure the
completion of an improvement shall be deemed to have been forfeited to the
Town of West Seneca in the event that such construction is not completed
and accepted by the Town of West Seneca within one (1) year from the
deposit of such moneys. An application may be made to the Town Board of
the Town of West Seneca for an extension of this time period. Said extension
may be granted at the discretion of the Town Board. Automatic forfeiture
of the moneys on deposit shall result if this time limit expires without the
granting of an extension. Before any moneys are so placed in escrow, the
person depositing same shall acknowledge the terms of this Article upon a
form prescribed by the Superintendent of Highways.
§ 93-18. Installations required prior to paving of streets.
A. All excavations made within the actual paved portion of a right-of-way
which are more than eight (8) feet in depth may be backfilled with
excavated dirt tamped into place up to a depth of eight (8) feet. The
remainder of said excavation, from a depth of eight (8) feet to the grade
of said hard surface of the road, is required to be backfilled with 1-10
transit-mixed concrete. On excavations made in the shoulders adjacent
to any hard-surface highway, it shall be permissible to use bank-run
gravel or equal. All such fill must be tamped into place.
B. A "shoulder" for the purposes of this Article shall be defined as to be not
less than six (6) feet in width, as measured from the edge of metal or
pavement to the center line of the adjacent open road ditch.
Excavations from the ditch line to the end of the house lateral shall be
backfilled with excavated dirt.
A. Sewer laterals, storm drain laterals and water connections to any pipes,
mains or other appurtenances located within the bed of or the proposed
bed of the paved portion of any street shall be made for each lot
abutting thereon at the time of the laying of said mains or pipes and
prior to the paving of said street.
B. Prior to the commencement of construction, the developer shall furnish
to the Town of West Seneca six (6) copies of a map pinpointing and
showing the exact location of all said pipes, mains and appurtenances
as set forth above.
§ 93-16 WEST SENECA CODE § 93-18
93:250
Chapter 95
RENTAL PROPERTY: ABSENTEE LANDLORDS AND CRIMINAL
ACTIVITY
§ 93-18 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 93-18
93:251

ARTICLE I
Licensing of Landlords
§ 95-1. Purpose.
§ 95-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Unlawful activity consisting of drug activity,
weapons possession, assault, domestic violence, murder, sexual assault,
gang activity or other activity proscribed by the Penal Law of the State of
New York.
CRIMINAL CONVICTION — The entry of a plea of guilty to or a verdict of
guilty for one or more counts set forth in an accusatory instrument.
DWELLING — A non-owner-occupied single-family, two-family or
multifamily dwelling which is rented or for rent.
DWELLING UNIT — An individual rental unit in a dwelling.
ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY — Use or possession of a controlled substance or
marihuana (marijuana), as defined by the New York State Penal Law.
NON-OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING — A dwelling which is owned by an
owner who does not reside in the dwelling.
OWNER/LANDLORD — The owner or owners of a dwelling, or a mortgagee
or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee or
agent.
A. The Town of West Seneca hereby finds and declares that the rental of
non-owner-occupied dwelling units constitutes a business which
impacts upon the public health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the Town of West Seneca. Residential non-owner-occupied
rental properties may become a haven for drug use and various criminal
or disruptive activities that can cause disorder in our community and
affect the quality of life of others in the Town of West Seneca.
B. The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca desires to minimize and
control the adverse effects caused by illegal and nuisance activities
which may occur at these residential non-owner-occupied rental
properties, thereby protecting the health, safety and welfare of our
citizens and preserving the quality of life, property values and the
character of neighborhoods and businesses.
C. It is the purpose of this article to implement a registration requirement
for the owners of residential non-owner-occupied rental properties in
order to curb criminal activity and disorder of such non-owner-occupied
rental properties in the Town of West Seneca.
§ 95-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 95-2
93:253
POLICE REPORT — A report issued by a Town police officer after said
officer has responded to a complaint alleging the occurrence of criminal
activity or a public nuisance.
PREMISES — A building or structure, or any part thereof.
PROPERTY MANAGER — A person or other entity designated by the owner
to manage a dwelling on behalf of the owner.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — The following are declared to be public nuisances.
RENTER/LESSEE/TENANT — Any person who rents a dwelling unit from
an owner in the Town of West Seneca. In addition to its ordinary meaning,
"renter/lessee/tenant" shall include an occupant of one or more rooms in a
rooming house or a resident, not including a transient occupant, of one or
more rooms in a hotel who has been in possession for 30 consecutive days
or longer.
TOWN — The Town of West Seneca.
§ 95-3. Landlord license; registration requirement.
Any premises, building, structure or real property used for the purposes
of prostitution as defined by New York State Penal Law Article 230.
A.
Any premises, building, structure or real property used for purposes
of indecency, obscene performances and/or promotion of obscene
materials as defined by New York State Penal Law Article 235.
B.
Any premises, building, structure or real property used for purposes of
illegal gambling activity as defined by New York State Penal Law Article
225.
C.
Any premises, building, structure or real property used for the purpose
of illegal possession, use or sale of a firearm or weapon as defined by
New York State Penal Law Article 265.
D.
Any premises, building, structure or real property used for the purpose
of illegal sale, manufacturing or consumption of alcohol beverages as
defined by the New York State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
E.
Any premises, building, structure or real property wherein there exists
or has occurred a criminal nuisance as defined by the New York State
Penal Law § 240.45 or § 240.46.
F.
Activities affecting the quality of life of residents of the Town of West
Seneca, including violations of the Town's Noise Law,27 alcohol-related
incidents or other violations of the Code of the Town of West Seneca
which are enforced by the Town Police Department.
G.
A. License required. No person who owns one or more dwelling units in
the Town shall allow a dwelling unit to be occupied or rented to another
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Noise.
§ 95-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 95-3
93:254
for occupancy unless the owner has first obtained a rental housing
business license as hereafter provided.
B. Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to hotels,
motels, bed-and-breakfast establishments, rooming houses or
boardinghouses, hospitals, nursing homes, or other dwelling units
which offer or provide medical or nursing services if such units are
subject to state or federal licensing or regulations concerning the safety
of the users, patients or tenants. This article shall not apply to any onefamily,
two-family, three-family or four-family dwellings where the
owner of said dwelling resides in one of the dwelling units of said
dwelling.
C. Application for license. Within 30 days after the effective date of this
article, the owner of dwelling units shall make written application for a
rental housing business license to the Town Clerk's office. Such
application shall be on a form furnished by the Town and shall set forth
the following information, in addition to other information required by
the Town from time to time which the Town deems necessary to
administer, enforce and ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article. Failure to provide such information shall be grounds to deny a
rental housing business license:
(1) Names, addresses (business and residence) and telephone
number(s) (business and residence) of owner;
(2) If the owner is an association, limited liability company,
partnership, joint tenancy, tenancy in common or tenancy by the
entirety, then the name, address and telephone number of each and
every owner, member or general partner shall be indicated on the
application;
(3) If the owner is a corporation, the principal place of business of the
corporation must be provided, along with the name, title and
residence address of all officers, directors and managing/general
agents, which must be included on the application;
(4) If the owner has designated an agent or managing company to
assist the owner with the management of the property, then the
name, principal residence address, principal business address and
telephone number of such agent or managing company must be
included on the application;
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to properly register any
change of address, change of agent or change of any other
pertinent information with the Town;
(6) For purposes of this article, a post office box shall not be accepted
as the owner's business or residence address. Furthermore, the
dwelling intended to be licensed shall not be accepted as the
owner's address unless it is the principal place or residence of the
owner;
§ 95-3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 95-3
93:255
§ 95-4. Criminal or public nuisance activity occurring on dwelling
property.
(7) For purposes of this article, if the owner does not reside in or have
its place of business in the County of Erie, then the owner must
have a property manager located in the County of Erie. If the owner
does not reside or have a business located in the County of Erie,
then the owner must designate a property manager located in the
County of Erie who can accept service of process.
(8) The owner shall specify the address to which all notices and
invoices for fees are to be forwarded.
D. No license application fee. There is no fee for a rental housing business/
landlord license under this article, but any license issued shall be
renewed by the owner every two years.
E. Issuance or denial of license. After receipt of the owner's application for
a rental housing business license, the Town Clerk and Town Attorney
shall review same to ensure said application contains all of the required
information. If the application is deemed complete, the Town Clerk's
office, within 30 days, shall forward the owner a rental housing
business license. If said application is deemed incomplete, the Town
Clerk or Town Attorney shall notify the owner, and the owner shall have
30 days in which to supply the required information. If the required
information is not supplied by the owner, the application shall be
denied.
F. Effect of failure to make application or denial of rental housing business
license. If the owner does not submit the rental housing business
license application or fails to supply all of the information required on
the application, the owner shall be subject to a fine of $500 per owner
for each thirty-day period until an acceptable application is submitted.
G. Recourse if fine is not paid. If the owner neglects or refuses to pay the
fine(s) as stated in Subsection F of this section within 30 days after
notification, the Town shall add any such fine(s) onto the owner's
property tax bill, and it shall become a lien on the property/dwelling.
H. Term of license. A rental housing business license issued pursuant to
this article shall be valid for a period of two years after its issuance,
unless sooner revoked pursuant to this article.
I. Nontransferability of license. A rental housing business license issued
pursuant to this article shall not be transferable to any person who has
acquired ownership of a dwelling. A new owner is required to file a new
application for a rental housing business license within 30 days after
acquiring ownership.
A. In the event that a Town police officer responds to the dwelling unit for
reports of criminal activity or public nuisance activity on the dwelling
unit, finds that said activity was engaged in or facilitated by the renter,
§ 95-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 95-4
93:256
§ 95-5. Crime-free/crime prevention lease addendum.
The owner or property manager of a dwelling under this article is
encouraged to utilize a crime-free/crime prevention lease addendum, an
example of which is annexed to this chapter, to assist the owner or property
manager with the eviction of tenants who continue to conduct criminal or
public nuisance activity in the dwelling unit.
§ 95-6. Tenant information.
The owner of each dwelling is required to maintain information concerning
all of its tenants, including the number and names of all occupants and
the full address and telephone numbers of all tenants. In the event of
criminal or public nuisance activity on the property, the owner or property
member of the household, guest or other party under the control of
the renter, and issues a police report for same, the Town Attorney shall
forward a notice to the owner or property manager stating that there
was a police report of criminal activity or public nuisance activity on
the dwelling property. The owner or property manager shall then take
appropriate action to notify the tenant to cease any such activity, or
evict said tenant. In the event that there is a subsequent incident at the
same dwelling unit in the same activity year relating to activity engaged
in, or facilitated by the same renter or a member of his/her household,
guest or other party under the control of said renter, the Town Attorney
shall forward by first-class mail a second notice of criminal activity or
public nuisance activity to the owner or property manager. Subsequent
incidents in the same activity year at the same dwelling unit will be
followed by a notice to the owner or property manager, along with a
notice of the imposition of the following fines:
(1) Third incident in the same activity year: fine of $50;
(2) Fourth incident in the same activity year: fine of $100;
(3) Fifth incident in the same activity year: fine of $500;
(4) All further incidents in the same activity year: fine of $1,000 per
incident.
B. If the owner or property manager submits information to the Town
Attorney that it is in the process of evicting the tenant in whose
dwelling unit the criminal or public nuisance activity is occurring,
future impositions of fines will cease. In the event that the owner
neglects or refuses to pay the fine(s) as stated in this section within 30
days after notification, the Town shall add such fine(s) onto the
dwelling's property tax bill, and it shall become a lien on the property/
dwelling.
C. For purposes of this article, "activity year" shall mean the period of time
commencing on September 1 of any year and ending on August 31 of
the subsequent year.
§ 95-4 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 95-6
93:257
manager shall cooperate with the Town Police Department by providing this
information to the Town Police Department if so requested.
§ 95-7. Appeals.
Any owner or property manager who is notified of a fine under this article
shall have the right to appeal the imposition of said fine to the Town Board
of the Town of West Seneca. A written request for an appeal shall be made
by the owner or property manager within 30 days after the date of the
communication notifying the owner or property manager of the fine. The
Town Board shall schedule a hearing within 30 days after receipt of said
request for appeal. The owner or property manager shall appear at the
hearing in person and shall have the right to representation by a person of
his or her choice. The owner, property manager or his/her representative
shall provide sworn testimony at said hearing. An appeal to the Town Board
will stay the imposition of the fine until it renders its decision. The Town
Board shall thereafter issue its written decision to uphold the fine or rescind
the fine.
§ 95-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 95-7
93:258
ARTICLE II
Eviction for Illegal Drug Activity or Public Nuisance
§ 95-8. Eviction for use or occupation of premises for illegal drug
activity.
A special proceeding to evict a tenant from leased premises may be
maintained upon the ground that the premises, or any part thereof, have
been used or occupied for the purpose of illegal drug activity or a public
nuisance as defined in § 95-2.
§ 95-9. Procedures.
The procedures applicable to summary proceedings to recover possession
of real property under state law shall be applicable to any proceeding
brought under this chapter.
§ 95-10. Service of notice; commencement of eviction proceedings.
A. The following persons, corporations and agencies may serve personally
upon the owner or landlord, or upon his agent, of demised real property
used or occupied, in whole or in part, for the use or possession of illegal
drugs or the existence of a public nuisance, a written notice requiring
the owner or landlord to make an application for the removal of the
person(s) so using or occupying the premises:
(1) Any domestic corporation organized for the suppression of vice,
subject to, or which submits visitation by, the New York State
Department of Social Services or the Erie County Department of
Social Services, and possess a certificate from such department of
such fact and of such conformity with regulations of the
department.
(2) Any duly authorized enforcement agency of New York State, or a
subdivision thereof, and/or the Town of West Seneca, under a duty
to enforce the provisions of the Penal Law or of any state or local
law, ordinance, code, rule or regulation relating to buildings.
B. If the owner or landlord, or his agent, does not make such application
within five days thereafter, or, having made it, does not in good faith
diligently prosecute it, the person, corporation or enforcement agency
giving notice may bring a proceeding under this chapter for such
removal as though the petitioner were the owner or the landlord of the
premises, and shall have precedence over any similar proceeding
thereafter brought by such owner or landlord or to the one theretofore
brought by him and not prosecuted diligently and in good faith. Proof of
illegal drug activity or a public nuisance at the demised premises or by
the occupants thereof, or of those resorting thereto, shall constitute
evidence of the unlawful use of the demised premises required to be
stated in the petition for removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of
§§ 95-11 and 95-12 of this chapter, multiple instances of illegal drug
§ 95-8 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 95-10
93:259
§ 95-11. Multiple convictions constitute presumptive evidence.
Two or more convictions of any person or persons had, within a period of
one year, for any of the offenses defined in Article 220 or 221 of the Penal
Law or any of the offenses set forth as a public nuisance in § 95-2 arising
out of conduct engaged in the same real property consisting of a dwelling
as that term is defined in § 4 of the New York State Multiple Dwelling Law,
shall be presumptive evidence of conduct constituting use and occupancy of
the premises for the purpose of using and possessing illegal drugs or of the
existence of a public nuisance and of the tenant's knowledge thereof.
§ 95-12. Other evidence of illegal drug activity or public nuisance.
Two or more incidents of the following activities at any building, structure
or real property within a one-year period prior to the commencement of a
civil action by notice of such action as provided within this chapter shall
be prima facie evidence of the existence of illegal drug activity or a public
nuisance.
§ 95-13. Civil penalties.
A court granting a petition pursuant to this article may, in addition to
any other order provided by law, make an order imposing and requiring
the payment by the respondent of a civil penalty not exceeding $5,000 to
the Town of West Seneca, in which the subject premises is located, and
activity or a public nuisance are not required to commence an eviction
proceeding under this chapter. Both the person(s) in possession of the
property and the owner or landlord shall be made respondents in the
proceeding under this chapter.
A. Service of an accusatory instrument charging any of the offenses
defined in Article 220 and 221 of the New York State Penal Law
occurring upon the property. For the purposes of this section, an
accusatory instrument shall include, but not be limited to, any criminal
information, misdemeanor and/or felony complaint filed in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Service of a search warrant on the building, structure or real property
where controlled substances, marihuana (marijuana), drug
paraphernalia and/or weapons are seized.
C. Recovery of illegal controlled substances, drug paraphernalia or illegal
firearms or weapons on the building, structure or real property.
D. Investigative purchases of illegal controlled substances on the building,
structure or real property by law enforcement agencies or their agents.
E. Two or more arrests or convictions for any of the activities set forth in
the definition of a public nuisance in § 95-2 at any premises, building,
structure or real property within a two-year period shall be prima facie
evidence of the existence of a public nuisance.
§ 95-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 95-13
93:260
the payment of reasonable attorneys' fees and the cost of the proceeding
to the petitioner. In any such case, multiple respondents shall be jointly
and severally liable for any payment so ordered, and the amounts of such
payments constitute a lien upon the subject real property.
§ 95-13 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 95-13
93:261
Chapter 97
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 70.
Public improvement construction — See Ch.
93.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 106.
§ 95-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 95-13
93:262
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 97-1. Definitions and usage.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOD (DENOTING "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C.,
expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil or waste drains
or pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building
sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
COLLECTION FACILITIES — The sewers, manholes and appurtenances
which collect wastewaters from individual, commercial or industrial
building sewers and convey these wastewaters to common treatment or
other disposal facilities.
DEC — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and/or the Erie County Health
Department, as applicable.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gas or solid waste substance,
or a combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial
wastes from commercial buildings and industrial facilities.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
NPDES (NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION
SYSTEM) — The federal system through which permits are issued
to regulate discharge into navigable waters from all point sources
§ 97-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-1
93:263
of pollution, including industries and municipal wastewater treatment
plants.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The official of the Town of West Seneca
duly appointed by the Town Board. The Plumbing Inspector shall be
responsible for the review and approval of all plumbing permit
applications and required plumbing designs, diagrams and layouts and
for the issuance of all plumbing permits. The Plumbing Inspector shall
be responsible for the inspection and approval of all building plumbing,
building drain and building sewer construction and shall be responsible
for compliance of all such plumbing installations with the Plumbing
Code and this chapter.
POTW (PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended (33 U.S.C.
§ 1292), which is owned by the Town of West Seneca, any one of the
various Erie County Sewer Districts, the Buffalo Sewer Authority or any
other agency or municipality receiving or contributing wastewater from
or to the Town of West Seneca POTW. This definition includes collection
facilities, pumping facilities, treatment facilities and other disposal
plants, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this
chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters
to the Town POTW from persons outside the various Town sanitary
sewer districts who are, by contract or agreement with a Town sanitary
sewer district, users of the Town's POTW, and shall also include a POTW
receiving or treating sewage generated within or conveyed by the Town
of West Seneca by contract or agreement.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and
stormwater as may be present. The admixture with sanitary sewage
of industrial waste as hereinbefore defined shall also be considered
sanitary sewage within the meaning of this definition.
§ 97-1 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-1
93:264
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWERAGE FACILITIES — See "POTW."
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the POTW
who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average
workday or who has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the Town's
wastewater treatment system or who has in his wastes toxic pollutants
as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Clean Water Act or who is
found by the Town, the DEC, the EPA or other appropriate regulatory
agency or authority to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW, the
quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality of sludge, the system's
effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system.
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial
waste which contains pollutant concentrations greater than those listed
in § 97-29 of this chapter or any flow or discharge not listed in § 97-29
which contains any pollutants exceeding by more than five times the
dischargers average flow or concentration during normal operating
hours.
SPDES (STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM) —
The state system through which permits are issued to regulate
discharge into navigable waters from all point sources of pollution,
including industries and municipal wastewater treatment plants.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries
stormwater and surface water and drainage but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes.
SURCHARGEABLE USER — Any user of the Town's facilities whose
discharge contains in excess of 250 mg/l of five-day biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), 250 mg/l total suspended solids and/or 5.0 mg/l total
phosphorus (15.35 mg/l total phosphate).
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by filtering.
TOWN — The Town of West Seneca, New York.
TOWN BOARD — The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca.
TOWN ENGINEER — The duly appointed professional engineer,
licensed by the State of New York, engaged by the Town of West Seneca
to represent the Town's interest as Town Engineer.
WASTE — Any liquid, solid or gaseous substance that may be
discharged into a public sewer.
§ 97-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-1
93:265
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WSPDES — The Town system through which permits are issued to
regulate the discharge of industrial waste into any sanitary sewer under
the jurisdiction of the Town of West Seneca, or in a contracted service
area.
B. Usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 97-1 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-1
93:266
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 97-2. Prohibited disposal of objectionable wastes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Town of West Seneca or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 97-3. Prohibited discharges into natural outlets.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any storm sewer or natural outlet
within the Town of West Seneca or in any area under the jurisdiction of said
Town any sewage or other polluted waters or wastes, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter
and except where a federal or state pollutant discharge elimination system
(NPDES or SPDES) permit has been duly issued and is currently valid for
such discharge.
§ 97-4. Connections to accessible sewers required.
The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the Town of West
Seneca and accessible to a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required, at
his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of these rules within 90 days after the date of official notice to do
so, provided that said public sewer is within 150 feet of the building to be
served.
§ 97-2 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-4
93:267

ARTICLE III
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 97-5. Permitted connections to private disposal systems.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Article II, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 97-6. Permit for construction.
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall first obtain a written permit issued by the Erie County
Health Department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the Plumbing Inspector, which the applicant shall supplement
by such plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary
by the Erie County Health Department. No building permit shall be issued
until the private sewage disposal system permit has been issued by the Erie
County Health Department.
§ 97-7. Completion of installation; inspections.
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Health
Department. The Health Department shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction, and in any event the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Health Department when the work is ready for final inspection
and before any underground portions are covered.
§ 97-8. Type, capacity and location of private system.
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Environmental
Conservation of the State of New York. No permit shall be issued for
any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than that established by the Erie
County Health Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 97-9. Abandonment of private system.
At such time as a public sanitary sewer is or becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic
tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 97-10. Sanitary operation.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town of West Seneca.
§ 97-5 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-11
93:269
§ 97-11. Additional requirements authorized.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health
Department.
§ 97-11 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-11
93:270
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 97-12. Application for connection permit; fees.
§ 97-13. Costs of connections.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Town of West Seneca from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 97-14. Separate sewer for each building; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where special permission is received from the Town Board.
§ 97-15. Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 97-16. Materials and methods of construction.
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
A. When a sanitary sewer is accepted by the Town Board, all properties
accessible thereto shall connect in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Plumbing
Inspector. The owner or his authorized agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the Plumbing Inspector, supplemented by
any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in
the judgment of the Plumbing Inspector. The application becomes a
permit when signed by the Plumbing Inspector. Applications are to be
made by the contractor, who must show authorization from the property
owner. The contractor must show coverage with such insurance as may
be required by the Town Board.
C. The connection fee for each connection from a single residential,
multiple residential, commercial or industrial building or unit shall be
in accordance with a schedule of connection charges established by
resolution of the Town Board. All connections shall be made by the
Town of West Seneca, and no connections shall be made by owners or
their agents.
§ 97-12 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-16
93:271
the Building and Plumbing Codes28 or other applicable rules and regulations
of the Town of West Seneca. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall
apply.
§ 97-17. Exclusion of surface waters.
No footing drains, areaway drains, roof drains or other drains carrying
surface water or groundwater shall be connected to the building sewer,
building drain or public sanitary sewer, either directly or indirectly. A sump
pump, wherever required, will be provided with a separate pipe, outlet or
drain to carry groundwater and surface water to a natural outlet or storm
sewer.
§ 97-18. Manner of making connection.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes29 or other applicable
rules and regulations of the Town of West Seneca or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Plumbing Inspector before installation.
§ 97-19. Inspection of sewer and connection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be
made under the inspection of the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
§ 97-20. Guarding of excavations; restoration.
All excavations for a building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public and private properties and utilities
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the appropriate jurisdiction.
§ 97-21. Protection of pipes and trenches.
Whenever pipelaying is not in progress, the end of the pipe shall be securely
closed with a tight-fitting cover or plug. Any earth or other material
entering the main sewer due to operations of the plumber, contractor or
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Code Administration and Enforcement, and Ch. 90,
Plumbing.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Code Administration and Enforcement, and Ch. 90,
Plumbing.
§ 97-16 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-21
93:272
building owner shall be removed at his expense. All trenches must be
protected by sufficient sheeting and bracing.
§ 97-22. Backfilling and restoration within highways.
Within the highway right-of-way, the backfilling of trenches and restoration
of work areas shall be in accordance with requirements of the highway
agency having jurisdiction.
§ 97-23. Prohibited connections. [Amended 2-27-2012 by L.L. No.
1-2012]
Nonsanitary connections. No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, sump pumps, floor drains,
such as garage or basement, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. Any such
connection now in existence shall be removed, redirected, and/or otherwise
incapacitated to prevent surface runoff or groundwater from entering
directly or indirectly into a public sanitary sewer.
§ 97-21 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-23
93:273

ARTICLE V
Wastewater Discharge Permits
§ 97-24. WSPDES permit required.
§ 97-24.1. Procedure for obtaining WSPDES permit.
A. No industrial user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
industrial wastes directly or indirectly to sewerage facilities owned by
the Town of West Seneca without first applying for a WSPDES (West
Seneca Pollution Discharge Elimination System) permit for industrial
wastewater discharge. After review and evaluation of the application,
the Town Engineer may issue that person a permit. At a minimum, all
significant industrial users shall be issued permits.
B. The Town may deny or condition any new or increased discharge to its
system or discharges which have changed with respect to their physical
or chemical character if, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, such
discharge would not be in compliance with applicable federal, state or
local pretreatment standards and requirements or where such
discharge would cause the Receiving POTW treatment plant to violate
its SPDES permit, inhibit or interfere with the operation and
maintenance of the POTW collection and treatment facilities or
concentrate in the sludge and interfere with its disposal by approved
methods. If the volume or character of the waste to be discharged to the
Town's collection facilities requires that wastewater collection,
treatment or other disposal facilities of the Town be improved,
expanded or enlarged in order to treat or convey the waste, then prior
to approval, the Town and the person making the discharge shall enter
into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all
added costs the Town may incur due to acceptance of the waste.
C. A WSPDES permit may require pretreatment of industrial wastewaters
before discharge, restriction of peak-flow discharges, discharge of
certain wastewaters only to specified sewers, relocation of points of
discharge, prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components,
restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day and such other
conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
D. No WSPDES permit is transferable without the prior written consent of
the Town Engineer. No person shall discharge industrial wastewaters in
excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by his WSPDES permit.
Any person desiring to discharge wastewaters or use facilities which
are not in conformance with his WSPDES permit must apply to the
Town Engineer for an amended WSPDES permit. Such amended permit
shall be granted, provided that its terms shall comply with these
regulations.
A. Applicants for WSPDES permits shall complete a Town of West Seneca
application form. Blank application forms may be obtained at the
following address: Town Engineer, Town of West Seneca, 1250 Union
§ 97-24 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-24.1
93:275
§ 97-24.2. WSPDES permit conditions.
The conditions of any permit issued by the Town to an industrial user will
be subject to the provisions and requirements of this chapter, all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards and requirements and applicable
requirements of the receiving sewer agencies.
§ 97-24.3. WSPDES permit duration.
Permits issued by the Town shall be valid for a period of three years. Users
shall apply for permit renewal a minimum of 180 days prior to their permit
expiration date.
§ 97-24.4. Modification of WSPDES permit restrictions.
As EPA, DEC or another appropriate enforcement agency adds or amends
specific pretreatment and effluent guidelines, or as the Town deems
necessary, the restrictions or conditions of any WSPDES permit may require
the introduction of changes or amendments, as circumstances dictate.
When necessary, the Town shall require an industrial user to develop a time
schedule for the installation of technology to comply with all applicable
federal, state and local pretreatment standards and requirements. In the
event that an existing user becomes subject to a newly promulgated
national categorical pretreatment standard, that user shall submit a report
to the Town within 180 days of promulgation of any applicable federal
categorical pretreatment standard, describing the nature and concentration
of any and all substances contained in the existing discharge which are
impacted by the categorical standard. This report shall further specify
whether the existing discharge complies with the categorical standard and,
if not, shall provide a schedule for incorporation of additional pretreatment
necessary to comply.
§ 97-25. Trucker's discharge permits.
Road, West Seneca, New York 14224. All completed applications shall
also be submitted to the above address.
B. If, after review, the Town determines the applicant to be a
surchargeable user or a significant industrial user, a WSPDES permit
shall be issued after a check for regulation compliance is complete.
A. All persons owning vacuum or cesspool pump trucks, or other transport
trucks, and desiring to discharge septic tank, seepage pit, interceptor
or cesspool contents or industrial wastes to sewerage facilities of the
Town or to facilities that discharge directly or indirectly to such
sewerage facilities shall first have a valid Town of West Seneca
trucker's discharge permit. All applicants for a trucker's discharge
permit shall complete an application form, pay the appropriate permit
fee as determined by resolution of the Town Board, receive a copy of the
Town's ordinance governing discharge to Town facilities of waste from
trucks and shall agree, in writing, to abide by this chapter.
§ 97-24.1 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-25
93:276
B. Discharge of septic tank, seepage pit, interceptor or cesspool contents
or industrial wastes shall be made by truckers holding a permit only at
the locations specified by the Town Engineer for the specific waste. The
Town shall require payment for treatment and disposal costs of the
waste, or may refuse permission to discharge prohibited wastes.
C. The trucker's discharge permit shall be valid for one year from date of
issuance, subject to receipt of the permit fee.
D. Any person violating the Town's requirements for liquid waste
discharges from trucks may have his permit revoked by the Town
Engineer.
§ 97-25 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-25
93:277

ARTICLE VI
Sewer Use
§ 97-26. Certain wastes excluded from sanitary sewers.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 97-27. Disposal of stormwater and similar waters.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Plumbing Inspector. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the Plumbing
Inspector, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 97-28. Prohibited discharges.
No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either directly or
indirectly, to any public sewers, any substance or wastewater which could
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general
prohibitions also apply to all nondomestic users of the Town's facilities,
whether or not the user is subject to national pretreatment standards or
any other federal, state or local pretreatment requirements. The following
substances and wastewaters are specifically prohibited from discharge into
the Town's facilities:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two
successive days' readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of
discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than
10% or any single reading be 20% or more of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to,
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols,
ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perclilorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the
Town, the state, the EPA or any other appropriate enforcement agency
has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent
hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass
grinding or polishing wastes.
§ 97-26 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-28
93:279
§ 97-29. Limited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the public
sewerage system any substance or wastes which exceed the limits
established below:
C. Any water or wastes having any corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment of the sewer system or
personnel employed in its operation.
D. Any water or wastes containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant effluent, or to exceed the limitation set forth in
a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but
not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of
the Clean Water Act.
E. Any water or wastes containing any chemical or biological constituent
or having physical characteristics which could cause interference with
any POTW wastewater treatment process.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids, which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance and repair.
G. Any garbage containing particles greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder
equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Plumbing Inspector.
H. Materials which exert or cause discolorations such as, but not limited
to, dye waters and vegetable tanning solution.
I. In no case shall a substance discharged to the Town's facilities cause
the POTW treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or
disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section
405 of the Clean Water Act and criteria, guidelines or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to federal, state or
local laws and regulations.
J. Any substance which will cause the POTW treatment plant to violate its
NPDES/SPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards.
K. Any substance or wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or
creates a public nuisance.
A. Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0.
B. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
If, in the opinion of the Town Engineer or other appropriate regulatory
§ 97-28 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-29
93:280
agency, lower temperatures of such wastes could harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or could otherwise endanger life, health
or property, or constitute a nuisance, the Town Engineer may prohibit
such discharges.
C. Any water or waste containing substances which may precipitate
solidity or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 104° F. (0°
and 40° C.).
D. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as
may exceed limits established by applicable federal, state or other
public agencies having jurisdiction.
E. Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user
knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no
case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or
qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15
minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation.
F. Any water or wastes which contain concentrations of total oil and
grease in excess of 100 mg/l.
G. Concentration limits.
(1) Any waters, sewage or wastes containing quantities of pollutants in
concentrations (milligrams per liter) which exceed the following,
and similar objectionable or toxic substances in such
concentrations which, in the opinion of the Town of West Seneca,
will be detrimental to the collection system or treatment process.
Material
Concentration Limit*
(milligrams per liter)
Chloroform 8.5
1, 2, 4 — trichlorobenzene 0.8
Fluoranthene 0.1
Pyrene 0.1
Endosulfan 1.6
DDD 0.68
BHC 1.9
PCB 0.002
Phenol (Total) 20.0
Selenium 2.4
Silver 2.2
§ 97-29 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-29
93:281
§ 97-30. Industrial discharge surcharge.
As a condition of the industrial discharge permit, an industrial user may be
required to pay an industrial discharge surcharge. The industrial discharge
surcharge may be required from those industrial users whose contribution
of compatible pollutants creates costs in excess of that normally created
by a domestic user. This surcharge will cover the appropriate debt service,
operation and maintenance costs needed to collect, treat and dispose of
wastes from the industrial user. The actual charge and formula for a
particular industrial user for this service will be determined by the Town
Board and collected with the industrial user's annual taxes.
§ 97-31. Dilution of discharges.
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any
other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a means for obtaining compliance
with any prohibited or limited discharge requirement of this chapter or any
federal or state pretreatment requirement.
§ 97-32. More stringent limitations to apply.
As federal categorical pretreatment standards are promulgated, the federal
standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. The
Town Engineer shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 402-13. If limitations and/or regulations
Material
Concentration Limit*
(milligrams per liter)
Cadmium 40.0
Chromium, Total 40.0
Chromium, Hexavalent 9.2
Copper 16.0
Mercury 7.0
Nickel 14.0
Lead 65.0
Zinc 25.0
Cyanide, Total 66.0
Cyanide, Amenable 6.2
* NOTE: Compliance determined on the basis of a grab
sample.
(2) For facilities with multiple outfalls to the public sewers, the limits
established above shall apply to each individual outfall.
§ 97-29 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-32
93:282
established by the POTW receiving or treating sewage generated in the
Town of West Seneca are more stringent than limitations imposed under this
chapter, the more stringent limitations shall apply.
§ 97-33. Accidental or slug discharges.
In the case of an accidental or slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the
user to immediately telephone and notify the Town Engineer and the POTW
treatment plant of the incident. The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions
being taken. Within five days following an accidental or slug discharge,
the user shall submit to the Town a written report describing the cause
of discharge and the measures which will be taken by the user to prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance. Compliance with this section of this
chapter shall not relieve the user of other liability or expense for damage
to the POTW's facilities or other damage to person or property, nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
§ 97-34. Improper usage of sewers.
The Town Engineer, Town Code Enforcement Officer or one of their
designees that are employees of the Town shall have the right to inspect
and/or test any building sewer and building drain and appurtenances or
private sewers that discharge wastewater directly or indirectly to the
Town's wastewater conveyance system. This includes the authority to
inspect basements for illegal connections, such as sump pumps or other
prohibited connections as indicated in § 97-23 (Prohibited connections). In
the case of basement inspection, the Town Engineer or Code Enforcement
Officer shall give notice of no less than 12 hours nor more than 48 hours
if requested by the owner. If it is found that such sewers or drains are
used or maintained in such a way as to cause any discharge that violates
this chapter, the Town Code Enforcement Officer will initiate enforcement
actions in accordance with Article IX (Enforcement).
§ 97-32 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-34
93:283

ARTICLE VII
Pretreatment and Control Facilities
§ 97-35. Industrial wastes.
The Town may require an industrial user to install and operate an industrial
wastewater pretreatment system to treat industrial flows prior to discharge
to the Town sewerage system when it is necessary to measure, sample,
restrict or prevent the discharge to the sewer of certain waste constituents,
to more equally distribute peak discharges of industrial wastewater or
to accomplish any pretreatment results required by the Town or other
appropriate regulatory agency. All pretreatment systems shall be subject to
the approval of the Town. Approval by the Town does not constitute a waiver
of compliance with these regulations or other appropriate regulations,
ordinances and codes.
§ 97-36. Spill control and prevention.
Each user shall incorporate measures to prevent or control accidental
discharges of substances and wastewater prohibited or limited by the
requirements of this chapter. These measures shall include facilities and
operating procedures as necessary to prevent the entrance of accidental
spills into the POTW. When required by the Town, detailed plans describing
these facilities and procedures shall be submitted to the Town Engineer
for review and shall be approved by the Town before construction of these
facilities. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the
effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to discharge into the system
until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Town.
§ 97-37. Maintenance of facilities.
Where pretreatment facilities are required and provided for wastes, these
facilities shall be maintained continuously and operated in a satisfactory
and effective manner by the industrial user at his expense.
§ 97-38. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee, they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts of any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients.
All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee and shall be so located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning, and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
§ 97-35 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-39
93:285
§ 97-39. Maintenance of interceptors.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner at his expense in continuously efficient operation at all times.
§ 97-40. Compliance schedule.
If an industrial user is required to install and operate a pretreatment
or control system for the purposes identified in Article VII, §§ 97-35 and
97-36 above, the industrial user shall develop and submit a compliance
schedule to define the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
pretreatment or operation and maintenance. The following conditions shall
apply to this schedule:
A. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of pretreatment required for the user to
comply with the objectives stated in § 97-35. These shall include hiring
an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract(s) for major components, commencing construction,
completing construction, etc.
B. No increment referred to in Subsection A shall exceed nine months.
C. Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the Town Engineer, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to
bring the construction back into compliance with the schedule. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports.
§ 97-39 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-40
93:286
ARTICLE VIII
Discharge Monitoring, Reporting and Inspections
§ 97-41. Control manholes.
When required by the Town, the owner of any property served by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Plumbing Inspector. The manhole, together with such meters and/or other
appurtenances required by the Town, shall be installed by the industrial
user at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe, accurate
and accessible at all times.
§ 97-42. Measurements, tests and analyses.
A. Periodic measurements of flow rates, flow volumes and such
measurements of quality and other constituents deemed necessary by
the Town shall be made on all industrial wastewater discharges at the
expense of the industrial user. All sampling, analysis and flow
measurements of industrial wastewater shall be performed by
recognized independent laboratories or, if approved by the Town, by the
laboratory of the industrial user. Prior to submittal of data to the Town
Engineer for evaluation, the results shall be verified by a responsible
official of the industrial user.
B. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made herein shall be determined in
accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, or
the Environmental Protection Agency's Methods of Analysis of Water
and Wastes, the most recent edition. If no appropriate procedure is
contained therein, the standard procedure of the industry shall be used
to measure wastewater constituents. Any independent laboratory or
industrial user performing tests shall furnish the required test date and/
or information on the test methods or equipment used if requested by
the Town Engineer.
C. The periodic monitoring reports will be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user. The user will also maintain
records of all information resulting from monitoring activities required
by this section for a period of three years.
D. The sampling, analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment
and monitoring records shall be subject at any time to inspection by the
Town.
§ 97-41 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-43
93:287
§ 97-43. Inspections; right of entry.
Authorized employees of the Town of West Seneca, representatives of the
Buffalo Sewer Authority or other POTWs receiving or treating sewage
generated in the Town of West Seneca, USEPA and/or NYSDEC personnel
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
upon all properties, including those in contracted service areas, for the
purpose of inspection of pretreatment facilities and monitoring records,
flow measurements, sampling and testing of discharges, review and copying
of all file records and data pertaining to wastewater discharge monitoring
investigation of suspected or reported violations and enforcement in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All inspections and related
activities, as described above, will be conducted by the personnel identified
after reasonable notice is given to the user to be inspected, monitored, etc.
§ 97-43 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-43
93:288
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 97-44. Suspension of WSPDES permits; reinstatement.
The Town Board may suspend a WSPDES permit when such suspension is
necessary in the opinion of the Town Board in order to stop a discharge
which presents a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, to the
environment or to the POTW's sewerage system or which causes the POTW
treatment plant to violate any condition of its NPDES/SPDES permit. Any
discharger notified of a suspension of his WSPDES permit shall immediately
stop the discharge of all industrial wastewater to the Town sewerage
system. The Town Board shall reinstate the WSPDES permit upon written
proof of satisfactory compliance with all discharge requirements of this
chapter.
§ 97-45. Revocation of WSPDES permits; reapplication.
§ 97-46. Penalties for offenses.
A. The Town Board may revoke a WSPDES permit upon a finding that the
discharger has violated any provision of his permit or of this chapter or
applicable federal and state regulations, including, but not limited to:
(1) Failure of the industrial user to report accurately the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge.
(2) Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in
operation or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
B. Any discharger whose WSPDES permit has been revoked shall
immediately stop all discharge of any wastes covered by the permit to
any public sewer in the Town of West Seneca. The Town may disconnect
or permanently block from such public sewer the industrial connection
of any discharger whose permit has been revoked if such action is
necessary to ensure compliance with the order of revocation.
C. Before any further discharge of industrial wastewater may be made by
the discharger, he must apply for a new WSPDES permit and pay all
charges that would apply for a new WSPDES permit and pay all charges
that would be required upon initial application, together with all
delinquent fees, charges and such other sums as the discharger may
owe to the Town. Costs incurred by the Town in revoking the permit and
disconnecting the industrial sewer shall be paid for by the discharger
before issuance of a new permit.
A. Any user who violates this chapter or the conditions of permits issued
under its authority shall be subject to fines determined as follows:
(1) Any user who violates Article VI pertaining to the introduction of
pollutants into the POTW collection and treatment facilities shall be
§ 97-44 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-46
93:289
§ 97-47. Falsification of data.
User representatives providing information and data as required for any
application, record, report, plan or other document required by these
regulations shall be subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 relating
to fraud and false statements and the provisions of Section 309(c)(2) of
the Clean Water Act governing false statements, representations or
certifications.
§ 97-48. Notice of violation; service of notice; emergencies.
assessed a fine not to exceed a maximum of $10,000 for each
violation.
(2) Violations of all provisions and rules of these regulations or
conditions of permits issued under their authority will be subject to
a minimum fine of $1,000 per day for each violation, including
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, nonpayment
of fees, etc.
B. In determining the amount of the above fines, the Town Board may
consider factors such as, but not limited to, the nature of the violation;
the magnitude to impact on human health, the environment and/or the
POTW treatment plant operation caused by the violation; the user's past
violation record; and other relevant factors.
C. Each day on which a violation is found to occur or continue shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense. A day shall consist of a twentyfour-
hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending the following
12:01 a.m.
D. When, in the opinion of the Town Board or the governmental agencies
having jurisdiction in the matter, a violation of this chapter is of such a
nature as to be likely to cause damage to the POTW sewerage systems
or a menace to the health or safety of the inhabitants of any areas
served, the Town Board may forthwith discontinue and sever any
connections with its sewerage system without any liability for
prosecution or damages.
A. Any person found in violation of this chapter or of any limitation or
requirement of a permit issued hereunder shall be served by the Town
Board with a written notice (except in the case of an emergency
situation) stating the nature of the violation and identifying the
enforcement actions which will or may be taken. Within 30 days of the
date of notice, the person in violation shall submit a plan for corrective
actions to be taken to prevent continuance or recurrence of the
violation.
B. Service of the notice of violation shall be sufficient if directed to the
owner or operator of a residence, or commercial or industrial facility, as
the case may be, violating this chapter. Service of said notice of
§ 97-46 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-48
93:290
§ 97-49. Hearings; notices.
§ 97-50. Legal action upon noncompliance.
If any user discharges into the Town's facilities in a manner which violates
any provision of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements or
any orders of the Town, the Town Attorney may initiate an action to seek
injunctive relief.
violation shall be made personally upon the alleged violator, if possible;
otherwise, said notice of violation shall be sufficient if served by
delivering the same to a person of suitable age or discretion at the
actual residence, commercial or industrial facility at which said
violation is occurring and by mailing by certified and regular mail the
notice to the person to be served at his/her last known residence or
business address or, where service cannot otherwise be made with
due diligence, by affixing said notice of violation to the door of the
residence, commercial or industrial facility at which said violation is
occurring and by mailing by certified and regular mail said notice to
such person at his/her last known address or place of business.
C. In the event of an emergency situation (as determined by the Town
Engineer), the Town Engineer is required only to give an informal
(verbal) notice in order to immediately and effectively halt a discharge
which presents an imminent endangerment to the POTW's facilities, the
environment or the health and welfare of persons.
A. In the event of violation of any provision of this chapter by a user, the
user may request a hearing to show cause why enforcement action
should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user designating
the time and place of the hearing to be held regarding the violations,
the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement
action and requesting the user to show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken.
B. The Town may issue notice of such hearings requesting the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to
any matter involved in such hearings. Testimony will be taken under
oath, recorded and kept on file for inspection by the public or any
interested party.
C. Enforcement actions, if any, taken by the Town subsequent to the
hearing shall be based upon the evidence presented. If the person in
violation has failed to show cause why enforcement action should not be
taken, the Town shall issue a directive to the user responsible for the
violation specifying the remedial action to be taken and a schedule for
completion of this action. Further orders and directives relative to the
assessment of the fine(s), enforcement action to be carried out and/or
other corrective actions required may also be issued.
§ 97-48 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-51
93:291
§ 97-51. Additional remedies.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Town Board, either alone or
in conjunction with the foregoing penalties, from maintaining an action
or proceeding in the name of the Town of West Seneca in any court of
competent New York State jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to
restrain by injunction the violation of any provision of this chapter.
§ 97-52. Damaging sewer works; penalties.
No person shall knowingly, willfully or maliciously break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be guilty of an offense against this chapter and shall be
subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed $100 or imprisonment for 30
days, or both said fine and imprisonment.
§ 97-53. Excessive sewer maintenance expense.
Sewer or sewerage maintenance expenses which result from a user
violation of any of the prohibited or limited discharge requirements in this
chapter will be charged to the user in violation. Such maintenance may
include but not be limited to stoppage, plugging, breakage, any reduction in
sewer capacity or any other damage to sewers or sewerage facilities of the
POTW. The costs charged to the user in violation may include the costs and
expenses for complete restoration of the impaired facilities to a functional
condition. Refusal of the user in violation to pay the necessary maintenance
expenses resulting from such violation shall constitute further violation of
this chapter subject to a fine as defined in this article.
§ 97-54. Liability for damages.
Any industrial wastewater discharger who discharges, or causes the
discharge of, prohibited wastewaters which cause damage to the POTW
facilities, detrimental effects or treatment processes or any other damages,
resulting in costs to the POTW, shall be liable for all damages occasioned
thereby.
§ 97-55. Connection to public sewers required.
At such time as a public sanitary sewer is or becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter. The property
owner shall apply for a connection permit and, upon issuance thereof, shall
make such direct connection at his expense. The property owner shall be
notified, in writing, by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee of
such availability of a public sanitary sewer and to make the connection
thereto and shall proceed to make such approved connection within a
period of 60 days from the date of such notification. Failure to make such
required connection within the time specified shall constitute a violation
§ 97-51 WEST SENECA CODE § 97-55
93:292
of this chapter and shall subject the violator to such penalties, charges or
assessments as established herein.
§ 97-56. Unpaid penalties, charges or assessments to constitute
lien; interest.
Unpaid sewer penalties, charges or assessments may become a lien upon
the real property upon which the violation has been duly determined to
exist. Interest shall be due and payable in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 97-57. Town correction of violations; collection of costs.
If a violator fails to correct a violation after due notice, as provided in
§ 97-40, and the Town Board deems it necessary that the violation be
corrected, it may cause the violation to be corrected, and the amount of the
cost of correcting said violation shall be spread upon the tax rolls of the
property which is the subject of said violation.
§ 97-58. Authority of Town Board.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the right of the Town Board
to enforce, or avail itself of the benefits of, any and all other applicable laws
and ordinances.
§ 97-55 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-58
93:293

ARTICLE X
Confidentiality
§ 97-59. State and federal law to govern confidentiality.
The confidentiality of user information and data submitted as necessary for
any application, record, report, plan or other document required by this
chapter shall be governed by the New York State Freedom of Information
Law (§§ 84 through 90 of the Public Officers Law of the State of New
York) and by other applicable state or federal statutes and regulations. Any
requests by a user to keep specific data and information confidential must
be made, in writing, at the time of submission.
§ 97-59 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 97-59
93:295
Chapter 99
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY
§ 99-1. Legislative intent.
The adoption of Megan's Law30 has created an increased public awareness
of sexual offenders by requiring them to become registered with authorities
and making such information available to the public. The Town Board of
the Town of West Seneca finds that one of the highest priorities of local
government is the protection of victims and potential victims from sexual
offenders in West Seneca, and this is a matter of unique local concern
not fully and adequately addressed by state law. The Town Board of the
Town of West Seneca hereby enacts this chapter to prevent sex offenders
from residing or loitering near areas where children regularly meet and
congregate.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADULT — Any person 18 years of age or older.
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A licensed day-care center, child-care facility or
any other child-care services facility exempt from licensing pursuant to the
laws of the State of New York.
CHILD or CHILDREN — Persons under 18 years of age. The singular or
plural shall include one another. If an applicable statute defining a crime
against a child refers to a child younger than 18, the younger age shall
control.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building and related facilities used for
education, social, cultural or recreational activities.
HIS — His or her.
LOITERING — Whether on foot or in a motor vehicle, a person who wanders
or remains idle in essentially one location site, lounges, loafs, walks about
aimlessly or repeatedly frequents the same location or repeatedly circles in
a motor vehicle.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides, lodges
or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
PUBLIC PARK — Any recreational facility, playground or park owned or
operated by the Town of West Seneca or any other governmental agency,
including but not limited to the West Seneca Central School District, County
of Erie or State of New York.
30.Editor's Note: See NY Corrections Law § 168 et seq.
§ 97-59 WEST SENECA CODE § 99-2
93:296
RESIDENT — Any person who lives in the Town of West Seneca in any
apartment or home, has a usual place of abode in the Town, is domiciled
in the Town or temporarily present in the Town and staying at a homeless
shelter or an extended-stay establishment.
SCHOOL — A licensed or accredited public, charter or religious school that
offers instruction to students in kindergarten through any grade up to grade
12.
SEX OFFENDER — Shall have the same meaning as the terms defined in
§ 168-a(1) of the Corrections Law of the State of New York.
SEX OFFENDER VIOLATION — A violation of any law defined as a sex
offense in § 168-a(2) of the Corrections Law of the State of New York.
SEX OFFENSE — Shall have the same meaning as the term defined in
§ 168-a(2) of the Corrections Law of the State of New York.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — A place where the person abides, lodges or
resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where
the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more
consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
§ 99-3. Residency restriction and prohibition.
§ 99-4. Exceptions.
The following are exceptions to § 99-3:
A. It shall be unlawful for any sex offender to establish a permanent or
temporary residence within 1,500 feet of any school, child-care facility,
community center or public space where children congregate for
sponsored or programmed activities.
B. For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the
outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence of the sex
offender to the nearest property line of the school, child-care facility,
community center, public park or open space when children congregate
for sponsored or programmed activities.
A. Any person who is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile
facility, other correctional institution or reside at a state or federaloperated
facility which is located within a restricted or prohibited area.
B. The school, child-care facility, community center, public park or open
space where children congregate for sponsored or programmed
activities within 1,500 feet of the sex offenders' permanent residence
was opened after the person established the permanent residence.
§ 99-2 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 99-5
93:297
§ 99-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Town of West Seneca Police
Department. The Chief of Police shall cause a copy of this chapter to be
provided to each registered sex offender who has registered under Megan's
Law (NY Corrections Law § 168 et seq.) and who is residing within the
Town of West Seneca. The Chief of Police shall cause a copy of any notices
required under this chapter to be served upon any sex offender.
§ 99-6. Defenses.
To the extent that a sex offender has not registered under Megan's Law
(Article 6-C of the Corrections Law of the State of New York31), it shall not
be a defense to prosecution under this chapter that the sex offender was not
provided with a copy of this chapter.
§ 99-7. Notice to move.
Any sex offender who resides on a permanent or temporary basis within
1,500 feet of any school, child-care facility, community center, public park
or open space where children congregate for sponsored or programmed
activities shall, within 90 days of receipt of written notice of the sex
offender's noncompliance with this chapter, move from said location to a
new location, but said new location may not be within 1,500 feet of any
school, child-care facility, community center, public park or open space
where children congregate for sponsored or programmed activities within
the Town of West Seneca. It shall constitute a continuing additional violation
beyond the 90 days the sex offender continues to reside within 1,500
feet of a school, child-care facility, community center, public park or open
space where children congregate for sponsored or programmed activities.
Furthermore, it shall be an additional violation each day that a sex offender
shall move from one location in the Town of West Seneca to another that
is within 1,500 feet of any school, child-care facility, community center,
public park or open space where children congregate for sponsored or
programmed activities.
§ 99-8. Liability of Town.
Nothing in this chapter creates or shall create a cause of action against the
Town of West Seneca not already authorized under existing law. Without
limitation, the Town of West Seneca is not liable to any person harmed or
who claims that notice under this chapter may have prevented the harm.
§ 99-9. Penalties for offenses.
Each violation of this chapter by a sex offender shall be punishable by a fine
of $250 or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 15 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. It is the intent of this Board that violations of
this chapter should not be treated by the courts as a lesser included offense
31.Editor's Note: See NY Corrections Law § 168 et seq.
§ 99-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 99-9
93:298
that merges into a violation of Article 6-C of the Corrections Law of the
State of New York. The Town shall also be entitled to injunctive relief to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 99-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective upon filing with the New York Secretary of
State.
Chapter 100
SMOKE DETECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 75.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 92.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
§ 100-1. Legislative intent.
§ 100-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED DETECTORS — Any battery-powered, alternating-currentpowered
or combination battery-powered/alternating-current-powered
ionization, or photoelectric-type detector that bears the approval stamp
or mark of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or another recognized testing
laboratory.
APPROVED MANNER — That the unit or units are positioned or located and
installed per the manufacturer's instructions. Approved wiring shall be as
prescribed by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters.
INSPECTION DEPARTMENT — Any use of this phrase refers to the Town
Building Inspector, Assistant and/or Fire Inspector.
SMOKE DETECTOR — Any device designed and tested for the express
purpose of detecting products of combustion, either visible or invisible, and
A. The Town Board hereby finds and declares that smoke detectors, when
properly installed and maintained, are of significant value in the
preservation of public safety and welfare, and minimizes property loss
in case of fire.
B. In consideration of the foregoing, and in accordance with the
specifications of the Town Board to enact legislation, it is directed that
smoke detectors be installed in all existing dwellings, multiple
dwellings, and commercial and industrial structures.
§ 99-9 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 100-2
93:299
bearing the mark or stamp of approval of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
or another nationally recognized testing laboratory.
SPRINKLER SYSTEM — A system of water supply, distribution and
application appurtenances designed, tested and installed in strict
accordance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.
§ 100-3. Where required; exceptions.
§ 100-4. Type of unit.
§ 100-5. Installation.
A. Dwellings. Smoke detectors shall be installed and maintained operable
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in all dwellings and
multiple dwellings as same are defined in New York State Uniform Fire
Prevention and Building Code32 adopted by the Town of West Seneca.
B. Commercial and industrial buildings. Smoke detectors shall be hard
wired for installation and maintained in an operable condition at all
times in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in all new
commercial and industrial buildings and all existing commercial and
industrial buildings. [Amended 2-5-1990; 11-28-2011 by L.L. No.
10-2011]
C. The exceptions to the applicability requirements of this section are: in
special or unique types of occupancies, where a smoke detector system
may be ineffective due to the constant presence of internal combustion,
engine exhaust, steam or other substance which would cause frequent
false alarms, another type of system, approved by the Inspection
Department of the Town of West Seneca, shall be installed.
A. Any smoke detector installed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be an approved type.
B. Battery-operated smoke detectors may be installed in existing
buildings, provided that such detectors are maintained in accordance
with provisions of this chapter and upon written approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer. [Amended 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 10-2011]
C. Alternating-current-powered smoke detectors shall have electrical
wiring installed in an approved manner.
A. Installation of smoke detectors shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.33
B. The building owner or his agent shall be responsible for the installation.
32.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 370 et seq.
33.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 370 et seq.
§ 100-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 100-5
93:300
§ 100-6. Maintenance.
Maintenance of smoke detectors shall be the responsibility of the building
owner or his agent in accordance with the following provisions:
§ 100-7. Date of compliance.
Smoke detectors required by this chapter shall be installed and operational
in all affected buildings in accordance with the provision of this chapter but
in no event later than one year after the adoption of this chapter.
§ 100-8. Inspection and certification.
The building owner or his agent shall be required to certify that smoke
detectors have been installed in accordance with this chapter. Such written
certification shall be furnished to the Inspection Department once a year, on
June 30 of each and every year. The Inspection Department shall have the
right to inspect annually any building which is required to be in compliance
with this chapter.
§ 100-9. Penalties for offenses.
Any person or persons, association or corporation violating the provisions
of this chapter, the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code,34 or any section or provision thereof is guilty of a violation punishable
by a fine not exceeding $250, or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding
15 days for each such offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 100A
C. A no-fee permit shall be required for the installation. These permits
shall be issued by the Inspection Department of the Town of West
Seneca.
D. The building owner or his agent shall provide or post within each guest
room or multiple dwelling unit written operating instructions for the
smoke detectors installed therein.
A. Battery-powered smoke detectors shall have new batteries installed
therein in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
B. Necessary maintenance or replacement of smoke detectors shall be the
responsibility of the building owner or his agent; provided, however,
that the renter or lessee shall notify the building owner or his agent of
the need for such maintenance or replacement.
C. The building owner or his agent shall assume no liability in the event
that any unauthorized person, renter or lessee tampers with, attempts
to repair or damages any smoke detector so as to render it inoperative.
34.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 370 et seq.
§ 100-5 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 100-9
93:301
SNOWPLOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 92. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 100A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, as defined in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, licensed to operate on the highways of the State of New
York and used to plow snow, but the term shall not include a vehicle used
solely by a person, firm or corporation to plow snow within the confines of
his or its own property, whether owned or leased.
§ 100A-2. Permit required; exception.
§ 100A-3. Application required; fee; certificate of insurance; terms
and conditions.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall plow or cause or allow snow to be
plowed by the use of any vehicle within the Town of West Seneca unless
a permit therefor, as hereinafter prescribed, issued by the Town Clerk is
in full force and effect. Such permit shall be prominently displayed by
affixing it to the driver's side window of the vehicle as forward as
possible so as to be readily visible from the exterior thereof.
B. Exception. The homeowner is permitted to plow his or her own
driveway without such permit.
A. Application forms.
(1) Application for such permit shall be made to the Town Clerk by the
owner of the vehicle, in writing, upon forms to be furnished by said
Town Clerk. Such forms shall contain:
(a) The owner's name and address.
(b) The vehicle identification number.
(c) The New York State license number.
(d) Such additional information as the Town Clerk shall require.
(2) The Town Clerk may require such documents and information as
may be reasonably necessary to verify the facts stated on such
application.
B. The applicant shall, at the time of the filing of his application, pay a
permit fee for each vehicle.
§ 100-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 100A-3
93:302
§ 100A-4. Prohibited acts.
§ 100A-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the members of the West Seneca Police
Department and the Superintendent of Highways of the Town of West
Seneca.
§ 100A-6. Penalties for offenses.
C. Certificate of insurance. The applicant shall, when applying for such
permit, provide a certificate of insurance addressed to the Town of West
Seneca Town Clerk showing evidence of liability insurance in such
kinds and amounts as shall be, from time to time, determined by the
Town Board.
D. Such permit shall commence on October 1 and expire on April 30 of the
following year and shall be in such form as the Town Clerk shall
prescribe.
E. Such permit shall not be transferable to another owner, and the permit
fee shall not be prorated during the term of the permit.
F. The permit holder shall sign a permit application indicating that he
agrees to hold the Town of West Seneca, its agents, servants and
employees harmless from any and all damages and/or causes of action
which may arise out of his snowplowing operations within the Town.
G. In the event that the Town Clerk refuses to issue a permit hereunder,
the applicant shall have the right to appeal such refusal to the Town
Board.
A. No person shall plow, shovel, sweep or pile snow, ice or other such
materials in or beyond the right-of-way of any street or public highway
or cause such to be done so as to interfere with the safety and
convenience or public travel or such as to constitute an obstruction of
the sight of persons traveling by vehicle or by foot on public streets or
sidewalks or on private driveways.
B. No person shall plow, shovel or pile snow from a private or public
driveway in such a manner as to deposit the same in the public roadway
or on a public sidewalk or across the street from said driveway.
A. The Town Board may, following a hearing before such Town Board, with
regard to violation of any of the terms and conditions of this chapter,
revoke or suspend the permit or permits granted to any person, firm or
corporation under the authority of this chapter or any law, ordinance,
rule or regulation relating to snowplowing or snow removal.
B. In addition to any other penalties that may be involved under this
chapter, any violation by a person, firm or corporation of any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed an offense punishable by a fine not to
§ 100A-3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 100A-6
93:303
§ 100A-7. Procedure for hearing.
§ 100A-8. Severability.
If any article, section, subdivision, paragraph or provision of this chapter is
adjudged to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to such portion
thereof so expressly adjudged invalid, and the remainder of this chapter
shall be deemed to be in all respects valid and effective.
Chapter 101
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 63.
§ 101-1. Title; applicability.
§ 101-2. Purpose. [Amended 5-14-2007 by L.L. No. 5-2007]
This chapter is adopted in order to promote and protect the public health
and safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and other aspects of the
general welfare of the residents of the Town of West Seneca; protect
exceed $250 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 15 days, or
both.
C. Any person who takes part in or assists in any violation of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalties provided herein.
A. Whenever it shall be provided herein that a hearing shall be held, such
hearing shall be held on a date and at a place and hour designated by
the Town Board.
B. The Town Clerk shall give notice of any hearing to be held hereunder,
stating the name and address of the applicant/permit holder, the subject
matter of the hearing and the date, place and hour designated therefor,
by mailing a copy of such notice to the applicant/permit holder at the
address shown on the application for permit at least 10 days prior to the
date of such hearing.
C. The applicant/permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by legal
counsel and to present such evidence as may be relevant at any hearing
held on the denial, suspension or revocation of any permit.
A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Recycling and
Waste Disposal Law of the Town of West Seneca, New York."
B. This chapter shall apply to and affect only the Town of West Seneca.
§ 100A-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 101-2
93:304
property, preserve property values and eliminate fire, safety and health
hazards by regulating the collection, storage and disposal of garbage,
recyclable material and refuse within the Town of West Seneca; promote
reduction and separation which will encourage the more efficient utilization
of solid waste disposal facilities and contribute to more effective programs
for the reuse of solid wastes; implement the applicable provisions of the
New York State Solid Waste Management Act of 1988 and amendments
thereto to require that solid waste shall be separated into recyclable,
reusable or other components for which economic markets for alternate
uses exist; and reduce the number of rodents in the Town and reduce the
available habitat and food sources for rodents in the Town.
§ 101-3. Definitions. [Amended 11-18-2002; 5-14-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
A. The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereby ascribed thereto unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A person, individual, partnership or
corporation or employer or agent thereof authorized by contract or
license with the municipality to collect solid waste from residential,
commercial and institutional properties as herein defined under the
terms and conditions of this chapter. In the event of municipal
collection, this definition shall include the governing body and
employees thereof.
BRUSH — Cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are less than
four inches in diameter.
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Discarded building material, concrete,
stones, earth from excavations or grading and all other refuse matter
resulting from the erection, repair or demolition of buildings, structures
or other improvements of property.
DUMPING — Throwing, depositing or burning of solid waste in or upon
any public highway, street or other public place.
FACILITY — Any solid waste management/resource recovery facility
employed beyond the initial solid waste collection process which is to
be used, occupied or employed for or is incidental to the receiving,
transporting, storage or processing or disposal of solid waste or the
recovery by any means of any material or energy product or resource
therefrom, including recycling centers, transfer stations, processing
systems, resource recovery facilities, sanitary landfills, plants and
facilities for composting or land spreading of solid wastes, secure land
burial facilities, reprocessing and recycling facilities, surface
impoundments and waste oil storage, incinerators and other solid waste
disposal, reduction or conversion facilities.
GARBAGE — All table refuse, animal and vegetable waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; offal
from meat, fish and fowl; fruits, vegetables and parts thereof; and other
§ 101-2 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101-3
93:305
articles and materials ordinarily used for food which have become unfit
for such use or which are for any reason discarded.35
GARBAGE TOTE — A Town-authorized container of either 95 gallons
or 65 gallons for the storage and collection of garbage. One tote shall
be assigned to each residential producer or other authorized unit and
shall be the property of the Town of West Seneca. A person who is the
owner or occupant of a residential producer shall have the option to
purchase, at his or her own expense, one additional garbage tote. There
shall be no more than two garbage totes at any residential producer
or other authorized unit. A person who is the owner or occupant of a
business which is an authorized unit shall have the option to purchase,
at his or her own expense, up to five additional garbage totes. Each
garbage tote provided by the Town of West Seneca shall remain the
property of the Town of West Seneca and shall not be removed from the
residence or other authorized unit to which it was assigned. Garbage
totes purchased by an owner or occupant of a residential unit or other
authorized unit shall remain the property of that individual. The cost
of either a recyclable tote or garbage tote under this section shall
be determined by resolution of the Town Board of the Town of West
Seneca.[Added 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Medical waste generated by a medical facility
regulated by the New York State Department of Health or Social
Services and as defined under regulations promulgated pursuant to
§ 27-0903 of the New York State Environmental Conservation Law,
including but not limited to the following products and their empty
containers: insecticides, herbicides and caustic chemicals.
LARGE HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS — All other large and/or bulky
articles actually used in the home and which equip it for living (such as
chairs, sofas, tables, beds, carpets, etc.).
MAJOR APPLIANCES — A large and/or bulky household mechanism
(such as a refrigerator, washer, dryer, stove, etc.) ordinarily operated by
gas or electric current.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) — All putrescible and
nonputrescible materials, including garbage, refuse and other
discarded solid materials, including but not limited to solid waste
materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural
operations and from community activities. Liquids, semisolids and
contained gaseous materials are hereby defined as "solid waste." It
shall not include solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or
other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt, dissolved or
suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents, dissolved materials
in irrigation return flows or other common water pollutants. In addition,
it shall not include hazardous waste.
35.Editor's Note: The former definition of "garbage receptacle," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014.
§ 101-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 101-3
93:306
NONRECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Waste material discarded as useless
or worthless trash, including but not limited to rags, sweepings, rubber,
leather, crockery, shells, clothing, straw, dirt and ashes.
NONRESIDENTIAL PRODUCERS — Any producer of garbage, refuse
and recyclable materials other than a residential producer, including
but not limited to commercial or industrial businesses, restaurants,
plazas, malls and the like.
OTHER AUTHORIZED UNIT — Any property in the Town of West
Seneca to which collection of garbage or recyclable materials is offered
by the Town of West Seneca.[Added 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
PERSON — An individual, owner, occupant, society, group, firm,
partnership, corporation or association of persons, and the singular
number shall include the plural number.
PRIVATE COLLECTOR — A person, firm, corporation or legal entity
providing for the collection of MSW and/or recyclable materials. To
operate in the Town of West Seneca, they shall be required to obtain a
license from the Town and be subject to the rules and regulations of the
Town.
PRIVATE SUBSCRIPTION — The collection of MSW and recyclable
materials where the resident contracts directly with the private
collector of the subscriber's choice.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Rinsed food containers, such as metal
cans, glass and plastic food containers, newspapers, magazines,
cardboard, flat paper and other paper; plastic materials and bottles
with metal rings and tops removed.
RECYCLABLE TOTE — A Town-authorized container of recyclable
materials with the capacity of either 65 or 95 gallons for the storage
and collection of recyclable materials. All recyclable totes shall be the
property of the Town of West Seneca, and one shall be assigned to
each residential producer and other authorized unit. Any recyclable
tote assigned to a residential producer or other authorized unit shall
remain at that residence or other authorized unit and shall not be
moved from the same. Additional recyclable totes shall be available
to owners or occupants of either residential units or other authorized
unit in the manner described in the definition of "garbage tote."[Added
2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
RESIDENTIAL PRODUCERS — Those persons, owners or occupants of
single-family or multifamily dwellings, used exclusively for residential
purposes, which produce garbage, nonrecyclable refuse and recyclable
material.
SCAVENGER — A person that collects and removes refuse and searches
through garbage for salvageable material.
SOLID WASTE — Includes but is not limited to garbage, nonrecyclable
material, recyclable material, construction debris, major appliances,
large household furnishings, brush and tree parts, grass and leaves.
§ 101-3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101-3
93:307
§ 101-4. Program requirements; separation and preparation.
[Amended 11-18-2002; 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 1-201436]
TREE PARTS — Cuttings from shrubs, hedges and trees which are less
than four inches in diameter.
B. None of the terms defined in this section shall be deemed or construed
to include vehicular tires, tire casings, oil or batteries.
A. Each person who places items at the curb for collection and disposal by
the Town of West Seneca shall separate nonrecyclable material from
recyclable material and prepare the same for collection and disposal in
accordance with this chapter.
B. Totes conforming to the specifications of this chapter shall be used
when storing or placing garbage and recyclable materials at the curb
for collection by the Town. When filled, a tote shall not exceed 150
pounds in weight. Garbage or recyclable material shall not be placed on
the curb or on any public street unless the same is in a tote as required
by this section, unless otherwise authorized by this section.
C. An authorized collector shall have no obligation to collect and shall not
collect or remove any brush, construction debris, garbage, large
household furnishing, major appliance, recyclable material or solid
waste not prepared for collection in accordance with this chapter.
D. An authorized collector shall have no obligation to collect and shall not
collect or remove any brush, construction debris, garbage, large
household furnishing, major appliance, recyclable material or solid
waste which was not produced or generated within the premises upon
which it is so placed, and the placing for such collection of any brush,
construction debris, garbage, large household furnishing, major
appliance, recyclable material or solid waste originating at a location
other than the one upon which it is placed for collection is hereby
prohibited.
E. All municipal solid waste shall be collected by an authorized collector
under contract with the municipality or by a licensed private collector
under private subscription.
F. Brush, grass clippings, and tree parts may be placed at the curb for
collection in a paper bag or containers of not more than 20 gallons
capacity which do not meet the definition of totes. Brush, grass
clippings and tree parts may not be placed in plastic bags. Bags and
containers, when filled shall weigh not more than 50 pounds. Brush,
grass clippings and tree parts shall not be placed in totes.
36.Editor's Note: With this local law, former §§ 101-4 and 101-5 were amended and, in effect,
combined in § 101-4, former §§ 101-6 through 101-13 were redesignated as §§ 101-5
through 101-12, respectively, and § 101-13.1 was redesignated as § 101-13.
§ 101-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 101-4
93:308
§ 101-5. Receptacles and storage. [Amended 5-4-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007; 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
G. Any and all brush and tree parts produced by the individual activity or
efforts of the owner or occupant of the premises shall be tied in bundles
not to exceed 36 inches in length and 12 inches in diameter and
weighing no more than 50 pounds.
H. All major appliances or large household furnishings not capable of
being placed in receptacles or bundles as provided herein may be
placed at the curbline or pavement line only on the scheduled pickup
collection day for that area. It shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner to dismantle the appliance or furnishing so that it will not be a
hazard to the public. Specifically, all refrigerator and freezer doors
must be removed.
I. Any construction debris which results from work performed by an
owner or occupant individually may be placed in a tote for collection by
the Town of West Seneca. Construction or other debris which results
from work by a contractor shall be removed and discarded
appropriately by the contractor.
J. Protruding nails and other sharp objects, including glass that may
inflict bodily harm to personnel or residents of the Town of West
Seneca, shall be removed from all solid waste prior to being deposited
in containers or bundled for collection.
K. Recyclable material shall be placed in recycling totes supplied by the
Town for recycling materials as herein provided.
L. Tires, batteries, motor oil and paint shall be separated from other
recyclables and nonrecyclables and brought to an area and at a time
designated by resolution of the Town Board to be disposed of at a
nominal charge.
A. The Town shall provide and assign to each residential unit and other
authorized unit one garbage tote and one recycling tote. Additional
garbage and recycling totes may be obtained as outlined in this chapter.
Garbage totes shall be used for the collection, storage and disposal of
all garbage and nonrecyclable refuse and rubbish that may accumulate
or be produced by them. Recycling totes shall be used for the collection,
storage and disposal of recyclable materials.
B. Garbage and nonrecyclable refuse and rubbish shall be stored in the
garbage tote with the lid completely closed. No garbage tote shall
exceed 150 pounds in weight when filled.
C. Recycling materials shall be stored in the recycling tote with the lid
completely closed. No recycling tote shall exceed 150 pounds in weight
when filled.
§ 101-4 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101-5
93:309
§ 101-6. Placement of totes and receptacles for collection.
[Amended 2-10-2014 by L.L. No. 1-2014]
§ 101-7. Collection and disposal. [Amended 2-10-2014 by L.L. No.
1-2014]
§ 101-8. Prohibited deposits or accumulations.
D. All garbage and recycling totes shall be maintained in good condition.
All garbage and recycling totes shall be kept as sanitary as possible in
view of the use to which they are put and shall be thoroughly cleaned by
the owner or occupant of the premises after garbage or recyclable
materials are removed by the collector. Except when placed at the
curbline for collection, all totes shall be stored on the property
producing the solid waste.
A. All garbage totes, recycling totes and other receptacles shall be
transferred to the curbline or pavement line in front of the premises.
B. No garbage tote, recycling tote or other receptacle shall be set out for
collection before 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection and shall be
at the curb for collection by 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
C. Garbage totes, recycling totes and other receptacles shall be removed
from the curbline within 12 hours after being emptied to a place
invisible from the street.
A. The Town of West Seneca shall provide for the collection and disposal of
all recyclable material, as well as for the collection and disposal of up to
a maximum of two garbage totes per week, from each residential unit or
other authorized unit.
B. The Town of West Seneca will collect cut grass, brush and tree parts
produced by owners or occupants, provided that such cut grass, brush
and tree parts were generated at the site upon which they are placed
for collection and they are placed for disposal.
C. Town employees or equipment shall not enter private property or other
structures in making collections under the chapter.
D. The Town shall have no obligation to pick up and remove any solid
waste which was not produced within the Town of West Seneca.
E. Ownership of waste material which has been placed at the curb for
collection in accordance with this chapter shall vest in the Town of West
Seneca. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any
person without authority from the Town to collect, pick up, remove or
cause to be collected, picked up or removed any rubbish. Each such
collection, pickup or removal of waste material from one or more
premises shall constitute a separate and distinct offense in violation of
this chapter.
§ 101-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 101-8
93:310
A. No person shall allow, permit or cause to exist any unsanitary or filthy
condition in or about any premises owned, used or occupied by said
person. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
B. No person shall cart to, dump, burn, deposit or otherwise dispose of or
cause to be carted, dumped, burned, deposited or otherwise disposed of
any solid waste upon any public highway, street or other public place or
on any private property, except as provided in this chapter or under the
authorization, supervision and direction of the Highway Superintendent
or the Solid Waste Coordinator.
C. Collection and disposal.
(1) The Town of West Seneca shall not collect dangerous, hazardous or
chemically toxic wastes, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Dangerous wastes: wastes that represent an immediate threat
to the safety of Town employees and general public, such as
jagged or protruding objects, broken glass, nails, etc.
(b) Hazardous wastes: wastes as defined in the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law and regulations thereto,
including but not limited to:
[1] Ignitable wastes, such as paint thinners, solvent-based
cleaners, degreasers (e.g., acetone and xylene) or
gasoline.
[2] Corrosive wastes, such as battery acid, metal cleaning,
both sludges (e.g., sodium hydroxide, sulfuric or
hydrochloric acid).
[3] Reactive wastes such as cyanide metal plating sludges or
any waste that will react violently with water or generates
toxic gases, vapors or fumes, (e.g., sodium metal).
[4] EP toxicity wastes which produce an extract containing
contaminants such as arsenic, lead, chromium, silver or
herbicides; or industrial process wastes, contaminated soil
from spill or other solids containing any of the metals or
organic materials in excess of the concentrations listed in
the state law and regulations thereto.
[5] Toxic wastes, such as sludges from solvent recovery,
solvents and the industry-specific wastes listed in Part
371, § 371.4(b), of the Consolidated Laws of New York
Codes Rules and Regulations.
(2) Dangerous, hazardous and chemically toxic wastes shall be
disposed of by the owner or producer of the same and at the sole
cost and expense of the producer.
§ 101-8 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101-8
93:311
§ 101-9. Supervision; rules and regulations.
§ 101-10. Authorized collectors; license required. [Amended
12-7-1992]
D. It shall be the duty of every person, owner or occupant of every
dwelling within the Town to keep such buildings free and clear of all
kinds of solid waste and to keep the sidewalk and yard areas clean.
E. No dirt, stone, brick, concrete or other substance that may accumulate
as a result of building construction, demolition, remodeling or repair
operations shall be set out for collection by the Department of
Sanitation but shall be otherwise disposed of by the owner or
contractor.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the maintenance
of a single compost pile located in the rear yard of a residence.
A. The collection and disposal of solid waste shall be under the supervision
and control of the Department of Highway for the Town of West Seneca.
B. The Superintendent of the Highway Department or his designee shall
be empowered to designate the days and hours of collection and to
make rules and regulations concerning all matters pertaining to the
collection and disposal of solid waste.
C. The collection and disposal of recyclable waste shall be under the
supervision and control of the Recycling Coordinator of the Town of
West Seneca.
D. The Superintendent of the Highway Department or his designee shall
be empowered to designate the days and hours of collection and to
make rules and regulations concerning all matters pertaining to the
collection and disposal of recyclable material.
E. The Highway Superintendent and Recycling Coordinator are authorized
to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including all implementing
rules and regulations.
A. All authorized collectors must obtain a solid waste collecting license
from the Town of West Seneca. A fee for such license shall be set by the
governing body on an annual basis, and all licenses shall be issued for
the calendar year or such portion thereof. There shall be no reduction in
the fee for a license issued after the beginning of any calendar year.
B. An authorized collector sticker shall be prominently displayed on each
vehicle operated by or on behalf of the authorized collector.
C. Authorized collector applications may be denied if the applicant or
licensee has been adjudged or administratively determined to have
committed one or more violations of this chapter during the preceding
calendar year.
§ 101-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 101-10
93:312
§ 101-11. Approval, denial, suspension or revocation of license.
D. All authorized collectors licensed by the Town of West Seneca shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Town of West Seneca for any pending,
threatened or actual claims, liability or expenses arising from waste
disposal by the authorized collector in violation of this chapter.
E. Authorized collectors shall offer collection services for all recyclable
materials to all residential customers from whom they provide
municipal solid waste collection services at the same times and on the
same days as services are provided to their customers for solid waste
collection.
F. Each collector who shall apply for a license under this section shall
complete an application for solid waste collection license to be issued
by the Town of West Seneca Solid Waste Coordinator. Each collector
shall maintain separate monthly records of solid waste and recyclable
materials collected, transported or disposed of by the authorized
collector, which shall include the following information:
(1) The municipality or geographical area and number of units in
which the solid waste or recyclable material was generated.
(2) The quantity, by ton, of solid waste and of each type of recyclable
material collected.
(3) The quantity, by ton, of recycled material delivered to a recycling
facility(ies) and the location of the recycling facility(ies).
(4) The quantity, by ton, of solid waste delivered to each facility.
G. Reports containing the information required as stated above shall be
compiled and delivered to the Town of West Seneca Solid Waste
Coordinator or other designated individual for each reporting period as
designated by the regulations, but which shall be no more frequently
than quarterly.
H. Authorized collectors shall not accept for collection municipal solid
waste which has not been source-separated in conformity with this
chapter.
I. The annual license fee shall be as follows:
(1) Master or firm license: $100.
(2) Per truck license: $50.
A. When the designated public official determines that a failure to comply
with this chapter may have occurred, she/he shall recommend to the
municipality that the authorized collector application or the license be
denied, suspended or revoked or its holder subjected to a reprimand or
fine or that the generator or originator of the solid waste or recyclable
materials be subject to sanctions, fines or penalties herein. Notice and
§ 101-10 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101-11
93:313
§ 101-12. Unlawful activities.
an opportunity to be heard shall be provided prior to the denial,
suspension or revocation of a solid waste license or authorized collector
permit or the issuance of a sanction, fine or penalty. [Amended
12-7-1992]
B. The designated public official shall notify the affected generator,
applicant or licensee of the alleged failure in writing. The notice shall
include the following:
(1) A statement of the condition allegedly violated, referring to the
pertinent ordinance, law, rule or regulation.
(2) A short and plain statement of the alleged misconduct.
(3) A statement of the time, place and nature of the hearing.
C. The notice shall be personally served or sent by registered mail to the
generator, applicant or licensee's last known address at least 10 days
before the hearing date, with a copy to the administrator.
D. Hearings.
(1) Hearings shall be held before the Town Justice within a reasonable
period, which shall be at least 10 days after service of notice.
(2) The generator, applicant or licensee may be represented by counsel
at the hearing and may offer evidence and cross-examine
witnesses.
(3) Within 20 days after the close of the hearing, the Town Justice
shall:
(a) Determine whether the alleged failure to comply with this
chapter has occurred; and
(b) If the Town Justice determines that such a failure has occurred,
decide whether the generator or applicant shall be subject to a
fine or penalty, the application shall be denied or an existing
solid waste license or authorized collector status be suspended
or revoked or its holder subjected to a reprimand and issue an
order carrying out this decision.
E. Determinations, decisions and orders.
(1) Disposition may be made by stipulation, agreed settlements,
consent order, default or other informal method.
(2) The Town Justice shall promptly notify the applicant or licensee, in
writing, of the final determination, decision or order.
A. It shall be unlawful for:
§ 101-11 WEST SENECA CODE § 101-12
93:314
§ 101-13. Rodent control measures. [Added 5-14-2007 by L.L. No.
5-2007]
(1) Any person other than those persons so authorized to collect any
designated recyclable which has been placed at the roadside for
collection or within a recycling collection area pursuant to this
chapter.
(2) Any person to violate or to cause or to assist in the violation of any
provision of this chapter or any implementing rule or regulation.
(3) Any person to place or to cause to be placed any material other
than a designated recyclable in or near a recycling collection area.
(4) Any person to hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with this Town
or its employees or any other authorized persons in the
performance of any duty under this chapter or in the enforcement
of this chapter.
B. All unlawful conduct set forth in this section shall constitute a violation.
A. Every occupant or owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit and any other
property shall store and dispose of accumulated rubbish, boxes, lumber,
scrap metal, tires or any other materials in such a manner as to prevent
rodent harboring in or about such property. Materials shall be stacked
neatly in piles elevated to a level high enough to permit effective
cleaning.
B. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
supply facilities or make provisions for the storage and disposal of
accumulated rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal or any other materials
in such a manner as to prevent rodent harborage in or about the shared
or public areas of a dwelling or its premises. Material shall be stacked
neatly in piles elevated at a level high enough to permit effective
cleaning.
C. No owner or occupant of any dwelling or dwelling unit and any other
property shall store, place or allow to accumulate any materials that
may serve as food or harborage for rodents in a site accessible to
rodents.
D. Garbage receptacles shall be kept secure and closed at all times. Areas
for storage shall be kept free and clear of any and all accumulation that
is not properly secured. At no time may any garbage or trash be stored
outside in plastic bags or other non-rodent-proof containers.
E. No person shall feed in the open any domestic or wild fowl, birds or
animals except in such a manner so as to prevent scattering of feed or
seed upon the ground or ground level which can or will provide food for
rodents, insects, vermin or other pests.
§ 101-12 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101-14
93:315
§ 101-14. Nonseparated waste not to be collected.
The Town of West Seneca or any other person collecting solid waste
generated within this Town may refuse to collect solid waste from any
person who has clearly failed to source-separate recyclables designated
under an applicable section of this chapter.
§ 101-15. Existing contracts; nonconforming contracts.
§ 101-16. Penalties for offenses.
§ 101-17. Injunction to restrain violation; remedies to be
concurrent.
§ 101-18. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this chapter are to be liberally construed so as
best to achieve and effectuate the goals and purposes hereof.
Chapter 101A
SMOKING
A. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with or
in any way modify the provisions of any existing contract in force in the
Town on the effective date of this chapter.
B. No renewal of any existing contract upon the expiration of the original
term thereof and no new contract for the collection, transportation,
processing or purchase of solid waste or recyclables shall be entered
into after the effective date of this chapter unless renewal of such
contract shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.
A. Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this chapter
may, upon conviction thereof in a proceeding before a court of
competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed fifteen (15) days or to a term of community service related to the
purposes of this chapter or to pay a fine of not more than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.) and not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.), or any
combination of the above penalties.
B. Each continuing day of violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, the Town may
institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct exists as defined in this
chapter for an injunction to restrain a violation of this chapter.
B. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this chapter shall be deemed
concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent
this Town from exercising any other remedy provided by this chapter or
otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 101-14 WEST SENECA CODE § 101-18
93:316
ARTICLE I
Smoking in Town-Owned Buildings
[Adopted 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 13-201137]
§ 101A-1. Prohibited acts.
§ 101A-2. Posting of policy required.
This smoking policy shall be prominently posted in all Town work areas.
A. Smoking shall be prohibited in all buildings owned and maintained by
the Town of West Seneca, effective January 1, 2012.
B. Smoking shall be prohibited within 100 feet of all entrances and exits of
all buildings owned and maintained by the Town of West Seneca.
37.Editor's Note: This local law was adopted as Ch. 100A, but was renumbered to maintain
the organization of the Code.
§ 101A-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101A-2
93:317

ARTICLE II
Smoking on Town Property
[Adopted 11-13-2017 by L.L. No. 10-2017]
§ 101A-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a tobacco/smoke-free policy for
all Town of West Seneca owned parks, playgrounds and property, in the
interest of providing a safe, healthy environment and protection for both
employees and the public from the dangers of tobacco use, as well as
secondhand smoke, which has been proven to cause cancer and respiratory
disease.
§ 101A-4. Applicability.
Persons affected or covered by this article shall be all individuals using or
present in Town parks, playgrounds or other property, including employees,
volunteers, students, guests, visitors, clients, caretakers, family members
and vendors.
§ 101A-5. Authority of Town.
This article recognizes that the Town of West Seneca, as the owner of the
Town parks, playgrounds and other property, has the legal right to eliminate
smoking entirely on its property or to limit smoking to designated outdoor
areas.
§ 101A-6. Prohibited acts.
§ 101A-7. Compliance required.
Employees, volunteers, students, guests, visitors, clients, caretakers, family
members, vendors or other persons using or present in Town parks may be
asked to refrain from smoking activities and may be asked to voluntarily
comply with the Town's clean air policy for Town parks and playgrounds.
A. Outdoor smoking and/or tobacco use, including the use of electronic
cigarettes or e-cigarettes, shall be prohibited at all Town-owned parks,
playgrounds and other property.
B. Smoking-related refuse, such as cigarette butts, burnt tobacco, etc., is
to be disposed of in ash urns or other containers specifically designated
for such disposal. Smoking refuse is not to be disposed of in trash cans.
C. "Electronic cigarette" or "e-cigarette" shall mean any product
containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for
human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking
through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term
includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed,
marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or vape pen, or
under any other product name or descriptor.
§ 101A-3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 101A-8
93:319
§ 101A-8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this article shall
be guilty of a violation punishable as follows: by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days or by a fine not to exceed $250, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. The continuation of an offense against the provisions of
this article shall constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate
and distinct offense hereunder.
§ 101A-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 101A-8
93:320
Chapter 102
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103. Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 102-1. Intent.
It is the intention of this chapter to promote the efficient use and layout of
land, and take into consideration the health, safety and general welfare of
the public and of the residents and users of the proposed development. This
will be accomplished through sound site planning that includes standards in
the design, layout, landscaping and construction of development.
§ 102-2. Applicability; exceptions.
No development shall occur within the Town of West Seneca unless in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Where applicable, no
building permit, special use permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued unless all the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and
the site plan has been approved. Exceptions to site plan requirements are
as follows:
§ 102-3. Authority; enforcement.
§ 102-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PLANNING BOARD — The duly appointed Planning Board for the Town of
West Seneca (pursuant to § 271, Article 16, of the Town Law).
SITE PLAN — A formal submission for the development of a site, including
application and plan, meeting the requirements set forth herein.
A. Single-family and two-family residential buildings on approved lots; and
B. Permitted accessory residential structures and uses, unless required
elsewhere.
A. The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca, pursuant to the provisions
of Town Law, does hereby grant the West Seneca Planning Board the
power and authority to review and approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove plans that require site plan approval under this chapter.
B. This chapter shall be enforced by the Town of West Seneca Code
Enforcement Officer or any such other duly authorized person as
designated by the Town Board.
§ 101A-8 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102-4
93:321
SKETCH PLAN — A plan developed to meet the requirements set forth
herein that identifies the existing characteristics of the site and outlines
the proposed development used for informal review and comment by the
Planning Board.
TOWN BOARD — The duly elected Town Board for the Town of West Seneca.
§ 102-5. Site plan waiver. [Amended 4-20-2009 by L.L. No. 1-2009]
A. A site plan waiver may be issued if a proposed project is minor in nature
to the extent that a full site plan review by the Planning Board may not
be necessary. In order for a project to be deemed minor and eligible for
relief from the full site plan review process, a minimum of only two
signatures from the Code Enforcement Officer, Town Engineer or
Planning Board Chairman must be secured on the site plan waiver
application to approve a site plan waiver. Criteria for such waiver are as
follows:
(1) The project is an addition to an existing structure of less than
approximately 1,000 square feet or which represents less than 10%
of the existing structure;
(2) A change in use that consists of a similar use to the approved use in
the structure and does not require additional parking;
(3) An accessory building to an approved use that is not visible from
the road or adjoining residential uses; and
(4) Such other minor changes to an approved site plan as determined
by the Code Enforcement Official, Town Engineer and Planning
Board Chairman.
B. In certain cases, the preparation of a sketch plan or a site plan
application may be deemed necessary to meet the requirements of a
site plan waiver process. It may be determined that the proposed
project needs formal site plan approval from the Planning Board. This
may be required for projects located in any zoning overlay district.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer, Town Engineer and/or Planning Board
Chairman, in making a determination to grant site plan waiver, may
include conditions that must be met for the issuance of the building
permit (a site plan waiver does not relieve the applicant of any building
permit requirement). All decisions regarding reasonable conditions to
be placed upon a site plan waiver approval shall be made in writing on
the site plan waiver application form.
D. Determinations and approval conditions for a site plan waiver may only
be appealed by the applicant by appearing before the Planning Board
under a formal site plan application.
§ 102-4 WEST SENECA CODE § 102-6
93:322
§ 102-6. Amendments; variances.
Amendments to a site plan shall be acted upon in the same manner as the
approval of the original plan. Upon findings by the Planning Board that,
due to special conditions peculiar to a site, certain information normally
required as part of the site plan is inappropriate or unnecessary or that
strict compliance with said requirements may cause extraordinary and
unnecessary hardships, the Planning Board may vary or waive the provision
for such information, provided that such variance or waiver will not have
detrimental effects on the public health, safety, or general welfare, or have
the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the site plan submission or
this chapter.
§ 102-7. Site plan review procedure.
§ 102-8. Preapplication; informal review.
§ 102-9. Application for site plan approval; fees. [Amended
6-11-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007; 6-15-2009 by L.L. No. 2-2009]
A. Where site plan review is determined to be required, the Code
Enforcement Official shall refer the application, site plan and
supporting materials to the Town Planning Board.
B. At the time of determination, the applicant may decide to proceed with
a sketch plan application or proceed with formal site plan review.
C. All proposals require appropriate environmental reviews in accordance
with the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA) before any
action is taken by the Planning Board.
A. Prior to the filing of an application for site plan approval, the applicant
may submit a sketch plan for informal Planning Board review and
comment. The purpose of the preapplication procedure is to afford the
applicant an opportunity to consult early and informally with the
Planning Board before preparation of the site plan.
B. The Planning Board will informally review the overall design and layout
against the intent and requirements of this chapter and provide
feedback to the applicant on potential issues or concerns that should be
addressed or additional information that should be submitted. The
applicant will be required to make the decision as to whether to submit
an amended sketch plan to the Planning Board or make a formal site
plan application.
A. The applicant shall file an application for site plan approval with the
Town Clerk to be forwarded to the Planning Board for consideration at
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board. The
application shall be accompanied by 16 copies of a formal site plan, to
be prepared in accordance with provisions described herein, and a
§ 102-6 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102-9
93:323
§ 102-10. Sketch plan.
If the applicant chooses to submit a sketch plan, the plan shall contain the
following data and information:
§ 102-11. Formal site plan; improvements.
filing fee as determined by the Town Board and outlined in the Town's
schedule of fees.38
B. The application shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to the next
scheduled Planning Board meeting. The application will be reviewed by
the Town Planning Board Consultant, Town Planner or designated Town
Representative to determine its completeness. If complete, the site plan
shall be placed on the next Planning Board agenda.
C. Where applicable, the application review under Subsection B above
shall be coordinated with the appropriate Town officials (Town
Engineer, Highway Superintendent; etc.) and other regulatory agencies
(NYSDEC, NYSDOT, Erie County Department of Environment and
Planning, etc.).
D. A stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the
requirements of § 102A-7 of the Stormwater Management and Erosion
and Sediment Control Ordinance shall be required for site plan
approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria
and standards of § 102A-8 of the Stormwater Management and Erosion
and Sediment Control Ordinance. The approved site plan than be
consistent with provisions of Chapter 102A.
A. Project location, including nearby roads and other major landmarks;
B. North arrow and scale;
C. General site information, including existing conditions and dimensions
of the site; and
D. General layout of the proposed development and accompanying
facilities.
A. An applicant shall prepare a formal site plan in accordance with this
chapter.
B. The site plan shall be prepared by an architect, landscape architect,
engineer, or surveyor licensed in the State of New York, be certified
with their signature and seal and contain the information found in the
Town's site plan application. A submitted sketch plan will allow the
Planning Board to identify the appropriate level of information needed
for the site plan.
38.Editor's Note: The Site Plan Fee Schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 102-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 102-11
93:324
§ 102-12. Planning Board actions; project review criteria.
C. In furtherance of the purposes of this chapter and to assure the public
health, safety and general welfare, the Planning Board may require the
following improvements:
(1) The construction of pedestrian walkways or sidewalks for the safe
and convenient movement of patrons both within the site and
within adjoining sites and pedestrian facilities. It is not the intent of
the Town to include sidewalks on every project, but to place them in
reasonable and appropriate locations.
(2) The dedication of rights-of-way and easements for all facilities to be
publicly maintained prior to the issuance of any building permits or
occupancy.
(3) Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, it is desirable to
provide for access to an adjoining property, proposed accesses shall
be extended to the boundary of such property. Cross access
agreements will be required as necessary.
(4) The construction of curbs, gutters and drives which will permit
vehicular travel on the site and connection to and from adjacent
parking areas and properties.
(5) Screening, fencing, walls, berms and screen plantings adequate to
screen views in accordance with requirements of this chapter and
other Town laws and ordinances for adjacent subdivisions,
contrasting development of less intensity and state highways of
limited access. Designated plantings and landscaping shall be in
accordance with the approved schedule and annually maintained
by the property owner.
(6) Any other improvement necessary to meet any condition of
approval.
A. The Planning Board shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or
disapprove any such site plan within 62 days after the day the
application is received (subject to completion of the SEQR process). The
time within which the Planning Board must render its decision may be
extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the Planning Board.
B. The Planning Board approval or denial and any conditions thereto shall
be guided by the following general standards for site development:
(1) Conformance with this chapter and other adopted Town plans, an
approved development plan that includes the subject site, if one
exists, and all other applicable laws;
(2) Compatibility of the proposed development with the natural
features of the land and the environmental attributes of the site;
§ 102-11 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102-12
93:325
§ 102-13. Application for building permit; expiration and extension
of approval.
(3) The project's compliance with grading and drainage requirements
of the Town;
(4) The project's compliance with the Town's Flood Damage Prevention
Law;39
(5) The general layout and design of buildings, lighting, signage, open
space and development features consistent with reasonable
planning principles;
(6) The location and design of vehicular entrances/exits, including
emergency access and fire lanes, in relation to the street system,
traffic circulation and control within the site, and coordination of
access points and circulation with adjoining properties;
(7) The provision and protection of pedestrian movement on the site
and coordination of pedestrian movement on adjoining properties
and the street system;
(8) The location, design, layout and adequacy of parking, loading and
stacking areas, including the provision of opportunities for
handicapped parking;
(9) Provision of landscaping, screening and buffers to complement
development and protect adjacent uses and public rights-of-way
from unsightliness, noise, glare and other nuisances. Such
elements shall also be used to promote the availability of green
space in nonresidential development and recreation space in
residential development to avoid a continuous paved or built
environment;
(10) Adequate provision of drainage and stormwater management
facilities;
(11) Adequacy of sewer and water facilities, fire protection and
conformance with Town regulations for the provision and
construction of those services;
(12) Where appropriate and applicable, the concurrence of Town
agencies, New York State Department of Transportation, New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation and other county
or state agencies, as appropriate; and
(13) Meeting the requirements for a site plan, as identified in this
chapter.
A. All Planning Board approvals are contingent upon the Town Engineer
reviewing and approving the design plans and all other regulatory
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 102-12 WEST SENECA CODE § 102-13
93:326
§ 102-14. Special conditions.
The Planning Board may impose special conditions or modifications limiting
the use or occupancy of the proposed land and development consistent with
the intent and purposes of this chapter. Any conditions so imposed shall
become a part of the site plan approval and must be satisfied prior to the
issuance of any permits for development. No building or other development
permit shall be issued for property that is subject to a site plan except in
conformity with the approved plan for that site.
§ 102-15. Performance guaranty.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit or authorization for
development of any portion of the site, the owner and developer shall
comply with the public improvement provisions of the Town Code and may
be required to post a bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit to guarantee
compliance with site plan requirements.
§ 102-16. As-built plans; inspection reports.
The Planning Board may require as part of site plan approval that, upon
satisfactory completion of all required improvements shown on the
approved site plan, an as-built plan be submitted for the review and
approval of the Code Enforcement Official at least one week prior to the
occupancy of the building. The Planning Board may require as-built plans
in electronic format. Such plan shall include the record of all progress and
final inspections for the installation of all on-site and off-site improvements
as approved by the Code Enforcement Official or any such other duly
authorized person as designated by the Town Board. The completion of
as-built plans and the successful inspection reports shall be the basis for
release of any surety bond or portion thereof.
approvals/permits being received by the applicant. Once all conditions
are met and approvals/permits received, the plan will be signed by the
Planning Board Chairman and the Town Engineer, and building permits
can be applied for.
B. Within one year of the date of site approval by the Planning Board, the
applicant shall apply for a building permit or the approval of the site
plan shall expire. However, the Planning Board may extend the time for
application for a building permit if, in its opinion, such action is
warranted by the particular circumstances thereof for a period not to
exceed one additional year.
C. Unless work is commenced and diligently prosecuted within one year,
or such time expressly stated by the Planning Board at the date of
granting approval, said approval shall become null and void.
§ 102-13 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102-17
93:327
§ 102-17. Certificate of occupancy.
A final occupancy permit may be issued for any appropriately completed
building, or portion thereof, located on a part of an approved site plan,
provided that:
§ 102-18. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision of
this chapter to any building, other structure, or tract of land to be invalid in
whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the person,
property, or situation involved in the controversy, and the application of
any such provision to any other person, property, or situation shall not be
affected.
§ 102-19. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 30 days after its filing with the office of the
Secretary of State.
Chapter 102A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 70.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 77.
Illicit discharges, activities and connections
to storm sewers — See Ch. 78B.
Site plan review — See Ch. 102.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
A. As-built plans, to the extent they are required by the Planning Board,
have been submitted and approved for the required improvements on
the site plan that relate to and provide services to the requested
building for occupancy;
B. All inspections and conditions that are required for the service and
support of the building requested for occupancy have been successfully
completed and are certified for use by the proposed use(s) being
requested;
C. Any off-site and on-site improvements necessary to service the
requested building for occupancy have been completed and
successfully inspected; and
D. Any remaining on-site construction will not adversely affect the
occupants or the intended use of the building requested for occupancy.
§ 102-17 WEST SENECA CODE § 102-19
93:328
ARTICLE I
Findings; Purpose; Statutory Authority; Applicability; Exemptions
§ 102A-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
§ 102A-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this
jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 102A-1 hereof. This
chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
A. Land development activities and associated increases in site impervious
cover often alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and
increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff, thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream base flow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety;
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
§ 102A-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-2
93:329
§ 102A-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the State of
New York, the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca has the authority
to enact local laws and amend local laws and for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety or general welfare of the Town of West Seneca and for the
protection and enhancement of its physical environment. The Town Board
of the Town of West Seneca may include in any such local laws provisions
for the appointment of any municipal officer, employees or independent
contractor to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 102A-4. Applicability; Stormwater Management Officer.
A. Meet the requirements of minimum measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS45), Permit No. GP-02-02, or as
amended or revised;
B. Require land development activities to conform to the substantive
requirements of the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01, or as amended or revised;
C. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities in order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream
temperature and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of
stream channels;
D. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from land development activities which would otherwise degrade local
water quality;
E. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
F. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all land development activities as
defined in this chapter.
B. The municipality shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer
who shall accept and review all stormwater pollution prevention plans
and forward such plans to the applicable municipal board. The
Stormwater Management Officer may:
(1) Review the plans;
§ 102A-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-4
93:330
§ 102A-5. Exemptions.
The following activities may be exempt from review under this chapter.
(2) Upon approval by the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca,
engage the services of a registered professional engineer to review
the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost not to
exceed a fee schedule established by said governing board; or
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
C. All land development activities subject to review and approval by the
applicable board of the Town under Subdivision of Land, Site Plan, and/
or Zoning regulations40 shall be reviewed subject to the standards
contained in this chapter.
D. All land development activities not subject to review as stated in
Subsection C shall be required to submit a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) to the Stormwater Management Officer who
shall approve the SWPPP if it complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this chapter.
B. Silvicultural activity, except that landing areas and log haul roads are
subject to this chapter.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Stormwater Management Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Town of West Seneca on or before the effective date of this
chapter.
F. Land development activities for which a building permit has been
approved on or before the effective date of this chapter.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Subdivision of Land, Ch. 102, Site Plan Review and Ch. 120,
Zoning.
§ 102A-4 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-5
93:331
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetables and other plants primarily for use by that person
and his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
§ 102A-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-5
93:332
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Control
§ 102A-6. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter or in documents prepared or reviewed under
this chapter shall have the meaning as set forth in this section.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Management Design
Manual, most recent version including applicate updates, that serves as
the official guide for stormwater management principles, methods and
practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.)
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
§ 102A-6 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-6
93:333
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvcultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Coldwater fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbances of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal separate
§ 102A-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-6
93:334
storm sewers for compliance with EPA established water quality standards
and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER — An employee or officer
designated by the municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution
prevention plans, forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and
inspect stormwater management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the State of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition, are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
§ 102A-6 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-6
93:335
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
§ 102A-7. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be reviewed until the
appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the specifications in this chapter.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) All SWPPPs shall provide the following background information
and erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map. At a minimum, the site map should show
the total site area; all improvements; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that
could be affected by the construction activity; existing and final
slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or
equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the stormwater
discharges(s);
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction padding plan describing the intended sequence
of construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP.
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
§ 102A-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-7
93:336
control for each stage of the project, from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project closeout;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SEPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit run of land
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities as defined in § 102A-6 of this article
and meeting Conditions A, B, or C below shall also include water
quantity and water quality controls (postconstruction stormwater
runoff controls) as set forth in Subsection B(3) below as applicable:
(a) Condition A: stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a total maximum daily load (TMDL)
designed watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B: stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C: stormwater runoff from land development activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of single-
§ 102A-7 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-7
93:337
family residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(3) SWPPP requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(a) All information in this Subsection B(1) of this section.
(b) Description of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each postconstruction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of postdevelopment stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each postconstruction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each postconstruction stormwater management
practice;
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property;
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 102A-13 of this
chapter.
(j) For Condition A, the SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect certified professional or professional engineer and
must be signed by the professional preparing the plan, who
shall certify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meet the requirements in this chapter.
C. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall assure that all other
applicable environmental permits have been or will be acquired for the
land development activity prior to approval of the final stormwater
design plan.
D. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
§ 102A-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-7
93:338
§ 102A-8. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities shall be subject to the following performance
and design criteria:
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity "I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree
to comply with the terms and conditions of the stormwater
pollution prevention plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for
any person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
E. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following documents shall serve as
the official guides and specifications for stormwater management.
Stormwater management practices that are designed and constructed
in accordance with these technical documents shall be presumed to
meet the standards imposed by this chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the
"Design Manual");
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the "Erosion Control Manual").
B. Equivalence to technical standards. Where stormwater management
practices are not in accordance with technical standards, the applicant
or developer must demonstrate equivalence to the technical standards
set forth in Subsection A and the SWPPP shall be prepared by a licensed
professional.
C. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the State of New York.
§ 102A-7 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-8
93:339

ARTICLE III
Adminstration and Enforcement
§ 102A-9. Construction inspection.
A. Erosion and sediment control inspection.
(1) The Town of West Seneca Stormwater Management Officer may
require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter and may either approve that portion of the work
completed or notify the applicant wherein the work fails to comply
with the requirements of this chapter and the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) as approved. To obtain inspections, the
applicant shall notify the Town of West Seneca Enforcement Official
at least 48 hours before any of the following as required by the
Stormwater Management Officer:
(a) Start of construction;
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
(c) Completion of site clearing;
(d) Completion of rough grading;
(e) Completion of final grading;
(f) Close of the construction season;
(g) Completion of final landscaping;
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Stormwater
Management Officer.
B. Stormwater management practice inspections. The Town of West
Seneca Stormwater Management Officer is responsible for conducting
inspections of stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants
are required to submit as-built plans for any stormwater management
practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan
must show the final design specifications for all stormwater
management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion. Inspection
programs shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but
not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections based upon
complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage
basins or areas identified as higher-than-typical sources of sediment or
§ 102A-9 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-9
93:341
§ 102A-10. Performance guarantee; maintenance guarantee;
recordkeeping.
other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or
industries of a type associated with higher-than-usual discharges of
contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state of
federal water or sediment quality standards or the SPDES stormwater
permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not
limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling
discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in
drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage
control facilities and other stormwater management practices.
D. Submission of reports. The Town of West Seneca Stormwater
Management Officer may require monitoring and reporting from
entities subject to this chapter as are necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter.
E. Right-of-entry of inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the Town of West Seneca the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspections specified in Subsection C.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Town of West Seneca in
its approval of the stormwater pollution prevention plan, the Town of
West Seneca may require the applicant or developer to provide, prior to
construction, a performance bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of
credit from an appropriate financial or surety institution which
guarantees satisfactory completion of the project and names the Town
of West Seneca as the beneficiary. The security shall be in an amount to
be determined by the Town of West Seneca based on submission of final
design plans, with reference to actual construction and landscaping
costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the surety
is released from liability by the Town of West Seneca, provided that
such period shall not be less than one year from the date of final
acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) have been
constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
and that a one-year inspection has been conducted and the facilities
have been found to be acceptable to the Town of West Seneca. Per
annum interest on cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the
account until the surety is released from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
§ 102A-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-10
93:342
§ 102A-11. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Town of West Seneca with an irrevocable letter of credit
from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion
control facilities both during and after construction, and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner
fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Town of West Seneca may
draw upon the account to cover the costs of proper operation and
maintenance, including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Town of West Seneca may require entities subject
to this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
chapter.
A. Notice of violation. When the Town of West Seneca determines that a
land development activity is not being carried out in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of
violation to the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain the
following:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
(2) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
B. Stop-work orders. The Town of West Seneca may issue a stop-work
order for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order
shall be required to halt all land development activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The
stop-work order shall be in effect until the Town of West Seneca
confirms that the land development activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stopwork
order in a timely manner may result in civil, criminal or monetary
penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this chapter.
§ 102A-10 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-11
93:343
§ 102A-12. Fees for services.
The Town of West Seneca may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Town of West Seneca or performed by a third party for the
Town of West Seneca.
§ 102A-13. Maintenance, inspection and repair of stormwater
facilities. [Amended 2-4-2013 by L.L. No. 1-2013]
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less
than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or
subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. However,
for the purposes of only all provisions upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed misdemeanors and
for such purpose only all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors
shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation shall
constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
chapter, the Stormwater Management Officer may prevent the
occupancy of said building or land.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Town of West Seneca may
take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien
upon the property until paid.
A. Maintenance and inspection during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at
all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
§ 102A-11 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-13
93:344
(2) For land development activities as defined in § 102A-6 of this
chapter and meeting Condition A, B and C in § 102A-7B(2), the
applicant shall have a qualified inspector conduct construction site
inspections. Refer to the NYSDEC SPDES General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity, most current or
its successor, for inspection requirements.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
Town of West Seneca to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions
established by this chapter. The easement shall be recorded by the
grantor in the office of the County Clerk after approval by the counsel
for the Town of West Seneca.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall ensure they are operated and maintained to achieve the
goals of this chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes,
at a minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
(3) Discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed design criteria or cause
or contribute to water quality standard violations in accordance
with § 102A-8C.
D. Maintenance agreements. For commercial, institutional or industrial
developments, the Town of West Seneca shall approve a formal
maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities binding
on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the County
Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan approval.
The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the terms and
conditions of Schedules A and B of this chapter entitled "Sample
Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement."41
E. The Town of West Seneca, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its
sole discretion, may accept dedication of any existing or future
stormwater management facility for residential or townhome
developments, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this
41.Editor's Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 102A-13 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-13
93:345
chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient
area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance. The owner(s) shall provide an engineer's report in order
to establish a drainage benefit area (DBA) which, at a minimum,
provides the following:
(1) Plans and specifications: provide an overall description of the
drainage benefit area and the improvements. Include an operations
and maintenance plan that ensures continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice. Refer to Schedule C of this chapter for practices
acceptable for dedication to the Town for maintenance
responsibility.
(2) Estimate of cost: the net amount to be assessed on the lots or
parcels within each district for the total cost of maintenance and
servicing for each fiscal year with adjustments either positive or
negative for reserves, surpluses, deficits, and/or contributions. For
future facilities, the developer shall be required to pay an initial fee
of $500 per lot or parcel in an escrow account that is created for
said drainage benefit area; accruing interest shall remain within
the escrow account.
(3) Assessment diagram: the diagram of the DBA boundaries showing
the exterior boundaries of the DBA and the lines and dimensions of
each lot or parcel of land within the DBA. A legal description of said
boundary shall accompany the diagram.
(4) Assessment roll: an assessment of the estimated cost of the
improvements on each benefited lot or parcel of land within the
DBA.
(5) Method of assessment: the method of apportionment of
assessments, indicating the proposed assessment of the net
amount of the costs and expenses of the improvements to be
assessed upon the lots and parcels of land within the DBA, in
proportion to the estimated benefits to be received by such lots and
parcels.
F. Existing facility dedication. The Town may accept dedication of existing
stormwater management facilities, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) All owners of the lands which constitute the entire stormwater
management facility shall accept the dedication of properties to the
Town.
(2) Maintenance easements are in place as necessary for Town access
as specified in this chapter.
(3) The facility is in good working order and regular maintenance has
been performed. If the facility is in need of repair or maintenance,
§ 102A-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-13
93:346
costs of such repair, to bring the facility into compliance, as
determined by the Town Engineer, shall be incurred by the facility
owners and property owners that are part of the future drainage
benefit area.
(4) An engineer's report has been developed, in accordance with this
chapter, to establish a drainage benefit area.
G. Inspection after construction. The Town of West Seneca shall be
allowed to enter the owner's or operator's premises, upon the
presentation of credentials, where a regulated facility or activity is
located to ensure optimum performance of the measures as designed or
if there is a reasonable likelihood of adversely affecting human health
or the environment.
§ 102A-13 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 102A-13
93:347
Chapter 103
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 85.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 70.
Sewers — See Ch. 97.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 102A-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 102A-13
93:348
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 103-1. Purpose of regulations.
The regulations herein contained are adopted for the purpose of providing
for the sound growth and development of the town, of affording adequate
sites and facilities for the distribution, transportation, safety, health and
welfare of its population, and of providing reasonable and equitable
requirements in the interest of developers, investors and home owners so
as to ensure stable property values.
§ 103-1 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-1
93:349

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 103-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these regulations, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ENGINEER — The duly appointed or retained licensed professional
engineer for the Town of West Seneca.
FINAL PLAT or SUBDIVISION PLAT — A scale drawing of a proposed
subdivision as surveyed and marked out on the ground, which, if approved
and accepted by the Town Board, is intended for recording at the office of
the County Clerk, together with accompanying material as required.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A master plan prepared and filed (or
which may be prepared and filed) by the Planning Board pursuant to Section
272a of the Town Law, outlining the general development of the Town of
West Seneca, including amendments thereto.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN — Scale drawings of public improvements required
to be provided by the subdivider.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted (or which may be adopted) by the Town
Board pursuant to Section 270 of the Town Law, showing the location
of streets, highways and parks within the town theretofore laid out and
the established drainage system, including and amendments or additions
thereto.
OWNER — A person, group, corporation or an organization holding title to
land which is proposed for subdivision.
PLANNING BOARD — The duly appointed Planning Board of the Town of
West Seneca pursuant to Section 271, Article 16, Town Law.
PRELIMINARY LAYOUT — The paper design indicating the layout of a
proposed subdivision, together with accompanying material as required.
PRIMARY CONTROL POINTS — Primary horizontal and/or vertical control
points monumented permanently on or in the ground, data for which is on
file with the Engineer.
STREETS — A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place or however otherwise designated.
ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS — Those used primarily for fast
or heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and principal
streets for circulation within such a development.
B.
§ 103-2 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-2
93:351
SUBDIVIDER — A person, group, corporation or an organization proposing
to subdivide land within the Town of West Seneca.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two lots, plots,
blocks or sites in such a way as to create or extend one or more streets, or
into more than four plots, blocks or sites without streets, for the purpose
of developing or offering such land for sale to the public. Resubdivision of
land heretofore platted shall come under the meaning of "subdivision" if it
falls under the above requirements. Resubdivision of land does not include
the consolidation of adjoining lots into common ownership.[Amended
5-9-1994]
TOWN BOARD — The duly elected Town Board of the Town of West Seneca.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
§ 103-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-2
93:352
ARTICLE III
Procedure and Fees
§ 103-3. Preapplication procedure.
Prior to the filing of an application for subdivision approval, the subdivider
may submit general site information, a location map and a sketch plan
with a request for informal consideration and advice. The purpose of the
preapplication procedure is to afford the subdivider an opportunity to
consult early and informally with the Planning Board before preparation
of the preliminary layout, in order to save time and money and make the
most of opportunities for desirable development. If the preapplication is
approved by the Planning Board, the applicant shall provide four copies of
the approved sketch plan to the Planning Board, one copy of which shall
be distributed to each of the following: Town Board, Town Attorney, Town
Engineer and Planning Board.
§ 103-4. Application for subdivision approval; filing fee. [Amended
5-10-199942]
Whenever any subdivision of land as hereinbefore defined is proposed to
be made and before any contract for the sale of or any offer to sell such
subdivision or any part thereof is made, the subdividing owner thereof or
his agent shall apply in writing to the Planning Board for approval of such
subdivision. Such application shall be presented to the Town Clerk, to be
forwarded to the Planning Board for filing at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning Board, and shall be accompanied by six copies of
the preliminary layout and a filing fee of $100 per lot. In the event that
the number of lots is subsequently reduced, a prorated refund shall be
made by the Town Clerk. If additional lots are created in the subdivision, an
additional filing fee shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the rate of $100 for
each additional lot.
§ 103-5. Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary layout.
A. The Planning Board shall review the preliminary layout and may
require additional information and plans as specified in § 103-10.
B. Following discussion with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable
and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him in
accordance with the requirements of Article VI, the Planning Board may
set the time for an informal public hearing thereon and shall forward a
copy of the notice of hearing and a copy of the preliminary layout to the
Town Board. If the preliminary layout is disapproved, the Planning
Board shall state the reasons for its disapproval.
C. If the preliminary layout is approved, the Planning Board shall express
its approval as "conditional approval" and state the specific conditions
42.Editor's Note: This motion of the Town Board became effective 5-13-1999.
§ 103-3 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-5
93:353
§ 103-6. Procedure for approval of improvement plans.
§ 103-7. Procedure for final approval of subdivision plat.
of such approval, if any. If the preliminary layout is disapproved, the
Planning Board shall state the reasons for its disapproval.
D. The action of the Planning Board shall be noted on five copies of the
preliminary layout, to which shall be attached referenced statements of
any conditions and requirements determined by the Planning Board in
accordance with these regulations. One copy shall be returned to the
subdivider, one copy shall be retained by the Planning Board and one
copy shall be transmitted to the Town Board, one copy to the Town
Attorney and one copy to the Town Engineer.
E. Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of § 102A-7
of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance shall be required for preliminary subdivision plat approval.
The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design criteria and
standards in § 102A-8 of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and
Sediment Control Ordinance. The approved Preliminary Subdivision
Plot shall be consistent with the provisions of this Chapter 102A.
[Added 6-11-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007]
A. Improvement plans, when required, shall be submitted to the
Engineering Department for the purpose of determining the adequacy
of design of required improvements and compliance with ordinances
and specifications regulating construction of public improvements.
B. The Engineering Department shall make comments, corrections and
suggestions in writing to the subdivider's engineer so that the
improvement drawings can be prepared in a final acceptable form for
the approval of the Town Engineer.
C. Two sets of such drawings shall be submitted on regular print paper
and one shall be submitted on a dimensionably stable reproducible
drafting medium. At the same time, the subdivision plat shall be
submitted for the endorsement of the Town Engineer as specified in
§ 103-12.
D. After approval by the Town Engineer, one set of paper print drawings
and the subdivision plat shall be returned to the subdivider.
A. The final subdivision plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary
layout as approved. If desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary layout which he proposes to
record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to
all requirements of these regulations.
B. Request for final approval of the subdivision plat shall be made after
final Town Engineer approval and be submitted in writing to the
§ 103-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-7
93:354
Planning Board at a regularly scheduled meeting and shall include the
original plus six copies of the plat with endorsements and documents
required for approval as specified in § 103-12. Such request shall be
submitted within six months after approval of the preliminary layout;
otherwise, such preliminary approval shall become null and void unless
an extension of time is applied for and granted by the Planning Board. A
stormwater pollution prevention plan consistent with the requirements
of § 102A-7 of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment
Control Ordinance and with the terms of preliminary plan approval
shall be required for Final Subdivision Plat approval. The SWPPP shall
meet the performance and design criteria and standards in § 102A-8
of the Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance. The approved final subdivision plat shall be consistent with
the provisions of this Chapter 102A. [Amended 1-27-1997;
6-11-2007 by L.L. No. 8-2007]
C. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 30 days after
submission of the subdivision plat for final approval in accordance with
the Town Law. The Planning Board shall approve, modify and approve
or disapprove such plat within 45 days after the public hearing thereon,
but shall not endorse any approved plat until all conditions of the action
granting approval have been met. Such endorsement shall constitute
final approval by the Planning Board. If the plat is disapproved, the
reasons for such action shall be stated upon the records of the Planning
Board and a copy of such reasons shall be sent to the applicant.
D. The Planning Board shall retain one copy of the subdivision plat and
other exhibits, return one copy to the subdivider and transmit one copy
to the Town Board, together with a written recommendation.
E. The final approval by the Planning Board shall constitute authorization
for the Town Clerk to sign the subdivision plat. [Amended 1-27-1997]
F. Approval of the plat does not constitute an acceptance by the town of
the dedication of facilities tendered by offers of cession. [Amended
1-27-1997]
G. Unless the subdivider shall file such plat in the County Clerk's office
within 90 days after final approval, said final approval shall expire.
[Amended 1-27-1997]
H. Submission of copies of subdivision plat. [Amended 1-27-1997]
(1) After filing the approved subdivision plat, the subdivider shall
submit to the Town Attorney seven copies (including one
reproducible mylar copy on dimensionably stable drafting medium)
of the subdivision plat showing the map cover number and date of
filing in the County Clerk's office. These maps shall be distributed
as follows:
(a) Planning Board, one copy.
§ 103-7 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-7
93:355
§ 103-8. Changes in zoning regulations.
In accordance with § 281 of the Town Law, the Planning Board,
simultaneously with the approval of a subdivision plat and upon application
by the owner of the land shown on the plat, may modify the zoning
regulations43 of the land so platted. In considering such application the
Planning Board may require a building plan indicating lots where group
houses for residence or apartment houses or local stores and shops are
proposed to be built. Such building plan shall also indicate for each lot
or proposed building unit the maximum density of population that may
exist thereon and the minimum yard requirements. Such building plan, if
approved by the Planning Board, shall modify, change or supplement the
zoning regulations of the land shown on the plat, provided that such land
so shown thereon shall not show a greater average density of population
or cover of the land with buildings than is permitted in the district wherein
such land lies, as shown on the Official Zoning Map. Such building plan
shall not be approved by the Planning Board unless in its judgment the
appropriate use of adjoining land is reasonably safeguarded and such plan
is consistent with the public welfare. Before the Planning Board shall make
any such change in the zoning regulations, there shall be a public hearing
preceded by the same notice as in the case of the approval of the plat itself.
However, such public hearing on any such zoning change may be held prior
to the public hearing for final approval of the subdivision plat. Upon the
filing of the plat in the office of the County Clerk, such change, subject,
however, to review by court as provided in § 282 of the Town Law, shall be
and become part of the zoning regulations of the Town of West Seneca, shall
take the place of any regulations established by the Town Board, shall be
enforced in the same manner and shall be similarly subject to change.
(b) Assessor, one copy.
(c) Highway Department, one copy.
(d) Building Department, one copy.
(e) Engineering Department, one copy plus reproducible mylar
copy.
(f) Town Attorney, one copy.
(2) No public improvement or building permit shall be issued until the
above departments receive a copy of the filed subdivision plat.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 103-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-8
93:356
ARTICLE IV
Plats and Data
§ 103-9. Preapplication plans and data.
§ 103-10. Preliminary layout — conditional approval.
A. General site information shall describe or outline the existing
conditions of the site and the proposed development to the extent
necessary to supplement the location map and sketch plan. Information
may be subsequently required on existing covenants, land
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, and
information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number of
residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas,
playgrounds, parks and other public areas, proposed protective
covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements.
B. Location map identifying the location of the subdivision in relation to
major streets and other predominant landmarks shall be included.
C. Sketch plan shall show in simple sketch form the proposed layout of
streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions, as well
as scale, North point and date.
A. The scale of the preliminary layout shall be 100 feet to the inch (scale:
one inch equals 100 feet). The scale, North point (oriented to the top of
the drawing where possible) and date of preparation shall be shown,
together with the data required below in Subsections B and C.
B. Existing conditions data shall include the following except when
otherwise specified by the Planning Board:
(1) Key plan showing location and boundaries of tract.
(2) Mapped area on the preliminary layout shall include the proposed
subdivision and a margin on all sides sufficient to indicate property
ownerships bounding the proposed subdivision. Names of
registered owners or record data of existing plats bounding the
proposed subdivision shall be noted on the preliminary layout,
together with all property line intersections with the subdivision
tract boundary. All related farm lot lines shall be shown.
(3) Subdivision tract. Present tract designation and ownership, both
according to official records in the office of the County Clerk, shall
be indicated on the plat. Tract boundaries, taken from official deed
description or as surveyed by a professional engineer or licensed
land surveyor, shall be drawn to scale. The acreage within the
proposed subdivision tract shall be indicated.
(4) Revision of recorded plats. In resubdividing a plat recorded in the
office of the County Clerk, the resubdivision map shall retain the
name of the original subdivision and shall indicate clearly in what
§ 103-9 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-10
93:357
manner the lots have been subdivided. The original lot lines shall
be shown on the map in broken lines, and the boundary lines
of the new lots in solid lines. If a map is submitted to revise or
resubdivide lots on two or more plats of adjoining subdivisions
previously recorded, the boundary lines of the original subdivisions
shall be clearly shown in broken lines in addition to the above.
(5) Easements. Location, width and purpose of easements.
(6) Streets on and adjacent to the tract (including all streets shown on
the Official Map). Name and right-of-way width and location; type,
width and elevation or surfacing; any legally established center-line
elevations; walks, curbs, gutters, bridges, culverts, etc.
(7) Utilities on and adjacent to the tract. Location, size and invert
elevation of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, ditches or
other facilities for drainage; location and size of water mains;
location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles and
streetlights. If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the
tract, indicate the direction and approximate distance to and size of
nearest ones, showing invert elevation of sewers or culverts. Where
drainage is to be accomplished by a natural watercourse or
drainage ditch, the elevation of water in such watercourse or ditch
at recognized flood stage shall be shown.
(8) Ground elevations on the tract, based on United States Geodetic
Survey datum plane. For land that slopes less than approximately
2%, show spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage
channels or swales and at selected points not more than 100 feet
apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than approximately
2%, either show contours at an interval of not more than five feet if
ground slope is regular and such information is sufficient for
planning purposes or show contours at an interval of not more than
two feet if necessary because of irregular land or need for more
detailed data for preparing plans and construction drawings.
(9) Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the Planning
Board. Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface
soil, rock and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater
unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet; location and results of
soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are
proposed.
(10) Other conditions on the tract. Watercourses, marshes, rock
outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more
in diameter, houses, other buildings and other significant features.
(11) Other conditions on adjacent land. Approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining
walls; power lines or towers.
C. Preliminary layout shall show all proposals, including the following:
§ 103-10 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-10
93:358
§ 103-11. Improvement plans.
(1) Streets. Names; right-of-way and roadway widths; approximate
grades and gradients; similar data for alleys, if any.
(2) Other rights-of-way or easements. Location, width and purpose.
(3) Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
(4) Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers.
(5) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or
other public uses.
(6) Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches,
industry or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family
dwellings.
(7) Site data, including number of residential lots, typical lot size and
acres in parks, etc.
(8) Topography. Any major alterations to the land configuration under
the proposed development shall be indicated.
(9) Other data. Subdivision name or title (under which to be eventually
recorded).
D. Other preliminary plans. When required by the Planning Board, the
preliminary layout should include profiles showing existing ground
surface and proposed street grades, including extensions for a
reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision;
typical cross sections of the proposed grading, roadway and sidewalk;
preliminary designs of any bridges and culverts which may be required;
preliminary plan of proposed water mains to connect with existing
public water supply, or alternative means of water supply approved by
the County Health Department; preliminary plan of proposed sanitary
sewers, with grades and sizes indicated, connecting with existing
sanitary sewerage systems, or alternative means of treatment and
disposal approved by the County Health Department; preliminary plan
for collecting and discharging storm drainage. All elevations shall be
based on United States Geodetic Survey datum plane.
E. Draft of protective covenants, if any, whereby the subdivider proposes
to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the
proposed development, shall be submitted with the preliminary layout.
A. Improvement plans shall be prepared by and bear the seal of a
professional engineer licensed to practice in New York State.
B. Improvement plans shall be presented on standard sheets 24 inches by
36 inches.
§ 103-10 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-11
93:359
§ 103-12. Subdivision plat — final approval.
C. Improvement plans shall consist of the plans, profiles and details of
required improvements (see Article VI).
A. Final subdivision plat shall be printed on linen or canvas-backed paper
or drawn with pen and india ink or tracing cloth on sheets twenty by
forty (20 x 40) inches. The scale shall be not greater than 100 feet to the
inch. Where necessary, the plat may be on several sheets accompanied
by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions
the final subdivision plat may be submitted for approval progressively
in contiguous sections satisfactory to the Planning Board. The final
subdivision plat shall show the following:
(1) Primary control points approved by the Engineer, or descriptions
and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. Location
and description of monuments (shown thus, "X"), lot corner
markers (shown thus, "O") and bench marks (shown thus, "BM").
(2) Tract boundary lines, farm lot lines, right-of-way lines of streets,
easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential
lots and other sites, with accurate dimensions, bearings or
deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all curves.
(3) Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
(4) Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements.
(5) Number to identify each lot or site in numerical order within
blocks; letter to identify each block.
(6) Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated
or reserved.
(7) Names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land.
(8) Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by
record name, date and number.
(9) Certification by professional engineer or licensed land surveyor
(including name, address, New York State license number and seal)
as to accuracy of survey and plat.
(10) Signed statement by the applicant that he is the owner in fee
simple of the land being subdivided.
(11) Certification of approval by County Health Department.
(12) Whenever a proposed subdivision includes parcels or rights-of-way
to be dedicated for public use, and offer of cession shall be included
on the final plat so dedicating the parcels and rights-of-way
specifically enumerated thereon. Unless a separate restricted offer
§ 103-11 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-12
93:360
is made for any or all parcels to be dedicated for public use, every
offer of cession shall be full, complete and immediate upon and
only upon acceptance of such offer by the municipality. Offers made
with restrictions shall be made separately and shall state in full the
terms of the restrictions.
(13) Title, scale, North point and date.
(14) The final plat shall contain appropriate statements with dated
signature spaces signifying approval or acceptance by the
following in the order listed:
(a) The Engineer (regarding approval of required improvements).
(b) The Planning Board, Town of West Seneca.
(c) The Town Board, Town of West Seneca, attested by the Town
Clerk.
(15) The following statement shall appear on the face of the map: "No
subdivision lot shall be resubdivided without prior approval by
resolution of the Town Board of West Seneca." [Added 7-2-1962]
B. Separate documents.
(1) Agreements covering the improvement and maintenance of
unceded public spaces and the conditions and time limits, if any,
applying to site reservations.
(2) Attorney's certificate or title policy certifying that applicant is the
landowner; and title insurance policy insuring all offers of cession.
(3) An agreement, acceptable to the Town Attorney, between the owner
of the subdivided land and the town, stating that said owner will
not transfer title to parcels having less than 300 feet of frontage on
a subdivision street unless such street shall have been improved
and accepted for maintenance purposes by the Town Board.
Alternatively and in the discretion of the Town Board, a
performance or other surety bond sufficient to cover the full cost of
such improvements, as estimated by the Town Board, shall be
furnished to the town by said owner.
(4) Statement by the Town Attorney approving as to legal sufficiency
all offers of cession, all covenants governing the maintenance of
unceded public open space and any action taken to establish or
extend water and/or sewer districts; also approving the sufficiency
of any bond offered in lieu of the completion of required subdivision
improvements.
(5) Protective covenants in form for recording, including covenants
governing the maintenance of unceded public spaces or
reservations.
§ 103-12 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-12
93:361
C. Other requirements.
(1) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or other
agreements as may be required by the Town Board in the
enforcement of these regulations. In special cases where there are
potential hazards of flooding or other hazards in the opinion of the
Engineer, the town may require the services of an independent
engineer or expert to recommend conditions under which the
subdivision may be approved. The expense of such engineer or
expert shall be borne by the subdivider.
(2) Where any water, storm sewer or sanitary sewer line, water plant
or sewage treatment plant is to be installed by the developer
outside existing districts, the establishment or enlargement of a
water district, storm sewer district and/or a sanitary sewer district
may be required.
§ 103-12 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-12
93:362
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 103-13. Streets.
A. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all
streets shall conform to the General Development or Master Plan and to
the Official Map, if any, and shall be considered in their relation to other
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public
convenience and safety and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of land to be served and/or abutted by such streets.
B. Where not shown in the General Development Plan, streets in a
subdivision shall:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas; or
(2) Conform to a plan for the adjacent area approved or adopted by the
Planning Board to meet a particular situation where topographical
or other conditions make continuance of or conformance with
existing streets impracticable.
C. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
D. Where a subdivision abuts on or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the Planning Board may require marginal access streets,
reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with or without rear
service alleys or such other treatment as may be necessary for
adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.
E. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or
controlled-access highway right-of-way, the Planning Board may require
a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way,
at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as
for park purposes in residential districts or for business, commercial or
industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be
determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades
and future grade separations.
F. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, water plants or sewage
treatment plants shall be prohibited except where their control is
definitely placed in the town under conditions approved by the Town
Board.
G. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
§ 103-13 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-13
93:363
H. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
I. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 75º.
The Planning Board may waive this requirement if adequate
channelizing or divisional islands are provided to ensure traffic safety.
J. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
10 feet or with a greater radius where the Planning Board may deem it
necessary. The Planning Board may permit comparable cutoffs or
chords in place of rounded corners.
K. Curb radii at intersections shall be not less than 20 feet.
L. Rights-of-way.
(1) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the General
Development Plan, and where not shown thereon, shall be not less
than as follows:
Street Type
Right-of-way
(minimum width in feet)
Arterial street 80*
Collector street 60
Minor street 60
Marginal access street 40
*Not including right-of-way for marginal access streets, if any.
(2) No trees shall be planted or maintained within any required rightof-
way.
M. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the
reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations; and where the Planning Board finds
it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be
platted within such tract.
N. Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall in general be not
longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 120 feet.
Dead-end streets shall be graded to drain to the intersection, or a utility
easement provided and approved by the Town Engineer for drainage
from the closed end.
O. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with
the names of existing streets. All proposed street names shall be
checked with the list of street names maintained by the Erie County
§ 103-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-13
93:364
§ 103-14. Alleys.
§ 103-15. Easements.
§ 103-16. Blocks.
Planning Department and shall be subject to the approval of the Town
Board.
P. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with
vertical curves not less than 200 feet in length:
Street Type Maximum % Grade
Arterial street 4
Collector street 6
Minor street 8
Marginal access street 8
Q. In order to facilitate drainage, no street grade shall be less than fourtenths
percent (0.4%) when possible, but in no event less than threetenths
percent (0.3%).
A. Alleys may be required in business, commercial and industrial districts,
but it is recommended that other definite and assured provision be
made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and
parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
B. The width of an alley, if required, shall not be less than 20 feet and shall
be paved full width with an invert for center drainage.
C. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable
shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the closed end,
as required by the Planning Board, and shall be graded to drain to the
exit.
A. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be
provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway or
channel, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage
right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the drainage purpose.
A. Block lengths generally shall not exceed 1,600 feet nor be less than 400
feet. Block widths shall not be less than 240 feet.
B. Intersections with arterial streets should be held to a minimum and
preferably spaced at least 1,000 feet apart.
§ 103-13 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-16
93:365
§ 103-17. Lots.
C. Pedestrian crosswalks, right-of-way not less than 10 feet wide, may be
required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other
community facilities.
A. The area, width and the minimum building setback lines shall conform
to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance44 and to the following
standards:
(1) Residential lots not served by a public sewerage system shall meet
the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for usable area. Unless
specifically approved by the County Health Department, the term
"usable area" herein includes the general area of the lot or plot
which may be utilized for proposed construction and for normal
and reasonable development of the area for the type of occupancy
proposed, exclusive of lakes, streams, ponds, swamps, areas of
exposed or underlying rock, hardpan or other impervious stratum
within four feet of the surface and marginal areas subject to
flooding along streams or other bodies of water.
(2) Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business,
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide
for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type
of use and development contemplated, as may be required by the
Zoning Ordinance.
B. Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residential occupancy
nor for such uses as may increase danger to life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard.
C. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with
satisfactory access from an existing or proposed public street. Where a
tract is subdivided into parcels larger than normal building lots, such
parcels shall be planned to permit the opening of future streets and
logical further resubdivision.
D. Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots should be avoided except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from
traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement at least 10 feet wide, across
which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line
of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use.
E. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
F. Rear lot lines coinciding with side lot lines shall be avoided wherever
possible.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 103-16 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-17
93:366
§ 103-18. Public sites and open spaces.
Where deemed essential by the Planning Board upon consideration of the
particular type of development proposed in the subdivision, or where a
proposed park, playground or other recreational public site shown in the
General Development Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the
Planning Board may require the reservation of areas or sites of a character,
extent and location suitable to the needs created by such development for
a park or parks, playground or other recreational uses. The Planning Board
will recommend to the Town Board that the appropriate local authority
negotiate for the outright purchase of such sites.
§ 103-19. Driveways. [Added 8-2-1971]
§ 103-19.1. Trees. [Added 8-23-1999]
G. Corner lots shall have extra width, equal to the front yard setback
required by the Zoning Ordinance, to permit appropriate building
setback from and orientation to both streets. This requirement may be
modified or waived by the Planning Board in appropriate cases.
A. The arrangement, width and location of all driveways shall be in
conformity with other existing driveways.
B. Each driveway shall be located on the same side of the dwelling as
adjacent sublots.
A. The developer is responsible to provide two deciduous trees per
subdivision lot. Corner lots will require an additional two trees. The
trees are to have a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches above the ground.
Trees are to be planted parallel to the street at a location two feet
outside the right-of-way or trees may be planted at the direction of the
Planning Board. Trees should be spaced evenly and should avoid
underground utilities. The tree species are to be selected from a list
provided by the Planning Department. Trees are to be planted prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO). The developer is
responsible to replace any dead or diseased tree for a period of one year
after the CO is issued. Tree planting requirements can be waived or
altered only with Planning Board approval.
B. Between the 31st of October and the 1st day of April of the succeeding
year, a CO may be issued upon the submission of an agreement, in
writing, by the person to whom the permit was issued, and signed by
him, and the posting of $250 for performance and compliance with all
requirements herein and completion of required planting and
restoration work to the satisfaction of the designated official on or
before the 1st day of May. The bond shall continue until the planting
and restoration work is completed in accordance with the agreement
and the Town Building Department. The Town Building Department
shall have the right to declare the performance bond in default and to
§ 103-17 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-19.1
93:367
apply the proceeds thereof to the completion of the required work and
to enforce as a lien upon the property and deficiency.
C. Such section shall take effect 10 days after such publication and
posting, but such amendments shall take effect from the date of its
service against a person served personally with a copy thereof certified
by the Town Clerk under the corporate seal of the town and showing the
date of its passage and entry in the minutes.
§ 103-19.1 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-19.1
93:368
ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 103-20. Monuments.
Monuments shall be placed at such block corners, angle points and points of
curves in streets and at intermediate points as approved by the Town Board
or its designated official. The monuments shall be of such type, material,
size and length as may be approved by the Town Board or Engineer.
§ 103-21. Utility and street improvements.
Utility and street improvements when required in each new subdivision
shall be in accordance with the standards and requirements described in
the accompanying schedule.
A. For apartment, row houses and other residential types other than onefamily
detached dwellings, improvements shall be in accord with
Standard B (see schedule).
B. For one-family detached dwellings, improvements shall be in accord
with Standard A (see schedule).
C. For business, commercial, industrial and other types, improvements
shall be as determined by the Town Board with the advice of the
Engineer.
Schedule of Required Utilities and Street Improvements
Standard
B A
x 1. Public water per plans approved by Engineer and
County Health Department.
x 2. Public sewer per plans approved by Engineer and
County Health Department.
x x 3. Arterial streets in accordance with General
Development Plan and as set forth in preceding
§ 103-13L.
4. Collector streets:
x 60-ft. r.o.w., 38-ft. pavement, 5-ft.sidewalks.(*)
x 60-ft. r.o.w., 36-ft. pavement, 4-ft.sidewalks.(*)
5. Minor streets:
x 60-ft. r.o.w., 30-ft. pavement, 5-ft. sidewalks.
x 60-ft. r.o.w., 28-ft. pavement, 4-ft. sidewalks.
6. Marginal access streets (one-way traffic, one-side
parking):
x 40-ft. r.o.w., 20-ft. pavement, 5-ft. sidewalks.
§ 103-20 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-21
93:369
§ 103-22. Underground utilities. [Added 8-2-1971]
Schedule of Required Utilities and Street Improvements
Standard
B A
x 40-ft. r.o.w., 18-ft. pavement, 4-ft. sidewalks.
x x 7. Streets along development boundaries and streets
connecting development with existing improved street
system: cross sections as determined by Engineer and
Planning Board.
x x 8. Alley paved full width per Standard Specifications.(**)
x x 9. Grading and center-line gradients per plans and
profiles approved by Engineer.
x x 10. Storm sewer system or other drainage improvements
as per plans approved by Engineer.
x x 11. Curb per Standard Specifications.(**)
x x 12. Curb and gutter (alternative to item 11) per plans and
specifications approved by Engineer.
x x 13. Pavement, base, etc., per Standard Specifications. (**)
x x 14. Wearing surface per Standard Specifications.(**)
x x 15. Sidewalks per Standard Specifications.(**)
(*) Or as otherwise required by the Planning Board in accordance with
the General Development Plan. Pavement width may be reduced 16
feet where an eight-foot stabilized and drained shoulder is provided on
each side if curbs are not to be installed.
(**) Specifications for Regulating the construction of Public
Improvements in the Town of West Seneca. (See Ch. 93, Public
Improvement Construction.)
A. All applications for subdivision approval and site plan approval as is
presently delegated to the Planning Board or which may be delegated
to the Planning Board of the Town of West Seneca shall require all
electric, television, fire alarm45 and telephone lines to be installed
45.Editor's Note: On 5-13-1968 the Town Board approved a motion to authorize the Planning
Board to require subdividers to provide for the installation of fire alarm signal devices,
including necessary connecting facilities, in accordance with standard specifications and
procedures acceptable to the Fire Alarm Superintendent. On 11-20-1972 the Town Board
approved a motion to adopt the following processing procedure for fire alarm signal
systems for subdivisions: (1)Town Planning Board sends to the Fire Alarm Department
copies of the notification of approval letters when processing proposed subdivision plans
through the preliminary and final approval stages. This will make the Fire Alarm
Department aware of the existence and status of new developments. The Fire Alarm
Superintendent in turn sends a form letter to the developer (or his engineer) indicating
the town's requirement for fire alarm systems, general information and specifications for
the installation. (2)The alarm system shall be constructed by the developer's contractor
at the same time as all other public utilities are being installed. Inspection of the Fire
§ 103-21 WEST SENECA CODE § 103-22
93:370
§ 103-22.1. Streetlighting. [Added 7-2-1979; amended 11-9-2015 by
L.L. No. 11-2015]
underground, except that the Town Board may waive this requirement
at the request of the applicant in cases where the Board shall determine
the installation of underground service will result in practical difficulty
or hardship. In making this determination, the Board shall take into
account the following factors:
(1) The size and nature of the subdivision.
(2) Any and all unusual topographic or other natural conditions.
(3) The type of utility service existing in the area adjacent to the
subdivision at the time of the application for waiver.
B. The Town Board may grant full or partial waiver of this requirement,
and in approving such waiver, may require the installation of electric,
television, fire alarm and telephone wires on poles or may require a
combination of underground and overhead service.
A. The developer must request a streetlighting proposal from the New
York State Electric and Gas Corporation.
B. The plan must provide for LED lights to be installed and must be
approved by the Planning Board prior to installation.
C. The developer must have underground wiring and the installation of
underground fed fixtures installed by the contractor of his choice. All
posts and fixtures must conform to the New York State Electric and Gas
Corporation's specifications, or the developer may arrange for the New
York State Electric and Gas Corporation to make the installation. Upon
acceptance of the highway or street, the Town of West Seneca will then
own the underground wiring and standards.
Alarm work shall be made by the Fire Alarm Department after payment of a fee of $50. All
such work shall be completed prior to the issuance of building permits for the area except
as outlined in Item (3). When preparing the public improvement certification letter, the
Engineering Department shall obtain from the Fire Alarm Superintendent the current
status of the alarm system installation and note same on our letter so that a record of all
improvements will be contained therein. (3)If at the time of preparation of the public
improvement certification letter the alarm system is not completed and building permits
are desired, the developer may, with the agreement of the related town departments and
Town Board, post a performance bond or certified check in an amount acceptable to the
Fire Alarm Superintendent, guaranteeing the completion of the alarm system within 90
days of the date of acceptance of the other utilities. Under this condition building permits
may be issued but in no case may the structures be occupied prior to certification of
completion of the fire alarm system. (4)As soon as the fire alarm system has been installed
to the satisfaction of the Fire Alarm Department, the Superintendent shall certify
construction completion in writing to the Town Board.
§ 103-22 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-22.1
93:371

ARTICLE VII
Variances
§ 103-23. Granting of variances.
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way
of carrying out the strict letter of these regulations, the Town Board, upon
the recommendation of the Planning Board, shall have the power to waive
or modify the application of any of the requirements herein relating to
the use, layout and platting of land for subdivisions so that the spirit of
the regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and
substantial justice done.
§ 103-23 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-23
93:373

ARTICLE VIII
Original Design
§ 103-24. Submission of original designs.
Fitting, imaginative designs shall be encouraged by allowing the subdivider
to submit original subdivision designs not in strict conformance with the
standards hereinbefore set forth.
§ 103-25. Preparation of designs.
Such original subdivision designs, to be considered, shall be prepared for
review by the Planning Board in a manner equivalent to an architect's
detailed site plan, including proposed location of structures; shall comprise
15 or more residential lots; and shall be prepared by either a registered
architect, professional engineer and/or a licensed land surveyor, whose
imprinted seal shall appear thereon.
§ 103-26. Observance of spirit of regulations.
Nothing in this Article shall relieve the subdivider from strict conformance
with the regulations as hereinbefore set forth unless he can show that his
proposals for original design observe the spirit of the regulations if not the
exact content.
§ 103-24 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION § 103-26
93:375
Chapter 106
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Sewers — See Ch. 97.
Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following shall have the meanings indicated:
CONTROLLED DRAINAGE — The gradual drawing off of water from a
private swimming pool to a storm sewer or a road ditch by means of direct
piping thereto.[Added 8-11-1975]
FENCE — An enclosure. Such enclosure shall be at least forty-two (42)
inches in height and not exceed six (6) feet in height, constructed of
masonry, wood, metal or wire no lighter than No. 11 gauge.
LADDER — Any device, no matter how constructed, intended to be used as
a means of access to the outside top edge of any swimming pool whose side
extends above the ground, whether or not said pool is portable.
PERSON — Any person, copartnership, association, firm or corporation.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool other than a portable aboveground
pool, designed, used and maintained for swimming or wading purposes.
§ 106-2. Building permit for in-ground pools. [Amended 3-7-1988]
All private swimming pools, other than portable aboveground pools,
erected, constructed, excavated, either below or partly above and partly
below grade, or installed upon premises within the Town of West Seneca
shall require a building permit.
§ 106-3. Fencing requirements.
A. Private swimming pools on the lot or any part thereof within which the
pool is located, if constructed below or partly below grade, shall be
enclosed and fenced, and the wall of a dwelling and/or accessory
building may serve and be used as an integral part of the fence.
B. Access to the pool shall be by way of a self-closing gate and/or door
which shall be locked with key or combination lock at all times when the
premises are not under the direct supervision of an adult. When access
is provided by a gate, the locking device shall be installed at least three
(3) feet above ground level of the fence.
§ 103-26 WEST SENECA CODE § 106-4
106:376
§ 106-4. Gravity drainage restricted. [Added 8-11-197546]
§ 106-5. Use of ladders.
No ladder shall be left in, adjacent to or in the vicinity of an aboveground
pool, whether or not said pool is portable, unless the ladder is under the
direct supervision of an adult or unless the ladder has been rendered
useless as a means of access to the outside top edge of said pool.
§ 106-6. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.) for each and every offense. Each week's offense (violation)
shall constitute a separate and additional violation. Notwithstanding the
penalty hereinbefore provided, the Town of West Seneca may enforce
obedience to this chapter or any part thereof by injunction to restrain such
violation.
Chapter 109
TAXATION
A. No person shall drain or back flush a private swimming pool other than
by controlled drainage; provided, however, that if, because of reasons of
topography, it is impracticable to drain water to a storm sewer or a road
ditch, the Town Engineer is hereby empowered to waive the strict
compliance with this section and approve an alternative manner of
drainage.
B. Any connection to a storm sewer must be of a temporary nature and
disconnected immediately upon completion of the draining or back
flushing of the swimming pool.
46.Editor's Note: This legislation also provided for the renumbering of former § 106-4, Use of
ladders, to become § 106-5 and for former § 106-5, Penalties for offenses, to become
§ 106-6.
§ 106-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 106-6
106:377

ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-20-1967]
§ 109-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-23-1990]
The purpose of this article is to grant a partial exemption from taxation to
the extent of 50% of the assessed valuation of real property which is owned
by certain persons with limited income who are 65 years of age or over after
the taxable status date, but before December 31 of the calendar year, and
who meet the requirements set forth in § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 109-2. Details of exemption. [Amended 11-2-1970; 5-7-1973;
1-20-1975; 7-18-1977; 7-2-1979; 10-6-1980; 1-17-1983; 11-21-1983;
4-20-1987; 2-26-1990; 4-23-1990]
Real property situate in the Town of West Seneca, New York, and owned
by one or more persons, each of whom is 65 years of age or over after the
taxable status date, but before December 31 of the calendar year, or real
property owned by husband and wife, one of whom is 65 years of age or
over after the taxable status date, but before December 31 of the calendar
year, shall be exempt from real property taxes of the Town of West Seneca to
the extent of 50% of the assessed valuation thereof, subject to the following
conditions:
A. Application for such exemption must be made by the owner or all of the
owners of the property on forms prescribed by the State Board of
Equalization and Assessment, to be furnished by the Assessors' office,
and shall furnish the information and be executed in the manner
required or prescribed in such forms and shall be filed in such
Assessors' office on or before the appropriate taxable status date.
B. The income of the owner or the combined income of the owners of the
property must not exceed the sum of $18,500 for the income tax year
immediately preceding the date of making application for exemption.
"Income tax year" shall mean the twelve-month period for which the
owner or owners filed a federal personal income tax return or, if no such
return is filed, the calendar year. Where title is vested in either the
husband or wife, their combined income may not exceed such sum.
Such income shall include social security and retirement benefits,
interest, dividends, net rental income, salary or earnings and net
income from self-employment but shall not include gifts or inheritances.
[Amended 12-9-199647]
C. Title to the property must be vested in the owner or all of the owners of
the property for at least 24 consecutive months prior to the date of
making application for exemption.
47.Editor's Note: This amendment provided that this increase applies to assessment rolls
having taxable status on or after January 1, 1997.
§ 109-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-2
106:379
D. The property must be used exclusively for residential purposes and
must be the legal residence of and be occupied in whole or in part by
the owner or by all of the owners of the property.
E. The percentage of exemption shall be based on the maximum annual
income range as follows: [Amended 12-17-1990; 4-24-1995;
3-25-1996; 12-9-199648]
Income Range
Percentage of
Exemption
$18,500 or less 50%
More than $18,500 but less than $19,500 45%
$19,500 or more but less than $20,500 40%
$20,500 or more but less than $21,500 35%
$21,500 or more but less than $22,400 30%
$22,400 or more but less than $23,300 25%
$23,300 or more but less than $24,200 20%
$24,200 or more but less than $25,100 15%
$25,100 or more but less than $26,000 10%
$26,000 or more but less than $26,900 5%
48.Editor's Note: This amendment provided that this increase applies to assessment rolls
having taxable status on or after January 1, 1997.
§ 109-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 109-2
106:380
ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 3-27-2017 by L.L. No. 3-201749]
§ 109-3. Purpose.
§ 109-3.1. Applicability of exemptions; computation.
A. The Town of West Seneca has established and appointed an Industrial
and Commercial Incentive Board ("ICIB"), and the ICIB has
recommended to the Town Board of the Town concerning the various
types of business real property which should be granted eligibility for
an exemption pursuant to § 485-b of the Real Property Tax Law.
B. The Town finds that the recommendations presented will encourage the
investment of small businesses which may not avail themselves of the
benefits available to larger businesses through the government
industrial development agencies.
C. The Town further finds that these exemptions are necessary to
encourage targeted economic development and create or retain
permanent private sector jobs, and that the value of the exemptions
provided is justified by the need to provide employment opportunities
and broaden the tax base.
A. Certain real property constructed, altered, installed or improved
subsequent to the effective date of this article for the purpose of
commercial, business or industrial activity as identified in North
American Industry Classification System Major Divisions 23 through 92
and which is contained within the geographic areas of the Town set
forth as C-1, C-2, M-1 or M-2 on the Town Zoning Map and the
amendments thereto50 shall be exempt from taxation and special ad
valorem levies, except for special ad valorem levies for fire district, fire
protection district and fire alarm district purposes, to the extent
hereinafter provided.
B. The exemptions described in this section shall only apply to those
projects where the cost of such construction, alteration, installation or
improvement exceeds the sum of $50,000. The amount of the exemption
shall be calculated by taking the increase in the assessed value of such
real property attributable to such construction, alteration, installation
or improvement and reducing that increase in the assessed value of
such real property on a declining percentage basis, pursuant to the
following accelerated strategic exemption schedule:
49.Editor’s Note: This local law superseded former Art. II, Business Investment Exemption,
adopted 5-2-1977 by L.L. No. 1-1977.
50.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is available for examination in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 109-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-3.1
106:381
Year of Exemption Percentage of Exemption
1 50%
2 50%
3 50%
4 40%
5 30%
6 20%
7 10%
8 10%
9 10%
10 5%
§ 109-3.1 WEST SENECA CODE § 109-3.1
106:382
ARTICLE III
Physically Disabled Persons Tax Exemption
[Adopted 5-7-1984 as L.L. No. 1-1984]
§ 109-4. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Physically Disabled Tax Exemption Law
of the Town of West Seneca."
§ 109-5. Declaration of policy.
It is declared to be the public policy of the Town of West Seneca to provide
partial tax exemption for real property of persons who are physically
disabled and who use said property for residential purposes. It is further
declared to be the policy of the Town of West Seneca to exercise its
authority pursuant to § 459 of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 109-6. Grant of exemption.
§ 109-7. Certified statement required; additional information
required.
A. Any improvement to real property used solely for residential purposes
as a one- , two- or three-family residence shall be exempt from taxation
to the extent of any increase in value attributable to such improvement
if such improvement is used for the purpose of facilitating and
accommodating the use and accessibility of such real property by a
resident owner of the real property who is physically disabled or a
member of the resident owner's household who is physically disabled, if
such member resides in the real property.
B. This exemption shall apply to improvements constructed prior to the
effective date of this Article.
C. This exemption shall be granted only upon application by the owner or
owners of real property.
A. An individual shall submit to the Town Assessor a certified statement
from a physician licensed to practice in the State of New York on a form
prescribed and made available by the State Board of Equalization and
Assessment which states that the individual has a permanent physical
impairment which substantially limits one or more of such individual's
major life activities, except that an individual who has obtained a
certificate from the State Commission for the Blind and Visually
Handicapped, stating that such individual is legally blind, may submit
such certificate in lieu of a physician's statement.
B. An individual shall furnish such information as the Board of
Equalization and Assessment shall require on a form prescribed and
made available by the Board.
§ 109-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-8
106:383
§ 109-8. Filing of information form and certified statement.
Such form and certified statement or certificate of blindness shall be filed
by the applicant with the Assessor of the Town of West Seneca on or before
June 1 to qualify for an exemption for the following year's Town tax.
§ 109-9. Approval of application; duration of exemption.
If the Town Assessor is satisfied that the improvement is necessary to
facilitate and accommodate the use and accessibility by a resident who
is physically disabled and that the applicant is entitled to an exemption
pursuant to this Article the Assessor shall approve the application and enter
the taxable assessed value of the parcel for which an exemption has been
granted pursuant to this Article on the assessment roll with the taxable
property, with the amount of the exemption as determined pursuant to
§ 109-6 of this Article in a separate column. Once granted, the exemption
shall continue on the real property until the improvement ceases to be
necessary to facilitate and accommodate the use and accessibility of the
property by the resident who is physically disabled.
§ 109-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 109-9
106:384
ARTICLE IV
Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 10-21-1985 as L.L. No. 1-1985]
§ 109-10. Exemption prorated.
Pursuant to the authority of Subdivision 5(a) of § 458 of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York, the Town Board of the Town of West
Seneca hereby provides for the prorating of veterans' real property tax
exemptions should property be assessed at full value.
§ 109-11. Ratio of increase.
If the ratio between the exemption granted under § 458 of the Real Property
Tax Law of the State of New York and the total assessed value of the real
property in the Town for which such exemption has been granted increases
due only to a full value assessment in the Town, the amount of exemption
heretofore or hereafter granted under said § 458 shall increase in such
subsequent year in the same proportion as the total assessed value has been
increased.
§ 109-10 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-11
106:385

ARTICLE V
Disposition of County Tax Revenues
[Adopted 2-3-1986 by L.L. No. 1-1986]
§ 109-12. Purpose.
This article is enacted to provide for the disposition of revenues from taxes
imposed by the County of Erie in that said amounts are to be paid directly
to the Town of West Seneca for any Town purpose.
§ 109-13. Sales tax revenue to be paid directly to Town.
Section 1262 of the Tax Law authorizes counties to set aside a portion
of their sales tax revenue for cities, Towns and villages; pursuant to this
section, the Town of West Seneca is providing that the amounts paid to the
Town, as a portion of the sales tax revenue, shall be paid directly to the
Town of West Seneca to be used for any Town purpose.
§ 109-14. Taxes affected.
This article will affect sales tax revenue which was set aside by the County
of Erie for the Town of West Seneca pursuant to law.
§ 109-15. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing in the office of the
Secretary of State.
§ 109-12 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-15
106:387

ARTICLE VI
Alternative Veterans Exemptions
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by L.L. No. 1-1997]
§ 109-16. Intent.
The Town Board of the Town of West Seneca finds that recent changes to
§ 458-a of the Real Property Tax Law of the State of New York would have
the effect of reducing property tax exemptions for veterans in the Town of
West Seneca and wishes to increase the amount of exemptions allowable to
such veterans.
§ 109-17. Home value cap.
The home value cap for veteran exemptions, as provided for in § 458-a of
the Real Property Tax Law, is hereby increased from $80,000 to $120,000.
§ 109-18. Maximum exemptions allowable.
The maximum exemptions allowable under Subdivision 2 of § 458-a of the
Real Property Tax Law for the following classes of veterans is hereby
increased as follows:
§ 109-18.1. Gold Star exemption. [Added 3-12-2001 by L.L. No.
1-2001]
A Gold Star Parent shall be included within the definition of "qualified
owner" as provided in § 458-a(1)(c) of the Real Property Tax Law. Property
owned by a Gold Star Parent shall be included within the definition of
"qualifying residential real property" as provided in § 458-a(1)(d), provided
that such property shall be the primary residence of the Gold Star Parent.
§ 109-19. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its filing with the Secretary
of State.
A. For war veterans (§ 458-a, Subdivision 2[a]): $18,000.
B. For combat veterans (§ 458-a, Subdivision 2[b]): $12,000.
C. For disabled veterans (§ 458-a, Subdivision 2[c]): $60,000.
§ 109-16 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-19
106:389

ARTICLE VIA
Cold War Veterans Exemption
[Adopted 10-16-2017 by L.L. No. 9-201751]
§ 109-19.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to make provision for a Cold War veterans
exemption from Town of West Seneca real property taxes and to make
such exemption available and applicable on the first taxable status date
occurring after the effective date of this article.
§ 109-19.2. Findings.
§ 109-19.3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE DUTY — Full-time duty in the United States Armed Forces, other
than active duty for training.
ARMED FORCES — The United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force,
and Coast Guard.
COLD WAR VETERAN — A person, male or female, who served on active
duty in the United States Armed Forces during the time period from
September 2, 1945, to December 26, 1991, and was discharged or released
therefrom under honorable conditions.
LATEST CLASS RATIO — The latest final class ratio established by the
Commissioner pursuant to Title 1 of Article 12 of Chapter 50-a of the Real
Property Tax Law for use in a special assessing unit as defined in § 1801 of
the Real Property Tax Law.
LATEST STATE EQUALIZATION RATE — The latest final state equalization
rate or special equalization rate established by the Commissioner pursuant
to Article 12 of Chapter 50-a of the Real Property Tax Law. The
Commissioner shall establish a special equalization rate if it finds that
A. The New York State Legislature amended the New York State Real
Property Tax law to authorize the Town of West Seneca and other
jurisdictions to enact a real property tax exemption for Cold War
veterans under Real Property Tax Law § 458-b.
B. The state legislation was intended to provide Cold War Veterans with a
real property tax exemption similar to tax exemptions given to other
wartime veterans.
C. The Town of West Seneca desires to extend similar tax exemptions to
Cold War veterans by this article.
51.Editor’s Note: This local law superseded former Art. VIA, Cold War Veterans Exemption,
adopted 3-31-2008 by L.L. No. 1-2008.
§ 109-19.1 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-19.3
106:391
there has been a material change in the level of assessment since the
establishment of the latest state equalization rate, but in no event shall such
special equalization rate exceed 100. In the event that the state equalization
rate exceeds 100, then the state equalization rate shall be 100 for the
purposes of this article. Where a special equalization rate is established
for purposes of this article, the Assessor is directed and authorized to
recompute the Cold War veterans exemption on the assessment roll by
applying such special equalization rate instead of the latest state
equalization rate applied in the previous year and to make the appropriate
corrections on the assessment roll, notwithstanding the fact that such
Assessor may receive the special equalization rate after the completion,
verification and filing of such final assessment roll. In the event that the
Assessor does not have custody of the roll when such recomputation is
accomplished, the Assessor shall certify such recomputation to the local
officers having custody and control of such roll, and such local officers are
hereby directed and authorized to enter the recomputed Cold War veterans
exemption certified by the Assessor on such roll.
QUALIFIED OWNER — A Cold War veteran, the spouse of a Cold War
veteran, or the unremarried surviving spouse of a deceased Cold War
veteran. Where property is owned by more than one qualified owner, the
exemption to which each is entitled may be combined. Where a veteran is
also the unremarried surviving spouse of a veteran, such person may also
receive any exemption to which the deceased spouse was entitled.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY — Property owned by a
qualified owner which is used exclusively for residential purposes; provided,
however, that in the event that any portion of such property is not used
exclusively for residential purposes, but is used for other purposes, such
portion shall be subject to taxation, and only the remaining portion used
exclusively for residential purposes shall be subject to the exemption
provided by this article. Such property shall be the primary residence of
the Cold War veteran or the unremarried surviving spouse of a Cold War
veteran, unless the Cold War veteran or unremarried surviving spouse is
absent from the property due to medical reasons or institutionalization.
SERVICE-CONNECTED — Means, with respect to disability or death, that
such disability was incurred or aggravated, or that the death resulted from a
disability incurred or aggravated in the line of duty on active military, naval
or air service.
§ 109-19.4. Grant of exemption.
A. As authorized by Real Property Tax Law § 458-b, the Town of West
Seneca is hereby opting into the Cold War veterans partial real property
tax exemption to the extent of 10% of the assessed value of such
property; provided however, that such exemption shall not exceed
$8,000 or the product of $8,000 multiplied by the latest state
equalization rate of the assessing unit, or, in the case of a special
assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever is less.
§ 109-19.3 WEST SENECA CODE § 109-19.4
106:392
§ 109-19.5. Limitations.
B. In addition to the exemption provided by Subsection A of this section,
where the Cold War veteran received a compensation rating from the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs or from the United States
Department of Defense because of a service-connected disability,
qualifying residential real property shall be exempt from taxation to the
extent of the product of the assessed value of such property, multiplied
by 50% of the Cold War veteran disability rating; provided, however,
that such exemption shall not exceed $40,000 or the product of $40,000
multiplied by the latest state equalization rate for the assessing unit, or,
in the case of a special assessing unit, the latest class ratio, whichever
is less.
A. The exemption from taxation provided by this article shall be applicable
to Town of West Seneca ad valorem taxes, but shall not be applicable to
taxes levied for school purposes.
B. The exemption provided by § 109-19.4 of this article shall be granted
for a period of 10 years. The commencement of such ten-year period
shall be governed pursuant to this section. Where a qualified owner
owns qualifying residential real property on the effective date of this
article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment
roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring on or
after the effective date of this article. Where a qualified owner does not
own qualifying residential real property on the effective date of this
article, such ten-year period shall be measured from the assessment
roll prepared pursuant to the first taxable status date occurring at least
60 days after the date of purchase of qualifying residential real
property; provided, however, that should the veteran apply for and be
granted an exemption on the assessment roll prepared pursuant to a
taxable status date occurring within 60 days after the date of purchase
of a residential property, such ten-year period shall be measured from
the first assessment roll in which the exemption occurs. If, before the
expiration of such ten-year period, such exempt property is sold and
replaced with other residential real property, such exemption may be
granted pursuant to this article for the unexpired portion of the tenyear
exemption period.
C. Application for exemption shall be made by the owner, or all of the
owners, of the property on a form prescribed by the state subject to the
terms and conditions set forth in Real Property Tax Law § 458-b.
§ 109-19.4 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-19.5
106:393

ARTICLE VII
Disabled Persons With Limited Incomes Tax Exemption
[Adopted 3-8-1999 by L.L. No. 1-1999]
§ 109-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant a partial tax exemption from real
property taxation as set forth in § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law to
persons with disabilities and limited incomes.
§ 109-21. Details of exemption.
§ 109-22. Eligibility.
A. Real property owned by one or more persons with disabilities, or real
property owned by a husband, wife, or both, or by siblings, at least one
of whom has a disability, and whose income, as hereinafter defined, is
limited by reason of such disability, shall be exempt from taxation, as
authorized by § 459-c of the Real Property Tax Law, to the extent of 50%
of the assessed valuation thereof as hereinafter provided.
B. To be eligible for the exemption, real property owned by one or more
persons with disabilities, or real property owned by a husband and wife,
or both, or by siblings, at least one of whom has a disability, and whose
income, as hereafter defined, is limited by reason of such disability,
shall be exempt from taxation to the extent provided in the following
table:
Income Range Percentage of
Exemption
$18,500 or less 50%
More than $18,500 but less than $19,500 45%
$19,500 or more but less than $20,500 40%
$20,500 or more but less than $21,500 35%
$21,500 or more but less than $22,400 30%
$22,400 or more but less than $23,300 25%
$23,300 or more but less than $24,200 20%
$24,200 or more but less than $25,100 15%
$25,100 or more but less than $26,000 10%
$26,000 or more but less than $26,900 5%
A. As provided in § 459-c, Subdivision 2, of the Real Property Tax Law, a
person is considered to have a disability if he/she has a physical or
mental impairment, not due to current use of alcohol or illegal drug use,
which substantially limits such person's ability to engage in one or more
major life activities, such as caring for one's self, performing manual
§ 109-20 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-22
106:395
§ 109-23. Proof of disability statement.
As provided in § 459-c, Subdivision 2, of the Real Property Tax Law,
submission of a statement to the Town Assessor of either an award letter
from the Social Security Administration, an award letter from the Railroad
Retirement Board or a certificate from the New York State Commission for
the Blind and Visually Handicapped shall be proof of disability.
§ 109-24. Filing of applications.
Applications must be filed with the Assessor's Office on or before the
appropriate taxable status date on an annual basis.
§ 109-25. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and
working, and who:
(1) Is certified to receive social security disability insurance (SSDI) or
supplemental security income (SSI);
(2) Is certified to receive railroad retirement disability benefits; or
(3) Has received a certificate from the New York State Commission for
the Blind and Visually Handicapped stating that such person is
legally blind.
B. No exemption shall be granted unless the income limits are met, the
property is used exclusively for residential purposes and is the legal
residence of the disabled person as provided for in § 459-c, Subdivision
5, of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 109-22 WEST SENECA CODE § 109-25
106:396
ARTICLE VIII
Volunteer Firefighters Tax Exemption
[Adopted 2-10-2003 by L.L. No. 1-2003]
§ 109-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to grant a partial exemption from taxation
for certain volunteer firefighters and volunteer ambulance workers for
qualified property as provided in § 466-c of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 109-27. Exemption granted.
Volunteer firefighters and volunteer ambulance workers meeting the
requirements of § 466-c(2) or § 466-c(3) shall be entitled to the real property
tax exemption provided in § 466-c(1) of the Real Property Tax Law.
§ 109-28. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State.
§ 109-26 SWIMMING POOLS § 109-28
106:397
Chapter 110
TREE CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103. Zoning — See Ch. 120.
§ 110-1. Legislative intent.
A. The Town of West Seneca recognizes the value of trees to the
community and that the preservation and enhancement of these
resources is necessary to:
(1) Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare
by requiring the preservation and protection of trees on public and
private property within the Town;
(2) Reduce flooding; reduce water pollution; reduce effects of wind and
air turbulence; reduce visual pollution; reduce sound pollution;
reduce soil erosion; reduce levels of carbon dioxide and return
oxygen to atmosphere; increase groundwater supply; provide
shade; provide habitat for wildlife; conserve and protect property
values and otherwise facilitate the creation of a convenient,
attractive and harmonious community; and generally preserve and
safeguard the ecological, economic and aesthetic environment.
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the removal of multiple
trees and the planting of new trees, maintain tree diversity, preserve
existing trees and control harvesting of these natural resources while
preserving opportunities for business development. This chapter sets
forth regulations for:
(1) Tree removal(s) associated with site plan, subdivision and special
permit applications before the Town;
(2) Establishing restrictions for the removal of trees not associated
with applications for site plans, subdivisions or special permits; and
(3) Regulating certain activities associated with the harvesting of
trees.
C. Certain actions regulated under this chapter may be of sufficient scale
to necessitate approval of the Town and may result in significant
environmental impacts subject to review pursuant to the State
Environmental Quality Review Act.
D. All land uses subject to the jurisdiction of other codes of the Town of
West Seneca, in addition to meeting the requirement of such codes,
must also comply with the regulations herein established.
§ 109-28 WEST SENECA CODE § 110-2
106:398
§ 110-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARBORIST — A certified or otherwise qualified arborist approved by the
Environmental Commission.
CLEAR-CUTTING — The large-scale, indiscriminate removal of trees,
shrubs and undergrowth with the intention of preparing real property for
nonagricultural development purposes.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The officer designated by the Town and
charged with enforcement of zoning, building and fire prevention codes.
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ) — A practical limit beyond which any loss of
roots would not have a significant impact on a tree's survival. The CRZ is a
circle whose radius shall be equal to the measured diameter of the tree, in
inches, at 4 1/2 feet above the base of the tree, multiplied by 12 inches. The
center of this circle shall be the center of the tree.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — A standard measurement of the
diameter of a tree measured at 4 1/2 feet above the base of the tree. For
purposes of this definition, multi-stem trees are considered one individual
tree, and each stem must be measured at 4 1/2 feet above the base of each
stem and added together to determine the diameter of the multi-stem tree.
DWELLING — A house, apartment, or other place of residence.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Town of West Seneca Commission
for the Conservation of the Environment, as appointed by the Town of West
Seneca Town Board.
PARK TREES — All trees located in Town parks and all other areas owned
by the Town.
PLAN — The Tree Conservation and Landscape Plan, which shall be drawn
to scale, including dimensions and distances, and shall clearly delineate
the existing and proposed structures, uses, parking areas, access aisles,
drainage patterns and the location, size and description of all landscape
materials, existing and proposed, including those existing plant materials to
be removed.
STREET TREES — All trees, shrubs, bushes and all woody vegetation on
land located between property lines on either side of all public streets,
highways or rights-of-way within the Town.
TREES — Any living woody plant usually having one or more self-supported
stems or trunks and numerous branches that have a DBH of four inches or
more.
§ 110-3. General provisions.
A. All developments otherwise subject to subdivision and/or site plan
review shall meet the requirements of this chapter. Where required by
this chapter, a tree conservation and landscape plan shall be submitted
§ 110-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 110-3
106:399
§ 110-4. Regulated activities; approval required.
It shall be unlawful to conduct, directly or indirectly, any of the following
activities in the Town unless a tree conservation and landscape plan is
submitted and approval obtained pursuant to this chapter:
§ 110-5. Tree removal permit required.
and approved by the Planning Board as a part of the review procedures
for all projects. The Commission and Arborist shall be consulted in an
advisory capacity for comments regarding the plan. The Commission
may promulgate and adopt its own policies with respect to credentials
of the Arborist and the variety of allowable trees to be used.
B. The plan shall be drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances,
and shall clearly delineate the existing and proposed structures, uses,
parking areas, access aisles, drainage patterns and the location, size
and description of all landscape materials, existing and proposed,
including those existing plant materials to be removed.
C. Upon approval of the plan by the Planning Board, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a tree removal permit, and the property
owner shall agree to install and perpetually maintain the approved plan
for the duration of the use. Any failure to adhere to the standards of the
approved plan shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
A. The extent of clearing for new-build single-family home sites shall not
exceed an area of more than 1/4 acre, not including the area used for
driveways, unless stricter requirements have been imposed pursuant to
subdivision approval;
B. The removal of over 10 trees per approved building lot within a
regulated setback area unless prior approval is granted during
subdivision approval;
C. Clearing and clear-cutting, as defined herein; or
D. Removal of any street or park trees.
A. Subject to the exceptions of § 110-6, it shall be unlawful for any person
to cut down, kill or otherwise destroy any tree growing on privately
owned land within the Town without a tree removal permit issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. It shall be unlawful to cut down, kill or otherwise destroy any street tree
or park tree without permission of the Superintendent of Buildings and
Grounds or a Town Board designee.
§ 110-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 110-6
106:400
§ 110-6. Exceptions.
The requirement of a permit in § 110-5 shall not apply to the following
activities:
§ 110-7. Standards for plan approval and issuance of permit;
appeals.
A. Cutting down, killing or otherwise destroying trees by the owner, or its
agent, of any tract of land no larger than one acre, which has already
been improved by a dwelling. This exception shall not apply to parcels
which are not yet improved by a dwelling. In the event that a tract of
land is being used for residential purposes and is larger than one acre,
this exception shall only apply to a one-acre area immediately
surrounding and measured equally around the dwelling.
B. Removal of any tree under an actual or ongoing emergency condition
when such tree removal is necessary for the protection and
preservation of life or property.
C. Removal of dead or diseased trees, including those located on private
property, that constitute a hazard to life or property.
D. Cutting down, killing or otherwise destroying trees on properties while
being operated and maintained as farms, nurseries, orchards or
commercial forests. This exception shall not permit lumber harvesting
or any form of tree removal incidental to or in preparation for
development of the land.
E. Cutting down, killing or otherwise destroying trees by public utility,
natural gas companies or the Town performing normal construction and
maintenance pursuant to and in compliance with the law; provided,
however, that the Town may review the procedures employed by such
companies or departments to determine whether they comply with
applicable laws and meet the purposes of this chapter.
A. When issuing a permit or reviewing a submitted plan for approval, the
following factors will be considered:
(1) The extent to which the actual or intended use of the property in
accordance with the regulations of the zoning district in which the
property lies requires cutting down, killing or destroying trees,
following approval of a tree preservation plan and development/site
plan.
(2) Any unreasonable hardship to the applicant which will result from
modification or denial of the requested permit.
(3) The value of preserving any tree by reason of its location, size, age
or some other outstanding quality such as uniqueness, rarity or
status as a landmark or species specimen, but not limited thereto.
§ 110-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 110-7
106:401
§ 110-8. Tree care and preservation.
The Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds or the Town Board designee
shall have the right to prune, treat, maintain and preserve any park trees
as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beauty of parks.
§ 110-9. Pruning; corner clearance.
(4) The extent to which the area would be subject to increased water
runoff and other environmental degradation due to removal of the
tree(s).
(5) The heightened environmental value of preserving tree cover in
densely developed or densely populated areas.
(6) The need for visual screening in transitional zones or relief from
glare, commercial or industrial unsightliness or any other affront to
the visual sense in any part of the Town.
(7) The condition of the tree(s) with respect to disease and potential
for creating hazardous conditions.
(8) The proximity of the tree(s) to existing or proposed structures and
utility appurtenances.
(9) The environmental effect of the removal, destruction or killing of
the tree(s).
(10) The intention of the applicant to replant additional trees at the site.
(11) Noncorrectable damage or obstruction to sewer services.
(12) Disturbance of the critical root zone.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 30 days from the date a
permit application is submitted to the Town, approve or disapprove the
application.
C. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
may, within 30 days of the date on which the decision was mailed to the
applicant, appeal such decision to the Town Board. The appeal shall be
in writing and shall include a copy of all papers filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer and a copy of the decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer. The appeal shall be filed when it is received by the
Town Clerk. The Town Board shall act upon such appeal within 30 days
after such notice of appeal is filed with the Town Clerk. In the event that
the Town Board fails to act with respect to such appeal within 30 days
after the appeal is filed with the Town Clerk, the application shall be
deemed approved, and the applicant shall be entitled to the issuance of
the permit required hereunder in accordance with the application.
§ 110-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 110-9
106:402
§ 110-10. Tree removal on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm, except as set forth in this chapter,
to cut down or to top any street tree, park tree or other tree, shrubs,
bushes and woody vegetation on public property. Trees severely damaged
by storms, or other causes, or trees under utility wires or other obstructions
where other pruning practices are impractical may be topped by the order
of the Highway Superintendent.
§ 110-11. Removal of dead or diseased trees on private property.
The Highway Superintendent shall have the right to cause the removal
of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the Town when
such trees constitute a hazard to public life and property or harbor insects
or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the
Town on private property. The Highway Superintendent will notify in writing
the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their
own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the
event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the Highway
Superintendent shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge
the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. Where the Town
is required to remove a tree for waterway maintenance purposes, the cost
shall not be charged to the owner of the property.
§ 110-12. Interference with Highway Superintendent prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, obstruct or interfere
with the Highway Superintendent, or any of his agents or employees, while
engaging in the maintenance or removal of any street trees, park trees or
trees on private property, as authorized in this chapter.
§ 110-13. Replacement of trees.
A. Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the Town shall prune the branches of said tree so that such branches
shall not obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there
shall be a clear space of 13 feet above the street and eight feet above
the sidewalk. Said owners, upon notice by the Town, shall remove all
dead, diseased or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a danger and menace to the safety of the public.
B. The Highway Superintendent shall have the right to prune any tree or
shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of
light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of
any traffic control device or sign.
A. When street or park trees are removed by the authority of the Highway
Superintendent, Superintendent of Building Grounds or Town Board
designee or by other Town officials, said trees should be replaced by the
Town either:
§ 110-9 SWIMMING POOLS § 110-13
106:403
§ 110-14. Dutch elm disease.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 169 of the New York State Agriculture and
Markets Law, the Town Board of the Town of West Seneca elects to exercise
and enjoy, through its appropriate officers and employees, the powers and
immunities prescribed and granted in §§ 164, 165 and 167 of Article 14 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law with respect and in regard to the Dutch
elm disease within the limits of said Town.
§ 110-15. Penalties for offenses.
(1) By planting a new tree in the same location of suitable species for
planting in an urban environment; or
(2) Offering the adjacent property owner a replacement tree to be
planted on his/her property of a suitable species for an urban
environment.
B. Unless otherwise exempt under chapter, where a building permit or
site/subdivision plan is required and where more than three trees are to
be removed, the applicant must make reasonable provisions for new
trees to be planted on site or off site as a mitigation measure. Such new
plantings shall be subject to approval by the Code Enforcement Officer
or the Planning Board, as applicable. A permanent certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued until the plantings are made.
C. If any trees are unlawfully cut down, cleared, killed, girdled or
otherwise destroyed by any person(s), firm(s), association(s) or
corporation(s) in connection with, or preparatory to, any development,
improvement or change of use or proposed rezoning for which a permit
or permission is required by the Town, then, in addition to any other
fine or penalty provided for in this chapter, or elsewhere, said person(s),
firm(s), association(s) or corporation(s) shall not be granted such
permit or permission by the Town unless and until a remedial tree
planting plan for the subject premises is accepted and approved by the
Planning Board as part of the coordinated review process.
D. The Environmental Commission and Arborist shall provide an advisory
list of trees to be planted in accordance with this section.
A. The Zoning Code Enforcement Officer may suspend or revoke a permit
in the form of a stop-work order if it finds that the applicant has not
complied with any or all of the terms of such permit, has exceeded the
authority granted in the permit, or has failed to undertake the project in
the manner set forth by the permit.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or a plea of guilty, guilty of a violation, subject to a fine of not
more than $250. For a second and each subsequent offense within a
one-year period, the violator shall be guilty of a violation punishable by
a fine of not more than $500 or a term of imprisonment of not more than
§ 110-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 110-15
106:404
§ 110-16. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this chapter shall be adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter and shall be
confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 110-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon filing with the Secretary of State.
Chapter 112
TRESPASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
15 days, or both. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be a separate and distinct offense. In addition, any offender may be
ordered by the court to replant trees that were improperly removed.
The court shall specify a reasonable time for completion of such
restoration, which shall be effected under the supervision of the Town.
C. In addition to the penalties outlined above, the Town shall not issue a
building permit or temporary certificate of occupancy for any property
for which a violation of this chapter has been served until said violation
is dismissed or resolved to the satisfaction of the Town or court, as
appropriate.
D. The Town Zoning Code Enforcement Officers are hereby authorized to
issue appearance tickets and summonses for violation of this chapter.
E. This chapter shall be administered as specified herein and enforced by
the Code Enforcement Officer or other Town Board designee of the
Town of West Seneca.
§ 110-15 TRESPASSING § 110-17
112:405

ARTICLE I
Unlawful Intrusion on Real Property
[Adopted 12-3-1962]
§ 112-1. Unlawful intrusion prohibited; penalties.
A person who intrudes upon any lot or piece of land within the boundary
of the Town of West Seneca, Erie County, New York, including such real
property as may belong to the town, without authority from the owner,
except such persons as are holders of licenses and/or permits duly issued
and are on property in strict pursuance of activities specified and approved
by and under the Conservation Law and rules and regulations of the
Conservation Commission of the State of New York and have not been
requested by the owner or lessee of such property to leave therefrom;
or a person who erects or occupies on such property any shelter, tent,
hut, cabin or other structure whatever without such authority, is guilty of
a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or both,
for each and every offense hereof. Any violation of this Article may also
be punishable by a civil fine in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.), to be
recovered in a civil action commenced in the name of the Town of West
Seneca against any violator in any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 112-1 TRESPASSING § 112-1
112:407

ARTICLE II
Vehicular Intrusion
[Adopted 4-26-1948]
§ 112-2. Vehicular intrusion prohibited.
For the purpose of protection and preservation of the property of the town
and of its inhabitants and of peace and good order, hereafter it shall be
unlawful for any person to place, park or leave an automobile, truck or other
vehicle, including wagons, pushcarts, etc., upon public or private property
without the consent of the owner.
§ 112-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall be liable for a fine
not exceeding ten dollars ($10.).
§ 112-2 TRESPASSING § 112-3
112:409
Chapter 114
TRUCK ROUTES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 114-1. Operation of commercial and delivery vehicles and heavy
trucks regulated.
A. Trucks and commercial vehicles over five tons prohibited from using
certain parks and certain thoroughfares. No person shall operate any
truck or commercial vehicle exceeding five tons gross weight at any
time upon or through any of the parks, parkways, park approaches and
avenues described below, except that such vehicles may be operated
thereon for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or
merchandise and/or the maintenance and repairs of public utilities and
then only by entering such parks, parkways, park approaches and
avenues at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and
proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter.
B. Truck routes.
(1) Pursuant to the authority contained in § 1660, Subdivisions (a)10
and 28, of the Vehicle and Traffic Laws of the State of New York, the
Town of West Seneca hereby establishes a system of truck routes.
(2) Any truck having a total combined gross weight of vehicles plus
load in excess of five tons shall be excluded from all streets in said
town, except those streets or parts of streets hereinafter listed or
described which form a part of the system of truck routes upon
which trucks are permitted to travel and operate, except that such
vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of delivering or
picking up materials or merchandise and/or the maintenance and
repairs of public utilities. The total combined gross weight of the
vehicle, plus load, shall be ascertained by computing the entire
weight of the truck or vehicle plus load, or, in the event said vehicle
is a tractor trailer combination, then by computing the entire
weight of the tractor and trailer plus load.
(3) All streets forming part of such truck route system shall be marked
by conspicuous signs bearing the words "truck route" in letters not
less than five inches in height, such signs to be spaced not more
than 1,500 feet apart. In addition, conspicuous signs bearing
lettering not less than five inches in height, such signs to be
adequately illuminated between sunrise and sunset, or to be
constructed of a reflecting material so as to be easily readable at
night when lights from vehicle headlights fall upon such signs, shall
§ 112-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 114-1
114:410
§ 114-2. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 9-29-1997]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
be placed on each main highway entering the town, or at or near
the point where such highway crosses or meets the boundary line
of the town, indicating that trucks having a weight in excess of five
tons, including load, are excluded from all streets within the town,
except those streets designated as part of the authorized truck
route system.
(4) No person, firm or corporation shall drive or operate or cause to be
driven or operated any excluded truck into, upon, along or through
the streets of the town in violation of the provisions of this
subsection.
(5) The following listed streets or parts of streets, as herein
designated, shall constitute the system of truck routes in the town:
(a) Clinton Street (state).
(b) Potters Road (state).
(c) Seneca Street (county).
(d) Ridge Road (county).
(e) Center Road (county).
(f) Union Road (state).
(g) Transit Road (state).
(h) Harlem Road (state).
(i) Southwestern Boulevard (state).
(j) Orchard Park Road (state).
(k) Slade Avenue (county).
(l) Michael Road (county).
(m) Mineral Springs Road from Buffalo City line to Harlem Road
(county).
(n) North America Drive.
(o) Ransier Drive.
(p) Empire Drive.
(q) Meyer Road.
(r) Birchwood Avenue.
§ 114-1 TRUCK ROUTES § 114-2
114:411
Chapter 115
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 38.
Parks — See Ch. 85.
Trespassing — See Ch. 112, Article II.
§ 114-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 114-2
114:412
ARTICLE I
Definitions
[Adopted 5-23-1966; effective 6-13-1966]
§ 115-1. Definitions of words and phrases. [Amended 4-11-1983]
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 115-1 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-1
114:413

ARTICLE II
Traffic Control Devices
[Adopted 5-23-1966; effective 6-13-1966]
§ 115-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Town Superintendent of Highways shall install and maintain traffic
control devices when and as required under the provisions of this chapter to
make effective the provisions of said chapter and may install and maintain
such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to
regulate, warn or guide traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York, subject to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 115-3. Traffic control signals. [Added 3-3-1969]
Traffic control signals shall be installed, maintained and operated as
follows:
A. East and West Road (County Highway No. 363) at its intersection with
the driveway to Reserve Hose Fire Hall.
(1) Normally operating as a flashing signal, displaying yellow
indications east and west on East and West Road and flashing red
south on Reserve Hose Fire Hall driveway.
(2) Upon actuation of a switch in the fire hall, displaying a steady red
indication facing east and west on East and West Road and a
flashing yellow indication south on Reserve Hose Fire Hall
driveway.
B. (Reserved)52
C. Seneca Street at its intersection with Southgate Plaza westerly (AM & A
Drive). [Added 2-7-197753]
(1) Three-section, three-faced, semi-traffic-actuated signal with dual
indications in each traffic direction and a single indication facing
north for pedestrians with push-button actuation.
(2) Normally this signal shall display green indications for east- and
westbound traffic on Seneca Street with red indications facing the
plaza driveway and northerly for pedestrians. Upon actuation of the
traffic detector in the plaza drive or the pedestrian push button, the
signal shall display steady red indications facing east and west on
Seneca Street and a steady green indication facing south on the
plaza driveway and north toward the pedestrian walk.
52.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which pertained to Lein Road at its intersection with
the driveway to the East Seneca Fire Hail, was repealed 4-11-1983.
53.Editor's Note: This legislation also repealed former Subsection C, which pertained to
signalization at Main Street at its intersection with Mill Road and Vigilant Hose Fire Hall.
§ 115-2 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-3
114:415
(3) A left-turn arrow shall be displayed during periods of traffic
actuation, along with a steady green indication facing east on
Seneca Street. During this phase, steady red indications shall be
displayed in all other directions.
D. Ridge Road (County Highway No. 137) at its intersection with Langner
Road (County Highway No. 458) and a commercial driveway.
[Amended 9-10-1979]
(1) Three-section, four-faced signal with dual indication on the
commercial driveway, operating as a pretimed signal.
E. Ridge Road (County Highway No. 137) at its intersection with Slade
Avenue (County Highway No. 210) and the Thruway exit ramp
northbound. [Amended 9-9-1974; 9-10-1979]
(1) Three-section, four-faced signal with dual indication in all
directions, semi-traffic-actuated with detectors on Slade Avenue,
the Thruway exit and for the left turn on eastbound Ridge Road,
shall operate normally with steady green indication facing east and
west on Ridge Road and a steady red indication on Slade Avenue
and the Thruway exit.
(2) When the eastbound Ridge Road left-turn detector is activated for a
sufficient period of time, the signal cycle will commence, which
provides for a steady red for westbound Ridge Road traffic, for
Slade Avenue left-turn traffic and Thruway exit traffic and for a
green arrow for the left-turn eastbound traffic on Ridge Road and
for a green arrow face for right-turning traffic on Slade Avenue.
(3) When the Slade Avenue detector is activated, the signal cycle will
commence, which provides for left- and right-turn green arrows for
Slade Avenue and steady red indications for all other directions.
(4) When the Thruway exit detector or pedestrian push button is
activated, the signal cycle will commence, which provides for green
indication for traffic from the Thruway exit and red indications for
all other directions. Flashing "walk" signs shall be displayed during
the appropriate interval of this signal cycle. During all other signal
cycles, the pedestrian sign shall display DON'T WALK.
F. Seneca Street (County Highway No. 215) at its intersection with Mill
Road (town highway).
(1) Display one vehicular signal face with three sections to traffic on
each approach.
(2) Operate as a pretimed signal displaying green, yellow and red.
G. Seneca Street (County Highway No. 215) at its intersection with Ridge
Road (County Highway No. 101) and driveway to plaza parking lot.
[Amended 9-8-1975]
§ 115-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-3
114:416
(1) Three-section, four-faced, fully traffic- actuated signal with dual
indications all directions,
(2) A left-turn arrow facing west on Ridge Road shall be displayed
during appropriate intervals of the signal cycle.
(3) Upon actuation of pedestrian push button, display steady red
indications facing east on Seneca Street, west on Ridge Road and
north on Seneca Street and a steady green south on the driveway to
the plaza parking lot.
H. Mineral Spring Road (County Highway No. 534) at its intersection with
National Fuel Gas, Inc., driveway, 365 Mineral Spring Road. [Amended
4-11-1983]
(1) Pretimed normally operating as a solid green display for all traffic
on Mineral Springs Road and as a solid red indication for
northbound exiting traffic from the driveway of National Fuel Gas,
Inc.
(2) Upon actuation of a switch by National Fuel Gas, Inc., the signal
shall phase so as to display red for all traffic on Mineral Spring
Road and green for the National Fuel Gas driveway in a pretimed
signal cycle.
I. Slade Avenue (County Highway No. 210) at its intersection with
commercial driveways from the Seneca Mall parking, east side of Slade
Avenue, and Erie County Savings Bank, west side of Slade Avenue.
[Amended 7-6-1970]
(1) Three-section, three-faced, semi-traffic-actuated signal with dual
indications.
(2) Normally this signal shall display green indications north and south
on Slade Avenue with red indications east on commercial driveway
from Seneca Mall and west on commercial driveway from the Erie
County Savings Bank. Upon actuation of detector in commercial
driveway, the signal shall cycle red indications north and south on
Slade Avenue and green indications on commercial driveways.
(3) During appropriate phases of signal operation, a green arrow shall
be displayed for Slade Avenue southbound left-turn traffic into
commercial driveway (Seneca Mall) and northbound left-turn
traffic into commercial driveway (Erie County Savings Bank).
J. Seneca Street (County Highway No. 215) at its intersection with Center
Road (County Highway No. 9218) and Kelsey Drive. [Added 9-8-1975]
(1) Three-section, five-faced, dual-indicated, pretimed signal, granting
right-of-way to Center Road westbound and Seneca Street
eastbound, and Seneca Street westbound and Kelsey Drive
southbound and commercial drive northbound.
§ 115-3 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-3
114:417
(2) A right-bearing arrow facing west on Seneca Street displayed
during appropriate intervals of the signal cycle.
K. Mill Road at its intersection with East and West Road (County Highway
No. 363). [Added 9-8-1975]
(1) Flashing signal displaying yellow indications east and west on East
and West Road and red indications north and south on Mill Road.
L. Seneca Street (County Highway No. 215) at its intersection with Center
Road (County Highway No. 9218) and Lein Road and Bullis Road.
[Added 9-8-1975]
(1) Three-section, five-faced, dual-indicated, alternating cycle,
pretimed signal, granting right-of-way to Seneca Street eastbound
and Bullis Road westbound, Center Road eastbound and westbound
and Lein Road southbound.
M. Seneca Street (County Highway No. 215) at its intersection with Exit
Ramp No. 54 from the Aurora Expressway (New York State Thruway).
[Added 9-8-1975]
(1) Three-section, three-faced, dual-indicated, semi-traffic-actuated
signal, with detector for southbound exit ramp traffic. Normal
operation is to give Seneca Street eastbound and westbound the
right-of-way until the detector is activated, and then southbound
exit ramp traffic is given the right-of-way with a steady green.
Signal will return to steady red after traffic discontinues the
activation or the maximum time is reached for the cycle.
N. Seneca Street (County Highway No. 215) at its intersection with
Bellwood Avenue, the driveway to Seneca Hose Fire Company and east
of Bellwood Avenue. [Added 9-8-1975]
(1) Two-section, single-faced signals normally operating as flashing
signals, displaying yellow indications for eastbound and westbound
Seneca Street and displaying red for southbound Bellwood Avenue
and the Seneca Hose Firehall driveway.
(2) Upon actuation of a switch in the firehall, signals indicate steady
red for eastbound and westbound Seneca Street and southbound
Bellwood Avenue and flashing yellow indication facing south for
Seneca Hose Firehall driveway.
(3) Single-headed signals located at Bellwood Avenue and Seneca
Street controlling southbound Bellwood Avenue traffic and firehall
traffic at a point east of Bellwood Avenue between Delray and
Bellwood Avenues on Seneca Street with two heads controlling
westbound Seneca Street traffic, and at a point west of Seneca
Hose Firehall driveway with two heads controlling eastbound
Seneca Street traffic.
§ 115-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-4
114:418
§ 115-4. One-way traffic. [Added 1-21-1974]
One-way traffic of vehicles is permitted on the following streets:
§ 115-4.1. Marking of highways. [Added 9-8-1975]
The Highway Superintendent of the Town of West Seneca, in accordance
with the Motor Vehicle Law of the State of New York, is hereby authorized to
control traffic upon Town highways within the Town of West Seneca through
the use of medians and the marking or striping of center lines and turning
lanes.
§ 115-4.2. Do-not-enter designations. [Added 10-15-1984]
The following do-not-enter designations are hereby established:
Name of Street Location
Wetherstone Drive North end of east drive facing north
Wetherstone Drive South end of west drive facing south
A. Veterans Drive (south) in a north-to-south direction.
B. Veterans Drive (north) in a south-to-north direction.
C. Dirksen Avenue in a north-to-south direction from Graham Avenue to
Seneca Street.
D. Race Street, in an east-to-west direction from Frontera Street to Union
Road. [Added 2-3-1986]
§ 115-4 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-4.2
114:419

ARTICLE III
Stop and Yield Intersections
[Adopted 5-23-1966; effective 6-13-1966]
§ 115-5. Stop intersections.
A. The following intersections of Town highways with other Town
highways in that portion of the Town of West Seneca lying easterly of
Union Road are hereby designated "stop intersections," and stop signs
shall be erected at entrances to said intersections as set forth below:
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
North Avenue with Trier
Avenue
On North Avenue controlling eastbound
and westbound traffic
North Avenue with Weigand
Street
On North Avenue controlling eastbound
traffic
Trier Avenue with Orchard
Avenue
On Trier Avenue controlling southbound
traffic
Orchard Avenue with
Weigand Street
On Orchard Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
French Lea with St. Jude
Terrace
On French Lea controlling northbound
and southbound traffic
Fremont Avenue with
Summit Avenue
On Fremont Avenue controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Almont Avenue with Gilfillan
Avenue
On Almont Avenue
controllingnorthbound traffic
Summit Avenue with Almont
Avenue
On Summit Avenue controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Fremont Avenue with
Almont Avenue
On Fremont Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
Almont Avenue with
Norwood Drive
On Almont Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Warren Avenue with
Norwood Drive
On Warren Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Summit Avenue with Warren
Avenue
On Summit Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
South Warren Avenue with
Norwood Drive
On South Warren Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Klink Place with Norwood
Drive
On Klink Place controlling northbound
traffic
Mill Road with Ebenezer
Drive
On Mill Road controlling southbound
traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:421
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Ebenezer Drive with Mill
Road
On Ebenezer Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Amana Place with Ebenezer
Drive
On Amana Place controlling northbound
traffic
Garden Avenue with Amana
Place
On Garden Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
Southwood Drive with
Willowdale Drive
On Southwood Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Hybank Drive with
Woodward Drive
On Hybank Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Belmont Drive with Hybank
Drive
On Belmont Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Belmont Drive with
Woodward Drive
On Belmont Drive controlling
southbound traffic
HiView Terrace with Mill
Road
On HiView Terrace controlling
westbound traffic
Treehaven Road with Mill
Road
On Treehaven Road controlling
westbound traffic
Woodward Drive with Mill
Road
On Woodward Drive controlling eastand
westbound traffic
Blair Lane with Woodward
Drive
On Blair Lane controlling northwestand
southeastbound traffic
Woodward Crescent with
Woodward Drive
On Woodward Crescent controlling
westbound traffic
Woodward Crescent with
Sibley Drive
On Woodward Crescent controlling
eastbound traffic
Woodward Crescent with
Woodward Crescent
On Woodward Crescent controlling
northwestbound traffic
Brianwood Drive with
Reynolds Road
On Brianwood Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Reynolds Road with
Brianwood Drive
On Reynolds Road controlling
westbound traffic
Reynolds Road with
Rosewood Drive
On Reynolds Road controlling
northbound traffic
Phyllis Drive with Mill Road On Phyllis Drive controlling eastbound
traffic
Woodmar Terrace with Mill
Road
On Woodmar Terrace controlling
eastbound traffic
Cardinal Lane with Mill
Road
On Cardinal Lane controlling eastbound
traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:422
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Beechwood Drive with Mill
Road
On Beechwood Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Larkwood Road with
Woodmar Terrace
On Larkwood Road controlling
northbound traffic
Larkwood Road with
Cardinal Lane
On Larkwood Road controlling
southbound traffic
Woodside Drive with Oakhill
Drive
On Woodside Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Chippewa Court with
Willowcrest Drive
On Chippewa Court controlling
southbound traffic
Willowcrest Drive with
Westgate Boulevard
On Willowcrest Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Cherokee Drive with
Willowcrest Drive
On Cherokee Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Cherokee Drive with
Westgate Boulevard
On Cherokee Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Shawnee Place with
Willowcrest Drive
On Shawnee Place controlling
northbound traffic
Shawnee Place with
Cherokee Drive
On Shawnee Place controlling
southbound traffic
Princess Lane with Duchess
Drive
On Princess Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Organ Crescent with St.
Jude Terrace
[Added 3-11-1968]
On Organ Crescent controlling
southbound traffic
Bosse Lane with St. Jude
Terrace
On Bosse Lane controlling northbound
traffic
Giblin Drive with St. Jude
Terrace
On Giblin Drive controlling northbound
traffic
Giblln Drive with Bosse
Lane
On Giblin Drive controlling southeast
bound traffic
Country Lane with Sharon
Drive
On Country Lane controlling westbound
traffic
Woodward Drive with
Belmont Street [Repealed
9-9-1974]
Gerard Drive with Queens
Drive
On Gerard Drive controlling eastbound
traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:423
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Joann Drive with Muriel
Drive
On Joann Drive controlling southbound
traffic
Joann Drive with Gerard
Drive
On Joann Drive controlling northbound
traffic
Miller Avenue with Ehinger
Road
[Added 3-11-1968]
On Miller Avenue controlling eastbound
traffic
Miller Avenue with East
Avenue
On Miller Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
Leacliff Lane with Hybank
Drive
On Leacliff Lane controlling southwestbound
traffic
Blair Lane with Treehaven
Road
On Blair Lane controlling northbound
traffic
Treehaven Road with
Treehaven Road
On Treehaven Road controlling
southbound traffic
Alma Drive with Treehaven
Road
On Alma Drive controlling northbound
traffic
Alma Drive with Woodward
Crescent
On Alma Drive controlling southbound
traffic
Woodward Court with
Woodward Crescent
On Woodward Court controlling
southbound traffic
Diane Drive with Sharon
Drive
[Added 3-3-1969]
On Diane Drive controlling westbound
traffic
Annette Drive with Kathy
Lane
On Annette Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Kathy Lane with Annette
Drive
On Kathy Lane controlling eastbound
traffic
Annette Drive with St. Jude
Terrace
On Annette Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Organ Crescent with Tim
Tam Terrace
On Organ Crescent controlling
eastbound traffic
Miller Avenue with
Roosevelt Avenue
On Miller Avenue controlling eastbound
traffic
Carol Drive with Sunnyside
Drive
On Carol Drive controlling westbound
traffic
Norwood Drive with
Sunnyside Drive
On Norwood Drive controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:424
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Sherwood Lane with
Norwood Drive
[Added 3-3-1969]
On Sherwood Lane controlling
southbound traffic
Norwood Drive with
Idlewood Drive
On Norwood Drive controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Bernice Drive with Phyllis
Drive
On Bernice Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Bernice Drive with Phyllis
Drive
On Bernice Drive controlling westbound
traffic
Pamela Court with Heather
Hill Drive
On Pamela Court controlling eastbound
traffic
Theresa Court with Heather
Hill Drive
On Theresa Court controlling
southbound traffic
Heather Hill Drive with
Theresa Court
On Heather Hill Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Davis Road with Barnett
Drive
On Davis Road controlling southbound
traffic
Sunrise Terrace with Valley
Drive
On Sunrise Terrace controlling
northbound traffic
Erwin Road with Barnett
Drive
[Added 11-10-1969]
On Erwin Road controlling southbound
traffic
Erwin Road with Tobey Hill
Drive
On Erwin Road controlling northbound
traffic
Valley Drive with Sunrise
Terrace
On Valley Drive controlling southbound
traffic
Cheryl Road with Tobey Hill
Drive
On Cheryl Road controlling northbound
traffic
Cheryl Road with Barnett
Drive
On Cheryl Road controlling southbound
traffic
Davis Road with Tobey Hill
Drive
On Davis Road controlling northbound
traffic
Barnett Drive with
Bradwood Road
On Barnett Drive controlling eastbound
traffic
Northwood Elementary
School driveway at
Northwood Avenue
[Added 10-5-1970]
On Northwood Elementary School
driveway controlling eastbound traffic
[Added 10-4-1971]
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:425
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Pleasantview Lane with
Creekview Drive (north
intersection)
On Pleasantview Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Pleasantview Lane with
Creekview Drive (south
intersection)
On Pleasantview Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Terrace Boulevard with
Northwood Avenue
On Terrace Boulevard controlling
westbound traffic
Garry Drive with Sunrise
Terrace
On Garry Drive controlling southbound
and northbound traffic
Gay Drive with Garry Drive On Gay Drive controlling eastbound
traffic
Sunrise Terrace with Gay
Drive
[Added 8-7-1972]
On Sunrise Terrace controlling
westbound traffic
Forest Avenue with
Northwood Avenue
[Added 12-4-1972]
On Forest Avenue controlling eastbound
traffic
Meadow Drive with Forest
Avenue
On Meadow Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Lowell Lane with Meadow
Drive
On Lowell Lane controlling northbound
traffic
West Bihrwood Drive with
Wedgewood Drive
On West Bihrwood Drive controlling
northbound traffic
West Bihrwood Drive with
Bihrwood Drive
On West Bihrwood Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Hilltop Courts with Cul-De-
Sac A
On Cul-De-Sac A controlling eastbound
traffic
Hilltop Courts with Cul-De-
Sac B
[Added 12-4-1972]
On Cul-De-Sac B controlling eastbound
traffic
Oakbrook Drive with Angle
Road
On Oakbrook Drive controlling southwestbound
traffic
Northridge Drive with
Oakbrook Drive
On Northridge Drive controlling
southeastbound traffic
Southridge Drive with
Oakbrook Drive
On Southridge Drive controlling northwestbound
traffic
Sunrise Terrace with Valley
Drive
On Sunrise Terrace controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:426
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Sunrise Terrace with Garry
Drive
On Sunrise Terrace controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Oakbrook Drive with
Northridge Drive
[Added 1-21-1974]
On Oakbrook Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Walnut Street with Main
Street
[Added 9-9-1974]
On Walnut Street controlling
southbound traffic
Idlewood Drive with Main
Street
On Idlewood Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Klink Place with Main Street On Klink Place controlling southbound
traffic
South Warren Avenue with
Main Street
On South Warren Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Mill Road with Main Street On Mill Road controlling northbound
traffic
[Added 9-8-1975]
Gay Drive with Garry Drive
[Repealed 5-10-1976]
Chestnut Avenue with Pearl
Street
On Chestnut Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
Wilson Street with Elm
Avenue
On Wilson Street controlling
northbound traffic
Maplewood Avenue with
Meadow Drive
On Maplewood Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Naples Drive with Roycroft
Drive
[Added 5-10-1976]
On Naples Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Westwood Drive with
Roycroft Drive
On Westwood Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Westwood Drive with
Vermont Place
On Westwood Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Vermont Place with Naples
Drive
On Vermont Place controlling
westbound traffic
Garry Drive at southerly
inter-section with Gay Drive
On Garry Drive controlling southbound
traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:427
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Kellybrook Road with Angle
Road
[Added 2-6-1978]
On Kellybrook Road controlling
westbound traffic
Villa Maria Road with Angle
Road
On Villa Maria Road controlling
eastbound traffic
Colonial Manor Court with
Villa Maria Road
On Colonial Manor Court controlling
northbound traffic
Colonial Manor Court with
Angle Road
On Colonial Manor Court controlling
eastbound traffic
Glenmar Drive with
Oakbrook Drive
On Glenmar Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Oakbrook Drive with
Crofton Drive
On Oakbrook Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Southridge Drive with
Oakbrook Drive
On Southridge Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Crofton Court with Crofton
Drive
[Added 11-20-1978]
On Crofton Court controlling
westbound traffic
Crofton Drive with Glemnar
Drive
On Crofton Drive controlling westbound
traffic
Glenmar Drive with
Carriage Park
On Glenmar Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Tanglewood Drive with
Crofton Drive
On Tanglewood Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Tanglewood Drive with
Glenmar Drive
On Tanglewood Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Constitution Avenue with
Liberty Lane
[Added 9-10-1979]
On Constitution Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Centennial Court Liberty
Lane
On Centennial Court controlling with
westbound traffic
Freedom Drive with
Constitution Avenue
On Freedom Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Freedom Drive with Liberty
Lane
On Freedom Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Liberty Lane with
Constitution Avenue
On Liberty Lane controlling westbound
traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:428
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Pine Court North with
Schultz Road
On Pine Court North controlling
southbound traffic
Pine Tree Lane with Mill
Road
[Added 4-11-1983]
On Pine Tree Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Canterbury Trail with On Canterbury Trail controlling
Wetherstone Drive northbound traffic
Cedar Court with Pine Court
North
On Cedar Court controlling eastbound
traffic
Pine Court North at
Canterbury Trail
On Pine Court North controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Pine Court North at
Wetherstone Drive
On Pine Court North controlling
northbound traffic
Wetherstone Drive at On Wetherstone Drive controlling
Canterbury Trail southbound traffic
[Added 6-3-1985]
Northridge Drive with
Oakbrook Drive
On Northridge Drive at easterly intersection
of Northridge Drive and
Oakbrook Drive controlling southbound
traffic
[Added 3-3-1986]
Tracy Lynn Lane with
Wedgewood Drive
On southeast corner of Tracy Lynn Lane
controlling northbound traffic
Lisa Ann Lane with East and
West Road
On northwest corner of Lisa Ann Lane
controlling southbound traffic
East Bihrwood Drive with
Wedgewood Drive
On southeast corner of East Bihrwood
Drive controlling northbound traffic
Hybank Drive with Leacliff
Lane
On southeast corner of Hybank Drive
controlling westbound traffic
Idlewood Drive with
Norwood Avenue
On Idlewood Drive controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
(4-way stop)
Fawn Trail with Deer Path On Fawn Trail controlling northbound
traffic
Deer Path with Ley- On Deer Path controlling eastbound
decker Road traffic
Larsen Lane with Schultz
Road
On Larsen Lane controlling northbound
traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:429
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Larsen Lane with
Brookwood Drive
On Larsen Lane controlling southbound
traffic
Lisa Ann Lane with Tracy
Lynn Lane
On Lisa Ann Lane controlling
southbound traffic
Lisa Ann Lane with
Wedgewood Drive
On Lisa Ann Lane controlling
northbound traffic
Mill Road with Ebenezer
Drive
[Added 8-3-1987]
On Mill Road controlling northbound
traffic
Fawn Trail with Deer Path On Deer Path controlling southbound
traffic
Cove Creek Run with East
and West Road [Repealed
10-3-1988]
Pinewood Drive at Pinewood
Drive
[Added 10-3-1988]
On Pinewood Drive controlling
southeast traffic
Brookwood Lane with Lillis
Lane
[Added 4-9-1990]
On Lillis Lane controlling westbound
traffic
Camelot Square with
Camelot Drive
On Camelot Square controlling
westbound traffic
Camelot Square with Angle
Road
On Camelot Square controlling
eastbound traffic
Cedar Ridge with Schultz
Road
On Cedar Ridge controlling northbound
traffic
Crystal Tree Court with
Cedar Ridge
On Crystal Tree Court controlling
northbound traffic
Lillis Lane with Meadowdale
Lane
On Meadowdale Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Rolling Woods Lane with
East and West Road
On Rolling Woods Lane controlling
northbound traffic
Rolling Woods Lane with
Rolling Woods Lane
On Rolling Woods Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Summit Meadow with
Center Road
On Summit Meadow controlling
southbound traffic
Summit Meadow with
Summit Avenue
On Summit Meadow controlling
northbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:430
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Summit Avenue with
Summit Avenue
On Summit Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
St. Jude Terrace with French
Lea Road
[Added 9-24-1990]
On St. Jude Terrace controlling
eastbound traffic
Osgood Avenue with
Cathedral Drive
[Added 4-8-1991]
On Osgood Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Summit Avenue with
Cathedral Drive
On Summit Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Cathedral Court with
Cathedral Drive
On Cathedral Court controlling
northbound traffic
Villa Maria Road with
Colonial Manor Court
[Added 9-9-1991]
On Villa Maria Road controlling eastand
westbound traffic
[Added 3-23-1992]
Mill Road with Woodward
Drive
On Mill Road controlling north-and
southbound traffic (4-way stop)
Lorry Drive with Robin Lane
[Added 3-8-1993]
On Lorry Lane controlling northbound
traffic
Ransier Drive with North
America Drive
[Added 4-25-1994]
On Ransier Drive controlling north- and
southbound traffic
Robin Court with Robin
Lane
[Added 3-13-1995]
On Robin Court controlling northbound
traffic
Ashley Drive with Camelot
Drive
[Added 9-23-1996]
On Ashley Drive controlling east and
northbound traffic
Renee Drive with Camelot
Drive
On Renee Drive controlling northbound
traffic
Renee Drive with Ashley
Drive
On Renee Drive controlling westbound
traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:431
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Taylor Drive with Conner
Drive
[Added 11-19-2007]
On Taylor Drive controlling southbound
traffic
Louise Drive with Camelot
Drive
On Louise Drive controlling northbound
traffic
Louise Drive with Conner
Drive
On Louise Drive controlling southbound
traffic
B. The following intersections of Town highways with other Town
highways in the northwest sector of the Town of West Seneca are
hereby designated "stop intersections," and stop signs shall be erected
at entrances to said intersections as set forth below:
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Nash Street with Casimer Street On Nash Street controlling
southbound traffic
Electric Avenue with Casimer
Street
On Electric Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Boynton Avenue with Casimer
Street
On Boynton Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Fernwood Avenue with Casimer
Street
On Fernwood Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Crawford Drive with Casimer
Street
On Crawford Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Marann Terrace with Casimer
Street
On Marann Terrace controlling
eastbound traffic
Gregory Drive with Brian Lane On Gregory Drive controlling south
bound traffic
Emporium Avenue with Gordon
Avenue
On Emporium Avenue controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Gordon Avenue with Aurora
Avenue
On Gordon Avenue controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Bradford Street with Aurora
Avenue
On Bradford Street controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Bradford Street with Emporium
Avenue
On Bradford Street controlling
westbound traffic
Arcade Street with Aurora
Avenue
On Arcade Street controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Dwyer Street with Bradford
Street
On Dwyer Street controlling
southbound and northbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:432
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Dwyer Street with Arcade Street On Dwyer Street controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Bradford Street with Collins
Avenue
On Bradford Street controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Arcade Street with Collins
Avenue
On Arcade Street controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Bradford Street with Knox
Avenue
On Bradford Street controlling
eastbound traffic
Arcade Street with Knox Avenue On Arcade Street controlling
eastbound traffic
Arcade Street with Barnsdale
Avenue
On Arcade Street controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Barnsdale Avenue with Bradford
Street
On Barnsdale Avenue controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Junior Avenue with Duerstein
Street
On Junior Avenue controlling southeastbound
traffic
Oschawa Avenue with Duerstein
Street
On Oschawa Avenue controlling
south-eastbound traffic
Flohr Avenue with Graham
Avenue
On Flohr Avenue controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Bellwood Avenue with Graham
Avenue
On Bellwood Avenue controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Thorndale Avenue with Graham
Avenue
On Thorndale Avenue controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Cambridge Avenue with Lyndale
Court
On Cambridge Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
Centerview Drive with Ansley
Court
On Centerview Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Centerview Lane with Ansley
Court
On Centerview Lane controlling
eastbound traffic
Centerview Lane with Ansley
Court
On Centerview Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Duerstein Street with
Manhassett Street
On Duerstein Street controlling
north-eastbound traffic
Edson Street with Manhassett
Street
On Edson Street controlling
northeastbound traffic
Dorr Street with Manhassett
Street
On Dorr Street controlling
southbound traffic
Savona Street with Manhassett
Street
On Savona Street controlling
southbound traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:433
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Burch Avenue with Manhassett
Street
On Burch Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Manhassett Street with Burch
Avenue
On Manhassett Street controlling
southeastbound traffic
Burch Avenue with Manhassett
Street
On Burch Avenue controlling northeastbound
traffic
Grace Street with Burch Avenue On Grace Street controlling northwestbound
traffic
Grace Street with Wildwood
Avenue
On Grace Street controlling southeastbound
traffic
Wildwood Avenue with Grace
Street
On Wildwood Avenue controlling
northeastbound traffic
Chamberlin Drive with
Manhassett Street
On Chamberlin Drive controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
Columbia Parkway with
Manhassett Street
On Columbia Parkway controlling
northbound traffic
Kirkwood Drive with Manhassett
Street
On Kirkwood Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Graham Avenue with Klas
Avenue
On Graham Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
Graham Avenue with Defray
Avenue
On Graham Avenue controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Graham Avenue with Tindle
Avenue
On Graham Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
Dirksen Avenue with North
Seneca Street
On Dirksen Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Dirksen Avenue with Graham
Avenue
On Dirksen Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
[Added 3-11-1968]
Crawford Drive with Marann
Terrace
On Crawford Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Brian Lane with Piotrowski Drive On Brian Lane controlling
southeastbound traffic
Centerview Drive with
Centerview Lane
On Centerview Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Eldred Avenue with Gordon
Avenue
On Eldred Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Burch Avenue with Grace Street On Burch Avenue controlling
northbound and southbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:434
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Grace Street with Burch Avenue On Grace Street controlling
eastbound traffic
Graham Avenue with Bellwood
Avenue
On Graham Avenue controlling
east-and westbound traffic
[Added 3-3-1969]
Gregory Drive with Lexington
Green
On Gregory Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Arcade Street with Emporium
Avenue
On Arcade Street controlling
westbound traffic
[Added 3-3-1969]
Winegar Place with Wlldwood
Avenue
On Winegar Place controlling
north-westbound traffic
Forrestal Lane with Wenro Place On Forrestal Lane controlling
eastbound traffic
Birchwood Avenue with Meyer
Road
On Birchwood Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Westminster Road with Meyer
Road
On Westminster Road controlling
northbound traffic
North Avenue with Plaza exit
[Added 3-9-1970]
On North Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
Bradford Street with Knox
Avenue
[Added 9-9-1974]
On Bradford Street controlling
westbound traffic
School Street with Jack Berry
Street
On School Street controlling
eastbound traffic
Windtree Lane with George
Drive
[Added 2-6-1978]
On Windtree Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Chapel Lane with Royal Coach
Road
On Chapel Lane controlling
eastbound traffic
Royal Coach Road with
Deerchase Road
On Royal Coach Road controlling
westbound traffic
Deerchase Road with Royal
Coach Road
On Deerchase Road controlling
eastbound traffic
[Added 10-15-1984]
Klas with North Seneca On Klas controlling northbound
traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:435
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
[Added 7-24-1989]
Knox Avenue with Bradford
Street
On Knox Avenue at Bradford Street
con-trolling north- and southbound
traffic
Collins Avenue with Bradford
Street
On Collins Avenue at Bradford
Street controlling north- and
southbound traffic
[Added 9-11-1989]
Klas Avenue with Graham
Avenue
On Klas Avenue controlling north
and southbound traffic
[Added 4-9-1990]
Kirkwood Avenue with
Chamberlin Drive
On Chamberlin Drive controlling
northbound traffic
[Added 9-9-1991]
Bradford Street with Dwyer
Street
On Bradford Street controlling
east- and westbound traffic
[Added 10-13-1997]
Collins Avenue with Arcade
Street
On Collins Avenue controlling north
and southbound traffic
Aurora Avenue with Gordon
Avenue
On Aurora Avenue controlling north
and southbound traffic
C. The following intersections of Town highways with other Town
highways in the southwest sector of the Town of West Seneca are
hereby designated "stop intersections," and stop signs shall be erected
at entrances to said intersections as set forth below:
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Ashmund Avenue with Fairfax
Drive
On Ashmund Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Marlow Road with Ashmund
Avenue
On Marlow Read controlling
westbound traffic
Lenox Avenue with Ashmund
Avenue
On Lenox Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
Innes Road with Ash-mund
Avenue
On Innes Road controlling
westbound traffic
Onondaga Avenue with
Shenandoah Road
On Onondaga Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Dundee Street with Onondaga
Avenue
On Dundee Street controlling
westbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:436
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Dundee Street with Brookside
Drive
On Dundee Street controlling
eastbound traffic
Densmore Avenue with Onondaga
Avenue
On Densmore Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
Densmore Avenue with Brookside
Drive
On Densmore Avenue controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Densmore Avenue with Tampa
Drive
On Densmore Avenue controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Densmore Avenue with Tudor
Boulevard
On Densmore Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
Dorrance Avenue with Covington
Drive
On Dorrance Avenue controlling
eastbound traffic
Brookside Drive with Dorrance
Avenue
On Brookside Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Woodcrest Drive with Densmore
Avenue
On Woodcrest Drive controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Woodcrest Drive with Dorrance
Avenue
On Woodcrest Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Tampa Drive with Dorrance
Avenue
On Tampa Drive controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Tampa Drive with Maryon Drive On Tampa Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Tudor Boulevard with Dorrance
Avenue
On Tudor Boulevard controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Tudor Boulevard with Maryon
Drive
On Tudor Boulevard controlling
southbound traffic
Greymont Avenue with Holland
Avenue
On Greymont Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Holland Avenue with Westcliff
Drive
On Holland Avenue controlling
westbound traffic
Century Drive with Bayberry
Avenue
On Century Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Century Drive with Boncroft Drive On Century Drive controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Century Drive with Westcliff Drive On Century Drive controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:437
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Milton Avenue with Century Drive On Milton Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Cloverside Drive with Highland
Avenue
On Cloverside Drive controlling
westbound traffic
St. Davids Drive with St. Davids
Drive
On St. Davids Drive controlling
southbound traffic
St. Davids Drive with St. Davids
Drive
On St. Davids Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Southgate Plaza exit with St.
Davids Drive
On Southgnte Plaza exit
controlling westbound traffic
Sunbriar Drive with West
Willowdale Drive
On Sunbriar Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Emerald Drive with St. Davids
Drive
On Emerald Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Emerald Drive with West
Willowdale Drive
On Emerald Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Singer Drive with West
Willowdale Drive
On Singer Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Singer Drive with St. Davids Drive On Singer Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Elmsford Drive with Elmsford
Drive
On Elmsford Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Marlin Drive with Cranwood Drive On Marlin Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Marlin Drive with Laurelton Drive On Marlin Drive
controlling northbound traffic
Cranwood Drive with Laurelton
Drive
On Cranwood Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Marilyn Drive with Thomas Drive On Marilyn Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Patricia Drive with Thomas Drive On Patricia Drive, controlling
eastbound traffic
Greenmeadow Drive with Dover
Drive
On Greenmeadow Drive
controlling southeastbound traffic
Dover Drive with Greenmeadow
Drive
On Dover Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Neubauer Court with Nancycrest
Lane
On Neubauer Court controlling
southbound traffic
Neubauer Court with Campbell
Lane
On Neubauer Court controlling
northbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:438
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Campbell Lane with Waltercrest
Terrace
On Campbell Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Waltercrest Terrace with
Nancycrest Lane
On Waltercrest Terrace
controlling southbound traffic
Pacecrest Court with Nancycrest
Lane
On Pacecrest Court controlling
southbound traffic
Pacecrest Court with Angelacrest
Lane
On Pacecrest Court controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Pacecrest Court with Marycrest
Lane
On Pacecrest Court controlling
northbound traffic
Fieldcrest Court with Nancycrest
Lane
On Fieldcrest Court controlling
southbound traffic
Fieldcrest Court with Marycrest
Lane
On Fieldcrest Court controlling
northbound traffic
Leocrest Court with Nancycrest
Lane
On Leocrest Court controlling
southbound traffic
Leocrest Court with Angelacrest
Lane
On Leocrest Court controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Leocrest Court with Marycrest
Lane
On Leocrest Court controlling
northbound traffic
Charlescrest Court with
Nancycrest Lane
On Charlescrest Court controlling
southbound traffic
Charlescrest Court with
Angelacrest Lane
On Charlescrest Court controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Charlescrest Court with
Marycrest Lane
On Charlescrest Court controlling
northbound traffic
Bernadette Terrace with
Marycrest Lane
On Bernadette Terrace controlling
northbound traffic
Angelacrest Lane with Bernadette
Terrace
On Angelacrest Lane controlling
westbound traffic
Angelacrest Lane with Fieldcrest
Court
On Angelacrest Lane controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Angelacrest Lane with Waltercrest
Terrace
On Angelacrest Lane controlling
eastbound traffic
Right-of-way entrance from Fisher
Road southbound with Marycrest
Lane
On right-of-way entrance from
Fisher Road controlling
southbound traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:439
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
[Added 3-11-1968]
Camwood Drive with Willow Drive On Camwood Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Camwood Drive with Campus
Drive
On Camwood Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Campus Drive with Leaside Drive On Campus Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Onondaga Avenue with Densmore
Street
On Onondaga Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Brookside Drive with Densmore
Street
On Brookside Drive controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Tudor Boulevard with Densmore
Street
On Tudor Boulevard controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Eagan Drive with Brookside Drive On Eagan Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Dorrance Avenue with Tampa
Drive
On Dorrance Avenue controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Westcliff Drive with Century Drive On Westcliff Drive controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Dorrance Avenue with Tudor
Boulevard
On Dorrance Avenue controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Tampa Drive with Densmore
Street
On Tampa Drive controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
[Added 3-11-1968]
Densmore Street with Woodcrest
Drive
On Densmore Street controlling
eastbound and westbound traffic
Marycrest Lane with Marycrest
Lane
On Marycrest Lane controlling
southbound traffic
Covington Drive with Dorrance
Avenue
On Covington Drive controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Laurelton Drive with Marlin Drive On Laurelton Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Maryon Drive with Brookside
Drive
On Maryon Drive controlling
westbound traffic
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:440
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Boncroft Drive with Century Drive On Boncroft Drive controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
[Added 3-3-1969]
Legion Parkway with Holland
Avenue
On Legion Parkway controlling
northbound traffic
Arrowhead Road with Milton
Avenue
On Arrowhead Road controlling
eastbound traffic
Southgate Drive with West
Willowdale Drive
On Southgate Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Gervan Drive with Park Lane On Gervan Drive controlling
eastbound traffic
Harvest Market prop-erty and
Seneca Street
On Harvest Market property
control-ling traffic onto Seneca
Street
[Added 11-10-1969]
Onondaga Avenue with Downing
Street
On Onondaga Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Windmill Road with Heritage
Farm Road
On Windmill Road controlling
northbound and southbound
traffic
Round Trail Road with Heritage
Farm Road
On Round Trail Road controlling
northbound traffic
[Added 10-4-1971]
Suburban Court with Laurelton
Drive
On Suburban Court controlling
southbound traffic
[Added 12-4-1972]
Old Farm Circle with Windmill
Road North
On Old Farm Circle controlling
northbound traffic
Old Farm Circle with Windmill
Road
On Old Farm Circle controlling
eastbound traffic
[Added 9-9-1974]
Westcliff Drive with Main Street On Westcliff Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Highland Avenue with Main Street On Highland Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Boncroft Drive with Main Street On Boncroft Drive controlling
southbound traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-5
114:441
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Hillcrest Drive with Main Street On Hillcrest Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Bayberry Avenue with Main Street On Bayberry Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Avon Drive with Main Street On Avon Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Hilldale Avenue with Main Street On Hilldale Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Woodlane Avenue with Main
Street
On Woodlane Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Iris Avenue with Main Street On Iris Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Jasmine Avenue with Main Street On Jasmine Avenue controlling
southbound traffic
Newell Place with Main Street On Newell Place controlling
northbound traffic
Exits from West Seneca Senior
High School West with Main
Street
On exits from West Seneca Senior
High School West controlling
southbound traffic
[Added 9-8-1975]
Woodcrest Drive with Maryon
Drive
On Woodcrest Drive controlling
southbound traffic
[Added 2-6-1978]
Hillview Terrace with Century
Drive
On Hillview Terrace controlling
northbound traffic
Hillview Terrace with Hillview
Terrace
On Hillview Terrace controlling
eastbound traffic
[Added 10-3-1988]
Cove Creek Run with East and
West Road
On Cove Creek Run controlling
northbound traffic on Cove Creek
Run
[Added 3-26-1990]
West Willowdale with rear
entrance of Southgate Plaza
On West Willowdale controlling
eastbound traffic
[Added 4-9-1990]
Cove Creek Run and Cove Hollow On Cove Hollow controlling
westbound traffic
[Added 9-23-1996]
§ 115-5 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-5
114:442
§ 115-6. Yield intersections. [Added 3-11-1968]
Stop Intersections Stop Signs
Westcliff Drive with Holland
Avenue
On Westcliff Drive controlling
north and southbound traffic
A. The following intersections of Town highways with other Town
highways in that portion of the Town of West Seneca lying easterly of
Union Road are hereby designated "yield intersections," and yield signs
shall be erected at said intersections as set forth below:
Yield Intersections Yield Signs
Pinewood Drive with Pinewood
Drive [Repealed 10-3-1988]
Carriage Park with Carriage
Park
On Carriage Park controlling
southbound traffic
Greenhill Terrace with
Greenhill Terrace
On Greenhill Terrace controlling
southbound traffic
Heather Hill Drive with
Pamela Court
On Heather Hill Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Sherwood Court with
Sherwood Lane
[Added 3-3-1969]
On Sherwood Court controlling
eastbound traffic
Preble Court with Organ
Crescent
On Preble Court controlling
westbound
Elwood Drive with Barnett
Drive
[Added 11-10-1969]
On Elwood Drive controlling
northbound traffic
Molnar Court with Molnar
Drive
[Added 10-4-1971]
On Molnar Court controlling
westbound traffic
Tommie Court with Cindy
Lane
[Added 9-8-1975]
On Tommie Court controlling
westbound traffic
Cam Court with Cindy Lane On Cam Court controlling westbound
traffic
Peters Circle with Cindy Lane On Peters Circle controlling southeastbound
traffic
§ 115-5 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-6
114:443
Yield Intersections Yield Signs
Coleen Court with Westwood
Drive
[Added 5-10-1976]
On Coleen Court controlling
westbound traffic
B. The following intersections of Town highways with other Town
highways in that portion of the Town of West Seneca lying in the
northwest sector of the Town of West Seneca are hereby designated
"yield intersections," and yield signs shall be erected at said
intersections as set forth below:
Yield Intersections Yield Signs
Electric Avenue with Casimer
Street
On Electric Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
Nash Street with Casimer Street On Nash Street controlling
northbound traffic
Frank Court with Gregory Drive On Frank Court controlling
eastbound traffic
Lakeside Drive with On Lakeside
Court
[Added 3-3-1969]
Lakeside Drive controlling
westbound traffic
Leo Court with Gregory Drive On Leo Court controlling
eastbound traffic
Klas Avenue at North Seneca
Street
[Added 9-26-1983]
On Klas Avenue controlling
northbound traffic
C. The following intersections of Town highways with other Town
highways in that portion of the Town of West Seneca lying in the
southwest sector of the Town of West Seneca are hereby designated
"yield intersections," and yield signs shall be erected at said
intersections as set forth below:
Yield Intersections Yield Signs
Southgate Drive with Parkside
Drive
On Southgate Drive controlling
southbound traffic
Elmsford Court with Elmsford
Drive
On Elmsford Court controlling
northbound traffic
West Cranwood Drive with
Cranwood Drive
On West Cranwood Drive
controlling eastbound traffic
Marilyn Drive with Patricia Drive On Marilyn Drive controlling
north-eastbound traffic
[Added 3-3-1969]
§ 115-6 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-6
114:444
Yield Intersections Yield Signs
Cloverside Drive with Cloverside
Court
On Cloverside Drive controlling
southeastbound traffic
Cloverside Court with Cloverside
Drive
On Cloverside Court controlling
northwestbound traffic
Thomas Drive with Christopher
Drive
On Thomas Drive controlling
northbound traffic
[Added 1-21-1974]
Veterans Drive with Legion Drive On Veterans Drive controlling
northbound traffic
[Added 5-10-1976]
Crownland Circle with
Crownland Circle
On Crownland Circle controlling
southbound traffic
§ 115-6 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-6
114:445

ARTICLE IV
Parking and Stopping
[Added 3-3-1969]
§ 115-7. Application of Article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 115-8. Parking at night. [Amended 8-7-1972]
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on all Town highways and
county roads within the Town of West Seneca between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. from November 15 to March 15, inclusive, each year.
B. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited on: [Added 10-15-1984]
(1) Municipal Parking Lot, Orchard Park Road and Seneca Street,
November 15 to March 15:
(a) North half, Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday, 1:00 a.m. to 7:00
a.m.
(b) South half, Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, 1:00 a.m.
to 7:00 a.m.
C. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the
following streets: [Added 2-14-1994; amended 12-12-1994;
12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011]
(1) Burch Avenue between Manhassett Street and Seneca Street.
(2) Edson Street between Manhassett Street and Seneca Street.
(3) Wildwood Avenue.
(4) Winegar Place.
(5) Duerstein Street.
(6) Stephenson Avenue.
(7) Grace Street.
(8) Benson Avenue.
(9) Wichita Street.
(10) Ludwig Avenue.
D. Alternate side parking: [Added 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011]
(1) The parking of vehicles on the following streets shall be governed
by rules of alternate side parking. Parking shall be allowed on the
§ 115-7 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-8
114:447
§ 115-9. Parking prohibited in designated locations.
generally westerly side of the street from Monday at 6:00 p.m.
until Thursday at 6:00 p.m. and on the generally easterly side of
the street from Thursday at 6:00 p.m. until Monday at 6:00 p.m.
The Highway Superintendent shall place signs on the listed streets
documenting when parking is permitted:
(a) Burch Avenue between Manhassett Street and Seneca Street.
(b) Edson Street between Manhassett Street and Seneca Street.
(c) Wildwood Avenue.
(d) Duerstein Street.
(e) Stephenson Avenue.
(f) Grace Street.
(g) Benson Avenue.
(h) Wichita Street.
(i) Ludwig Avenue.
(2) The parking of vehicles on the following streets shall be governed
by rules of alternate side parking. Parking shall be allowed on the
generally northerly side of the street from Monday at 6:00 p.m.
until Thursday at 6:00 p.m. and on the generally southerly side of
the street from Thursday at 6:00 p.m. until Monday at 6:00 p.m.
The Highway Superintendent shall place signs on the listed streets
documenting when parking is permitted:
(a) Grace Street.
A. The parking of vehicles is hereby prohibited in the following locations.
Any and all subsections of this section which are in contravention of the
provisions of the Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1202(a)2b shall supersede
the same.
(1) On the east side of Amana Place, between Seneca Street and
Garden Avenue.
(2) On the west side of Amana Place, between Seneca Street and
Ebenezer Drive.
(3) On the north side of Arcade Street, between Collins Avenue and a
point 72 feet easterly therefrom.
(4) On the south side of Arcade Street, between Harlem Road and
Collins Avenue.
(5) On the east side of Aurora Avenue, between Arcade Street and a
point 130 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 115-8 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-9
114:448
(6) On the west side of Aurora Avenue, between Arcade Street and a
point 130 feet northerly therefrom.
(7) (Reserved)54
(8) On the east side of Bellwood Avenue, between Seneca Street and
Graham Avenue.
(9) (Reserved)55
(10)On the east side of Briarhill Drive, between Center Road and the
end of the street.
(11)On the east side of Briarwood Drive, between Center Road and the
end of the street.
(12) (Reserved)56
(13)On the west side of Burch Avenue, between Manhassett Street and
Indian Church Road.
(14)On the south and north sides of Century Drive, between its east end
and a point 150 feet westerly therefrom.
(15)On the east side of Chamberlin Drive, between Seneca Street and
Manhassett Street.
(16)On the east side of Collins Avenue, between Arcade Street and a
point 216 feet northerly therefrom.
(17)On the west side of Creekward Drive, between Seneca Street and a
point 171 feet southerly therefrom.
(18)On the east side of Creekward Drive, between Seneca Street and a
point 216 feet southerly therefrom.
(19) (Reserved)57
(20)On the west side of Delray Avenue, between the center line of
Graham Avenue and the end of the street. [Amended 11-20-1978;
1-28-2003]
(21)On the west side of Dirksen Avenue, between Seneca Street and a
point 112 feet northerly therefrom.
(22)On the east side of Dirksen Avenue, between Seneca Street and
Graham Avenue.
54.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), which dealt with parking on both sides of
Barnsdale Avenue, was repealed 4-12-2004.
55.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), which dealt with parking on the west side of
Benson Avenue, was repealed 1-19-1987.
56.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(12), prohibiting parking on a portion of the west side
of Burch Avenue, was repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
57.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(19), prohibiting parking on a portion of the east side
of Delray Avenue, was repealed 1-28-2003.
§ 115-9 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-9
114:449
(23)On the north side of Doster Place, between Union Road and the end
of the street.
(24) (Reserved)58
(25)On the east side of Dwyer Street, between Indian Church Road and
Mineral Spring Road.
(26)On the west side of Dwyer Street, between Arcade Street and a
point 104 feet northerly therefrom.
(27)On the west side of Dwyer Street, between Arcade Street and a
point 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(28) (Reserved)59
(29)On the west side of Electric Avenue, between Clinton Street and a
point 32 feet southerly therefrom.
(30)On the west side of Flohr Avenue, between Seneca Street and
Graham Avenue.
(31)On the north side of Forrestal Lane, between Wenro Place and the
end of the street.
(32)On the east side of Fremont Avenue, between Center Road and
Almont Avenue.
(33)On the south side of Garden Avenue, between Union Road and
Amana Place.
(34)On the east and west sides of Jack Berry Street, between Indian
Church Road and Buffalo Creek. [Amended 5-10-1976]
(35)On the west side of Kirkwood Drive, between Seneca Street and
Manhassett Street.
(36)On the west side of Klas Avenue, between Seneca Street and a
point 292 feet northerly therefrom.
(37)On the west side of Klink Place, between Norwood Drive and Main
Street.
(38)On the south side of Kron Avenue, between Union Road and the end
of the street.
(39)On the north side of Main Street, in front of Ebenezer United
Church of Christ property.
58.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(24), prohibiting parking on a portion of the west side
of Duerstein Street, was repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
59.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(28), prohibiting parking on a portion of the east side
of Edson Street, was repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
§ 115-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-9
114:450
(40)On the south side of Main Street, between Mill Road and a point
160 feet easterly therefrom.
(41)On the north side of Main Street, between South Warren Avenue
and a point 179 feet westerly therefrom.
(42)On the west side of Mill Road, between Cazenovia Creek bridge
and a point 185 feet southerly therefrom.
(43)On the east side of Mill Road, between Cazenovia Creek bridge and
a point 266 feet northerly therefrom.
(44)On the east side of Mill Road, between Main Street and Seneca
Street.
(45)On the west side of Mill Road, between Seneca Street and a point
271 feet northerly therefrom.
(46) On the west side of Newell Place: [Amended 4-29-2002]
(a) Between Main Street and a point 364 feet southerly therefrom;
and
(b) On school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(47) On the east side of Newell Place: [Amended 4-29-2002]
(a) Between Main Street and a point 364 feet southerly therefrom;
and
(b) On school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
(48)On the east side of Onondaga Avenue, between Dorrance Avenue
and a point 160 feet northerly therefrom.
(49)On the north side of Oschawa Avenue, between Duerstein Street
and the Buffalo city line.
(50) (Reserved)60
(51) (Reserved)61
(52)On the east and west sides of Pearl Street, commencing at a point
300 feet north of Clinton Street and extending to a point 800 feet
north of Clinton Street.
(53)On the south side of School Street, between Union Road and Jack
Berry Street.
(54)On the east side of South Warren Avenue, between Main Street and
a point 468 feet northerly therefrom.
60.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(50), prohibiting parking on the south side of Park
Lane between Union Road and the curve, was repealed 9-9-1974.
61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(51), prohibiting parking on a portion of the east side
of Park Lane, was repealed 11-26-2001.
§ 115-9 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-9
114:451
(55)On the west side of Warren Avenue, between Norwood Drive and a
point 310 feet southerly therefrom.
(56)On the west side of Tampa Drive, between Potter Road and a point
55 feet southerly therefrom.
(57)On the east side of Thorndale Avenue, between Seneca Street and
the end of the street. [Amended 2-7-1977]
(58)On the east side of Tindle Avenue, between Seneca Street and the
end of the street. [Amended 11-20-1978]
(59)On the north and south sides of West Cranwood Drive, between
Orchard Park Road and Laurelton Drive.
(60) (Reserved)62
(61) (Reserved)63
(62)On the east side of Washington Street, between Center Road and
the end of the street. [Added 3-9-1970]
(63)On the west side of Florence Avenue, between Center Road and the
end of the street. [Added 3-9-1970; amended 5-10-1976]
(64) (Reserved)64
(65)On the south side of Main Street, between Seneca Street and the
easternmost edge of the east driveway to the West Seneca Senior
High School parking lot. [Added 3-9-1970]
(66)On the north side of Main Street, between Seneca Street and the
westernmost edge of the west driveway to the West Seneca Senior
High School parking lot. [Added 3-9-1970]
(67)On the east side of Seneca Street, between the north curb of Main
Street and a point 50 feet northerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(68)On the east side of Seneca Street, between the south curb of Main
Street and a point 50 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(69)On the east side of Seneca Street, between the south drive to the
West Seneca Senior High School and points 50 feet northerly and
southerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(70)On the east side of Seneca Street, between the north drive to West
Seneca Senior High School and points 50 feet northerly and
southerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(60), prohibiting parking on a portion of the east side
of Wildwood Place, was repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
63.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(61), prohibiting parking on a portion of the north side
of Winegar Place, was repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
64.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(64), added 3-9-1970, was repealed 10-5-1970.
§ 115-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-9
114:452
(71)On the east side of Seneca Street, between the south edge of the
driveway to West Seneca Central School Bus Garage and a point 75
feet southerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(72) (Reserved)65
(73)On the west side of Hilldale Avenue, between Main Street and a
point 50 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(74)On the east side of Hilldale Avenue, between Main Street and
Seneca Street. [Added 3-9-1970]
(75)On the north side of Main Street, between Bayberry Avenue and
points 75 feet easterly and westerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(76)On the south side of Main Street, between Hilldale Avenue and
points 75 feet easterly and westerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(77)On the west side of Bernadette Terrace, between Nancycrest Lane
and a point 50 feet northerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(78)On the west side of Wichita Road, between Seneca Street and the
end of the street. [Added 3-9-1970]
(79)On the east side of Boynton Avenue, between Clinton Street and a
point 200 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 3-9-1970]
(80) (Reserved)66
(81)On the west side of St. Davids Drive, between Seneca Street and
Plaza exit. [Added 10-5-1970]
(82)On the east side of St. Davids Drive, between Seneca Street and a
point 50 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 10-5-1970]
(83)On the south side of Summit Avenue, between Union Road and
Warren Avenue. [Added 10-5-1970]
(84)On the north side of Bullis Road, between Seneca Street and
Center Road. [Added 1-4-1971]
(85)On the south side of Loxley Court, between Orchard Park Road and
Potter Road. [Added 1-4-1971]
(86)On both sides of Mill Road, between Seneca Street and Hi View
Terrace. [Added 10-4-1971]
(87)On the east side of French Lea, between Clinton Street and the
Cheektowaga Town line. [Added 10-4-1971]
65.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(72), added 3-9-1970, prohibiting parking on a portion
of the west side of Burch Avenue, was repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
66.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(80), added 10-5-1970, was repealed 1-4-1971.
§ 115-9 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-9
114:453
(88)On the east side of Waltercrest Terrace, between Campbell Lane
and Marycrest Lane. [Added 10-4-1971]
(89)On the south side of Marilyn Drive, between Orchard Park Road
and Patricia Drive. [Added 8-7-1972]
(90) (Reserved)67
(91)On the north side of Route 16 (Seneca Street), between a point 75
feet west of the west curbline of Bellwood Avenue and a point 70
feet east of the east curbline of Bellwood Avenue. [Added
12-4-1972]
(92)On the south side of Route 16 (Seneca Street), between Route 240
(Orchard Park Road) and a point 600 feet west of Lind Avenue.
[Added 12-4-1972]
(93)On the north side of Seneca Street (County Highway No. 215),
between a point 54 feet east of Harlem Road and the intersection of
Thruway Exit 54, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., with
two-hour limited parking in said area between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
[Added 9-10-1979]
(94)On the north side of Route 16 (Seneca Street), between Harlem
Road and a point 54 feet easterly therefrom. [Amended 9-8-1975]
(95)On the north and south sides of Legion Parkway, from Union Road
to Holland Avenue except where hereinafter designated. [Added
1-21-1974]
(96)On the west side of Veterans Drive (south entrance), from Legion
Drive to Town Hall parking lot. [Added 1-21-1974]
(97)On the west side of Veterans Drive (north entrance), from Legion
Drive to Town Hall parking lot. [Added 1-21-1974]
(98)On the west side of Slade Avenue between Potter Road and a point
400 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 9-9-1974]
(99) (Reserved)68
(100) (Reserved)69
(101)On the north side of French Road, between Clinton Street to a
point 1,400 feet easterly therefrom. [Added 9-9-1974]
67.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(90), added 8-7-1972, prohibiting parking on a portion
of the east side of Wichita Road, was repealed 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
68.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(99), added 9-9-1974, prohibiting parking on the south
and east sides of Park Lane between Union Road and East and West Road, was repealed
11-26-2001.
69.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(100), added 9-9-1974, prohibiting parking on a
portion of the west side of Park Lane, was repealed 11-26-2001.
§ 115-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-9
114:454
(102)On the south side of Kauderer Place, from Union Road to the end
of the street. [Added 9-8-1975]
(103)On the west side of Klas Street, between Seneca Street and the
end of said street. [Added 5-10-1975; amended 2-6-1978;
4-11-1983; 12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011]
(104) (Reserved)70
(105)On the east side of Highland Avenue, between Main Street and a
point 100 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 5-10-1976]
(106)On the north side of Reserve Road, between Orchard Park Road
and a point 600 feet easterly therefrom. [Added 2-6-1978]
(107)On the south side of Reserve Road, between Orchard Park Road
and a point 625 feet easterly therefrom. [Added 2-6-1978]
(108)On the north and south sides of Reserve Road, between Union
Road and a point 450 feet easterly therefrom. [Added 2-6-1978]
(109)On the north and south sides of Reserve Road, between Union
Road and a point 450 feet westerly therefrom. [Added 2-6-1978]
(110)On the north side of Reserve Road, between Southwestern
Boulevard and a point 225 feet westerly therefrom. [Added
2-6-1978]
(111)On the east side of Kelsey Drive, between Seneca Street and the
end of the street. [Added 2-6-1978]
(112)On the east side of Casimer Street, between Clinton Street and a
point 250 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 2-6-1978]
(113)On the west side of Casimer Street, between Clinton Street and a
point 50 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 2-6-1978]
(114)On both sides of Borden Road, between Clinton Street and a point
350 feet northerly therefrom. [Added 11-20-1978]
(115)On the east side of Lyndale Court, between Center Road and the
end of the street. [Added 11-20-1978]
(116)On the east side of Cambridge Avenue, between the north end of
the street and the south end of the street. [Added 11-20-1978]
(117)On the north side of Cambridge Avenue, between Lyndale Court
and the intersection of Cambridge Avenue running north and south.
[Added 11-20-1978]
(118)On the east side of Elwood Drive, between Reserve Road and
Barnett Drive. [Added 11-20-1978]
70.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(104), dealing with Benson, Ludwig, Klas and
Stephenson Streets, was repealed 2-6-1978.
§ 115-9 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-9
114:455
(119)On the east side of Bellwood Avenue, between Graham Avenue
and the northerly end of the street. [Added 11-20-1978]
(120)On the west side of Flohr Avenue, between Graham Avenue and
the northerly end of the street. [Added 11-20-1978]
(121)On the east side of Dirksen Avenue, between Graham Avenue and
North Seneca Street. [Added 11-20-1978]
(122)On the north side of Seneca Street, between Route 400 (Aurora
Expressway) exit ramp and a point 600 feet west of Lind Avenue.
[Added 9-10-1979]
(123)On the north and south sides of Center Road, between Seneca
Street and a point 300 feet west of Lind Avenue. [Added
9-10-1979]
(124)On the east and west sides of Mohawk Street, between Terrace
Boulevard and the Town line. [Added 9-10-1979]
(125)On the west side of Mill Road, between Main Street and Ebenezer
Drive. [Added 9-10-1979]
(126) (Reserved)71
(127)On the north and south sides of Commerce Parkway between
Union Road and a point 150 feet easterly therefrom. [Added
9-26-1983]
(128)On both sides of Empire Drive between Gardenville Parkway West
and the end of the street. [Added 2-6-1984]
(129)On the north side of St. Jude Terrace, from Hyland Avenue to west
boundary Farm Lot No. 319. [Added 10-15-1984]
(130)On the south side of Graham Avenue, between Tindle Avenue and
Klas Avenue. [Added 10-15-1984]
(131) On the north and west sides of Dyke Road. [Added 6-3-1985]
(132) South side of Greenwood Avenue. [Added 1-19-1987]
(133) Both sides of Diane Drive, from Terrace Boulevard to
Cheektowaga line. [Added 1-19-1987]
(134) Both sides of Electric Avenue, 100 feet from intersection with
Clinton Street. [Added 1-19-1987]
(135)On east side of Duerstein Street, between flow meter signs.
[Added 1-19-1987]
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(126), added 4-11-1983, as amended, prohibiting
parking on portions of the west and east sides of Stephenson Street, was repealed
12-19-2011 by L.L. No. 12-2011.
§ 115-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-9
114:456
(136) East side of Wetherstone Drive between Seneca Creek Road and
175 feet southerly. [Added 8-3-1987]
(137)West side of Wetherstone Drive between Seneca Creek Road and
191 feet southerly. [Added 8-3-1987]
(138) South side of East and West Road from Cove Creek Run to Circle
End Drive. [Added 8-3-1987]
(139) East and west sides of Old Lein Road from Lein Road south to the
dead end. [Added 2-1-1988]
(140) North side of Indian Church Road from Union Road extending 285
feet westerly and from the center line of Jack Berry Street
extending 116 feet easterly. [Added 1-23-1989; amended
10-21-1991]
(141) South side of Indian Church Road commencing 69 feet from the
center line of Jack Berry Street and extending easterly to Union
Road. [Added 1-23-1989; amended 3-8-1993]
(142) North side of Main Street from South Warren Avenue to Union
Road. [Added 3-26-1990]
(143)West side of Brookside Drive, between Potters Road and a point
150 feet southerly therefrom. [Added 9-24-1990]
(144)West side of Chamberlin Drive between Seneca Street and a point
33.00 feet northerly therefrom. [Added 2-11-1991]
(145) Cul-de-sac of Meadowdale Lane, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on
school days. [Added 3-11-1991]
(146) North and south sides of Orchard Avenue 122 feet easterly from
Union Road. [Added 10-21-1991]
(147) (Reserved)72
(148) East side of Seneca Street between the southerly edge of the
driveway to the Royal York Apartments and a point 169 feet
southerly therefrom. [Added 3-8-1993]
(149) East side of Pinewood Drive between Seneca Street and a point
360 feet northerly therefrom. [Added 3-13-1995; amended
7-15-1996]
(150) On the east side of Willink Place. [Added 9-23-1996]
(151)West side of Schaefer Road from Berg Road to end of street.
[Added 10-13-1997]
72.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(147), prohibiting parking on the west side of Warren
Avenue from Center Road to a point 270 feet southerly therefrom, added 6-1-1992, was
repealed 12-20-2004.
§ 115-9 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-9
114:457
§ 115-9.1. Temporary restricted parking. [Added 3-15-1994]
§ 115-10. Diagonal parking. [Added 1-21-1974]
(152) South side of Center Road from Queens Drive easterly for 975
feet. [Added 2-28-2000; amended 6-26-2000]
(153)On the east and west sides of Birchwood Avenue, from the
intersection of the north line of Center Road and Birchwood Avenue
to a point 1,275 feet north. [Added 12-11-2000]
(154)On the east side of Orchard Park Road from Marilyn Drive to
Allendale Road. [Added 6-11-2001]
(155)On the east side of Aurora Avenue from Arcade Street south to the
end. [Added 11-26-2001]
(156) In the cul-de-sac on Park Lane. [Added 11-26-2001]
(157)On the east side of Jasmine Avenue on school days between 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. [Added 4-29-2002]
(158)On the south side of Main Street between a point 305 feet east of
the east line of Union Road and a point 485 feet east of the east line
of Union Road. [Added 1-28-2003]
(159) On the south side of Race Street. [Added 12-20-2004]
(160) On the west side of Henrietta Avenue. [Added 12-20-2004]
(161) On the west side of Frontera Court. [Added 12-20-2004]
(162)On North America Drive in front of 20 North America Drive.
[Added 11-19-2007]
(163)On the north side of Seneca Street, beginning at the westernmost
point of the property located at 4620 Seneca Street eastward a
distance of 200 feet. [Added 4-15-2013 by L.L. No. 3-2013]
A. The Chief of Police or the Highway Superintendent may prohibit the
parking of vehicles in designated locations on a temporary basis for a
period not to exceed 24 hours.
B. The Chief of Police or the Highway Superintendent shall post with the
appropriate "No Parking" signs the location or locations to be
restricted.
(1) The sign shall set forth the day of the week and the time period that
parking will not be allowed.
(2) The sign shall be posted by 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to the day
that parking will not be allowed.
§ 115-9 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-10
114:458
§ 115-11. Stopping and standing restricted in designated locations.
A. Diagonal parking shall be permitted in the following designated
locations.
(1) East side of Veterans Drive (south entrance), from Legion Drive to
Town Hall parking lot.
(2) East side of Veterans Drive (north entrance), from Legion Drive to
Town Hall parking lot.
(3) East side of Legion Drive 135 feet south of Holland Avenue for 315
feet.
(4) South side of Legion Drive west of Kiwanis Youth Center.
[Added 3-26-1990]
(5) South side of Dorrance Avenue at the playground.
A. The stopping of vehicles except buses is hereby prohibited in any of the
following locations:
(1) On the north and south sides of Ridge Read, between Seneca Street
and Orchard Park Road.
(2) On the north and south sides of Seneca Street, between Union
Road and Ridge Road.
(3) On the east side of Wildweed Place, between Seneca Street and a
point 88 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) On the west side of Wildwood Place, between Seneca Street and a
point 90 feet northerly therefrom.
B. No person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger(s) at the
following locations: [Added 10-3-1988]
(1) On the north end of Jasmine Avenue, east and west sides, 60 feet
southerly from the end of the street.
§ 115-10 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-11
114:459

ARTICLE V
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
[Added 3-3-1969]
§ 115-12. Authority to impound vehicles.
§ 115-13. Storage and charges. [Amended 12-14-1970]
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Town Highway
Superintendent may store such vehicle in a suitable place at the expense
of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle may redeem
the same upon payment to the Town Highway Superintendent of the amount
of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such removal,
such removal charges not to exceed $15, together with any charges for
storage, such storage charges not to exceed $2 per day or fraction thereof.
§ 115-14. Notice of removal.
The Town Highway Superintendent shall without delay report the removal
and the disposition of any vehicle removed as provided in this article to the
Town police, and it shall be the duty of such Town police to ascertain to the
extent possible the owner of the vehicle or person having same in charge
and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of the
amount which will be required to redeem same.
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Town during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other public emergency which
affects that portion of the public highway upon which said vehicle is
parked or abandoned, said vehicle may be removed by the Town
Highway Superintendent
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway within this Town
where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, said vehicle may
be removed by the Town Highway Superintendent.
C. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway within this
Town where stopping, standing or parking is prohibited, said vehicle
may be removed by the Town Highway Superintendent.
§ 115-12 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-14
114:461

ARTICLE VI
Truck Exclusions73
[Added 12-15-1969]
§ 115-15. All trucks excluded.
A. Trucks, commercial vehicles, tractors and tractor-trailer combinations
are hereby excluded from the following highways within the Town of
West Seneca:
(1) Summit Avenue, between Union Road and Warren Avenue.
(2) Warren Avenue, between Center Road and Summit Avenue.
(3) Fremont Avenue, between Center Road and Summit Avenue.
(4) Almont Avenue, between Center Road and Summit Avenue.
(5) Kirkwood Drive, between Seneca Street and Chamberlin Drive.
(6) Columbia Parkway, between Seneca Street and Manhassett Street.
(7) Chamberlin Drive, between Seneca Street and Indian Church Road.
(8) Manhassett Street, between Indian Church Road and Kirkwood
Drive.
(9) Wildwood Street, between Seneca Street and Grace Street.
(10) Grace Street, between Twin Fair Plaza exit and Wildwood Street.
(11) Burch Avenue, between Seneca Street and Indian Church Road.
(12) Dorr Street, between Manhassett Street and Indian Church Road.
(13) Savona Street, between Manhassett Street and Indian Church
Road.
(14) North Avenue, between Union Road and Inter Drive.
(15) Inter Drive, between Clinton Street and North Avenue.
(16) Extension of Inter Drive into Union Square Plaza.
[Added 9-8-1975]
(17) Tindle Avenue, between Seneca Street and Graham Avenue.
(18) Thorndale Avenue, between Seneca Street and Graham Avenue.
(19) Delray Avenue, between Seneca Street and Graham Avenue.
73.Editor's Note: A motion adopted by the Town Board on 12-8-1969 designated as a truck
route that part of Fisher Road between the Thruway and the City of Lackawanna lying
within the Town of West Seneca.
§ 115-15 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-15
114:463
§ 115-16. Trucks over five tons excluded.
(20) Flohr Avenue, between Seneca Street and Graham Avenue.
(21) Bellwood Avenue, between Seneca Street and Graham Avenue.
(22) Graham Avenue, between Klas Avenue and Tindle Avenue.
(23) Klas Avenue, between Seneca Street and North Seneca Street.
(24) North Seneca Street, between Harlem Road and Klas Avenue.
(25) Leydecker Road, between Seneca Street and East and West Road.
[Added 1-19-1987]
(26) Eagen Drive.
(27) Maryon Drive.
(28) Covington Drive.
(29) Tudor Boulevard.
(30) Tampa Drive.
(31)Woodcrest Drive.
(32) Brookside Drive.
[Added 8-3-1987]
(33) Onondaga Street.
A. Trucks in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from the following
highways within the Town of West Seneca:
(1) Lind Avenue [Added 2-1-1988]
(2) Blossom Road. [Added 3-23-1992]
(3) Ski Hi Drive [Added 9-11-1995]
(4) East Avenue [Added 9-11-1995]
(5) Main Street [Added 9-11-1995]
(6) Cathedral Drive [Added 9-11-1995]
(7) Cathedral Court [Added 9-11-1995]
(8) Osgood Avenue [Added 9-11-1995]
(9) Summit Meadow [Added 9-11-1995]
(10) Summit Avenue (Summit Meadows Subdivision) [Added
9-11-1995]
§ 115-15 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-16
114:464
§ 115-17. Exceptions.
The regulations established in this article shall not be construed to prevent
the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along the highways
from which such vehicles and combinations are otherwise excluded.
(11) Duchess Drive [Added 9-11-1995]
(12) Princess Lane [Added 9-11-1995]
(13) Broadway Street [Added 9-11-1995]
(14) Pearl Street [Added 9-11-1995]
(15) Elm Street [Added 9-11-1995]
(16) Chestnut Avenue [Added 9-11-1995]
(17)Wilson Avenue [Added 9-11-1995]
(18) Schultz Road [Added 9-23-1996]
B. Trucks in excess of five tons are hereby excluded from the following
areas within the Town of West Seneca: [Added 10-15-1984]
Name of Area
Municipal Parking Lot, Orchard Park Road at Seneca Street
§ 115-16 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-17
114:465

ARTICLE VII
Turning Movements
[Added 10-5-1970]
§ 115-18. Left turns prohibited.
The left turning of vehicles is hereby prohibited as follows:
A. Vehicles proceeding north at two most easterly driveways from Harvest
Market parking lot to proceed west on Seneca Street.
§ 115-18 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-18
114:467

ARTICLE VIII
Southgate Plaza Regulations
[Adopted 7-24-1967]
§ 115-19. Statutory authority. [Amended 4-11-1983]
Pursuant to Chapter 679 of the Session Laws of the State of New York
for the year 1970, which added § 1660-a to the Vehicle and Traffic Law
of the State of New York, effective January 1, 1971, and entitled "Traffic
regulations at hospital parking areas and driveways and shopping centers;
private apartment complex," it is hereby resolved that pursuant to the
written request of the owner of Southgate Plaza, Inc., the provisions of this
article are enacted as the regulations of the Town of West Seneca for the
control and operation of the parking area at Southgate Plaza, Inc.
§ 115-20. Definitions.
All terms, such as "motor vehicle," as used in this article shall have the same
meaning as they have in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York.
§ 115-21. Stopping and yielding in plaza.
§ 115-22. Yielding at entrance to highway.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any exit of
Southgate Plaza shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on
said highway.
§ 115-23. Speed regulations.
A. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop sign,
but if none, then shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the Subsection
B hereof.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop as required above and, after
having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle that has
entered the intersection from another roadway or is approaching so
closely on said roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such driver is moving within or across the intersection.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions, having regard to the
actual and potential hazards then existing.
§ 115-19 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-23
114:469
§ 115-24. Parking or standing on roadway.
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, upon any roadway within said plaza or in any area marked
"fire lane" within said plaza.
§ 115-25. Removal and storage of vehicles.
Police shall have the power to order the removal and storage of vehicles
parked or abandoned in the parking area during snowstorms, floods, fires
or other public emergencies or found unattended in the parking area where
they constitute an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or
parking is prohibited, and to assess against the owner of or operator of any
such vehicle reasonable charges for such removal and storage.
§ 115-26. Traffic infractions.
The violation of any section of this article or of a rule or regulation provided
herein shall constitute a traffic infraction within the meaning of § 1800 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 115-27. Vehicle and operator requirements.
For the convenience of the public or of the users of the parking area, it
shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in this plaza while said
vehicle is unregistered or while the operator of said vehicle is unlicensed,
pursuant to the terms of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, and while the vehicle is not equipped in a manner prescribed by the
Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, and a violation of any of
the rules and regulations of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York pursuant to the above shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 115-28. Use of headlights.
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in said plaza during the hours
of darkness without having the headlights of said vehicle on.
§ 115-29. (Reserved)
B. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles
per hour.
§ 115-23 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-29
114:470
ARTICLE IX
Shopping Center Regulations
[Added 5-10-1976]
§ 115-30. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to Article 39 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New
York, wherein it provides that municipalities may provide traffic regulations
in the parking area of shopping centers, it is hereby resolved that, pursuant
to the written request of the owner of Twin Fair, Inc., and Benderson
Development Co., Inc., the provisions of this article are enacted as the
regulations of the Town of West Seneca for the control and operation of
the parking areas at Ridge-Langner Plaza, Twin Fair-Transit and Twin-Fair
Seneca.
§ 115-31. Definitions.
All terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the same meaning
as they have in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 115-32. Stopping and yielding in plaza.
§ 115-33. Yielding right-of-way at entrance to highway.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any exit of
the shopping centers as set forth in § 115-30 shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on said highway.
§ 115-34. Speed regulations.
A. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop sign;
but if none, then he shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
the approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to Subsection B
hereof.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop as required above and, after
having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle that has
entered the intersection from another roadway or is approaching so
closely on said roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such driver is moving within or across the intersection.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions, having regard to the
actual and potential hazards then existing.
§ 115-30 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-34
114:471
§ 115-35. Parking or standing within plaza roadways prohibited.
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, upon any roadway within said shopping centers or in any
area marked FIRE LANE within said shopping centers.
§ 115-36. Removal and storage of vehicles; charges.
Police shall have the power to order the removal and storage of vehicles
parked or abandoned in the parking area during snowstorms, floods, fires
or other public emergencies or found unattended in the parking area where
they constitute an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or
parking is prohibited and to assess against the owner of or operator of any
such vehicle reasonable charges for such removal and storage.
§ 115-37. Violations deemed traffic infractions.
The violation of any section of this article or of a rule or regulation provided
herein shall constitute a traffic infraction within the meaning of § 1800 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 115-38. Vehicle and operator requirements.
For the convenience of the public or of the users of the parking area, it shall
be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in said shopping centers
while said vehicle is unregistered or while the operator of said vehicle is
unlicensed, pursuant to the terms of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York, and while the vehicle is not equipped in a manner prescribed
by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, and a violation of
any of the rules and regulations of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York pursuant to the above shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 115-39. Use of headlights.
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in said shopping centers
during the hours of darkness without having the headlights of said vehicle
on.
B. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles
per hour.
§ 115-34 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-39
114:472
ARTICLE X
Prohibition of Right Turn on Red Signal
[Added 2-7-1977]
§ 115-40. Intersections designated.
The following intersections will display signs prohibiting vehicles turning
right on red signals:
§ 115-41. Intersections with time and day designations. [Added
2-28-2000]
Right turns on red shall be prohibited at the following intersections at the
time and on the days specified:
A. (Reserved)74
B. Ridge Road at its intersection with Slade Avenue and Thruway ramp
eastbound.
(1) On Slade Avenue controlling southbound traffic turning west.
C. Seneca Street at its intersection with Ridge Road and driveway to
Champion Plaza parking lot.
(1) On Plaza Drive controlling northbound traffic turning east.
D. Seneca Street at its intersection with Center Road and Kelsey Drive.
(1) On Seneca Street controlling northwest traffic turning north or
east.
(2) On Kelsey Drive controlling southbound traffic turning west.
E. Seneca Street at its intersection with Center Road, Lein Road and Bullis
Road.
(1) On Lein Road controlling southbound traffic turning west.
(2) On Seneca Street controlling northwest traffic turning east or
north.
(3) On Bullis Road controlling eastbound traffic turning north.
F. (Reserved)75
74.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which pertained to Ridge Road at its intersection with
Langer Road, was repealed 4-11-1983.
75.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding Seneca Street at its intersection with
Southgate Plaza, was repealed 9-26-1983.
§ 115-40 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-41
114:473
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
At
Intersection
of
Hours/
Days
Mill Road Both Seneca Street 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
Seneca Street Both Mill Road 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
§ 115-42. (Reserved)
§ 115-43. (Reserved)
§ 115-44. (Reserved)
§ 115-45. (Reserved)
§ 115-46. (Reserved)
§ 115-47. (Reserved)
§ 115-48. (Reserved)
§ 115-49. (Reserved)
§ 115-41 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-49
114:474
ARTICLE XI
Handicapped Parking
[Added 9-22-1980]
§ 115-50. Authorization to establish areas for handicapped parking;
applications; handicapped parking permits.
The Superintendent of Highways is hereby authorized to establish areas
for handicapped parking in the Town of West Seneca. The Town Clerk
shall process applications for handicapped parking and issue handicapped
parking permits to qualified residents of the Town of West Seneca.
§ 115-51. Restricted parking areas designated.
The parking of vehicles is hereby restricted, where designated, at the
following locations to handicapped persons with Town permits:
§ 115-52. (Reserved)
§ 115-53. (Reserved)
§ 115-54. (Reserved)
§ 115-55. (Reserved)
§ 115-56. (Reserved)
§ 115-57. (Reserved)
§ 115-58. (Reserved)
§ 115-59. (Reserved)
A. Kiwanis Youth Center.
B. West Seneca Town Hall.
C. West Seneca Library.
D. Centennial swimming pool.
E. West Seneca Outdoor Recreation Center.
F. On the north side of Indian Church Road commencing at a point 285
feet west of Union Road to a point 116 feet east of the center line of Jack
Berry Street. [Amended 1-23-1989; 10-21-1991]
G. Wegman's parking lot. [Added 4-25-1994]
§ 115-50 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-59
114:475

ARTICLE XII
Speed Limitations
[Added 9-26-1983]
§ 115-60. School zones.
School zones shall be as follows:
Location
Speed
Limit
(mph)
Ebenezer Drive from Mill Road west to Amana Place
[Added 2-28-2000] 25
Indian Church Road for 300 feet in an east and west
direction from the building line of Fourteen Holy Helpers
Elementary School
30
Mill Road from Main Street to Seneca Street [Added
2-28-2000] 25
§ 115-61. Park and recreation zones. [Added 10-15-1984]
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per
hour on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Limits
Legion Drive From Union Road to Holland Avenue
§ 115-60 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-61
114:477

ARTICLE XIII
French Quarter Park Regulations
[Adopted 5-14-2001]
§ 115-62. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority of § 1660-a of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the
State of New York and upon the written request of the owner or person in
charge of the operation and control of the French Quarter Mobile Home
Park, the provisions of this article are enacted as the regulations of the
Town of West Seneca for the control of and operation of parking areas and
driveways of the French Quarter Mobile Home Park.
§ 115-63. Definitions; word usage.
§ 115-64. Stopping and yielding in Park.
§ 115-65. Yield right-of-way at entrance to highway.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any exit of the
Park shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said highway.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FRENCH QUARTER MOBILE HOME PARK — The drives and parking
areas within said Park, including streets named by the Park as
Versailles Boulevard, Burgundy Circle, Avignon Court, Calais Court,
Orleans Court, Bordeaux Court, Torraine Court, Normandy Court,
Marsaille Avenue, Alsace Place, Lorraine Place, Doucette Place,
Britanny Court and Bourbon Court.
B. All terms, such as "motor vehicle," as used in this article shall have the
same meaning as they have in the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York.
A. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop sign;
but if none, then he shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of
the approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to Subsection B
hereof.
B. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a
vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop as required above and, after
having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle that has
entered the intersection from another roadway or is approaching so
closely on said roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such driver is moving within or across the intersection.
§ 115-62 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-66
114:479
§ 115-66. Speed regulations.
§ 115-67. Parking or standing within Park roadways prohibited.
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended
or unattended, upon any roadway within said Park in any area marked "NO
PARKING" or "FIRE LANE." There shall be no parking on any roadways in
the Park from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. from November 15 to March 15.
§ 115-68. Removal and storage of vehicle; charges.
Police shall have the power to order the removal and storage of vehicles
parked or abandoned in the parking area during snowstorms, floods, fires
or other public emergencies or found unattended in the parking area where
they constitute an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or
parking is prohibited and to assess against the owner of or operator of any
such vehicle reasonable charges for such removal and storage.
§ 115-69. Violations deemed traffic infractions.
The violation of any section or of a rule or regulation provided herein shall
constitute a traffic infraction within the meaning of § 1800 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
§ 115-70. Vehicle and operator requirements.
For the convenience of the public or of the users of the Park, it shall
be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in said Park while said
vehicle is unregistered, uninsured or while the operator of said vehicle is
unlicensed, pursuant to the terms of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State
of New York, and while the vehicle is not equipped in a manner prescribed
by the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, and a violation of
any of the rules and regulations of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of
New York pursuant to the above shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 115-71. Use of headlights.
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the Park during the hours
of darkness without having the headlights of said vehicle on.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions, having regard to the
actual and potential hazards then existing.
B. No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles
per hour.
§ 115-66 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-71
114:480
ARTICLE XIV
Texting While Driving
[Adopted 11-16-2009 by L.L. No. 5-2009]
§ 115-72. Intent; definitions; prohibition; exceptions; penalties;
enforcement; effect on other laws.
A. Declaration of intent. Text messaging while driving is a growing
problem on our roads. This activity by its very nature involves the
operator of a motor vehicle taking his or her hands off of the steering
wheel as well as his or her eyes off of the road. Text messaging while
driving is a clear distraction and leads to accidents, including but not
limited to, fatal accidents. Until such time as the New York State
Legislature passes a similar law, the Town of West Seneca needs to
address this problem with a local law.
B. Definitions: As used in this section, the following items shall be defined
as follows:
HANDS-FREE — The manner in which a wireless handset is operated
for the purpose of composing, reading or sending text messages, by
using an internal feature or function, or through an attachment or
addition, including but not limited to, an earpiece, headset, remote
microphone or short-range wireless connection, thereby allowing the
user to operate said device without the use of the hands.
INOPERABILITY — A motor vehicle that is incapable of being operated
or being operated in a safe and prudent manner due to mechanical
failure, including but not limited to, engine overheating or tire failure.
MOTOR VEHICLE — The same meaning as defined in § 125 of the New
York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, unincorporated
association, firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock association or
other business entity or business organization of any kind.
STOPPED — Not in motion.
TEXT MESSAGE also referred to as SHORT MESSAGING SERVICE
(SMS) — The process by which users send, read or receive messages
on a wireless handset, including but not limited to, text messages,
instant messages, electronic communication or e-mail, in order to
communicate with any person or device.
USE — To hold a wireless handset in one's hand.
WIRELESS HANDSET — A portable electronic or computing device,
including but not limited to, cellular telephones and personal digital
assistants (PDAs) capable of transmitting data in the form of a text
message.
§ 115-72 TRUCK ROUTES § 115-72
114:481
C. Prohibition. No person shall use a wireless handset to compose, read or
send text messages while operating a motor vehicle on any public street
or public highway within the Town of West Seneca.
D. Exceptions. Notwithstanding Subsection C above, this article shall not
be construed to prohibit the use of a wireless handset by:
(1) Any law enforcement, public safety or police officer, emergency
services official, first aid, emergency medical technicians and fire
safety officials in the course of their employment as such;
(2) A person using a wireless handset inside a motor vehicle while such
motor vehicle is stopped, parked or standing and is removed from
the flow of traffic, in accordance with applicable rules or
ordinances, or is stopped due to the inoperability of such motor
vehicle.
(3) Notwithstanding Subsection D, this law shall not be construed to
prohibit a person operating a motor vehicle from using a hands-free
wireless set.
E. Penalties. A violation of Subsection C above shall constitute an offense
and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $150 or by
imprisonment for not more than 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. For conviction of a second violation within a period of 18
months, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300
or by imprisonment of not more than 45 days, or by fine and
imprisonment. Each such violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
F. Enforcement. This article shall be enforceable by the Town of West
Seneca Police Department and may be enforced by other law
enforcement agencies having jurisdiction on the public streets and
highways within the Town of West Seneca.
G. Effect on other laws. This article shall be null and void on the day that
statewide New York legislation goes into effect, incorporating either the
same or substantially similar provisions as contained in this article, or
in the event that a pertinent state or federal administrative agency
promotes regulations preempting such action by the Town of West
Seneca. The New York State Legislature may determine via resolution
whether identical or substantially similar statewide legislation or
preempting regulations have been enacted for purpose of triggering the
provisions of this article.
§ 115-72 WEST SENECA CODE § 115-72
114:482
Chapter 117
VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic Violations Bureau — See Ch. 38.
Trespassing — See Ch. 112.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 115.
§ 117-1. Purpose.
The regulation of recreational vehicle use within the Town of West Seneca is
deemed necessary to preserve the public peace and good order, to prevent
unreasonably loud or disturbing noises which the Town Board of the Town
of West Seneca determines to be detrimental to the peace, welfare and good
order of the people and to promote the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the community, including the protection and preservation of the
property of the town and of its inhabitants.
§ 117-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Snowmobiles, motorcycles,
minibikes, trail bikes, motorbikes, all-terrain vehicles, and other motorized
two- and three-wheeled vehicles and similar vehicles and contrivances
designed for operation primarily on off-highway trails.
§ 117-3. Operation restricted.
No person shall drive, operate, ride upon or suffer, or permit to be driven or
operated or ridden upon, any recreational motor vehicle as defined in this
chapter, within the corporate limits of the Town of West Seneca under any
of the following circumstances:
A. On the private property of another without the express prior written
consent of the owner and the occupant of such property. Such consent
may be revoked at any time by the grantor thereof. Where such express
prior written consent has been obtained, the operator shall keep such
consent on his person and available for immediate display at all times
during the period of such operation. Such express prior written consent
shall not be deemed a consent hereunder as to any person whose name
is not set forth therein. Failure to produce such express prior written
consent upon demand therefor by any police officer shall be
presumptive evidence that such consent has not been given or received.
B. On any public grounds or property within the town.
§ 115-72 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 117-3
117:483
§ 117-4. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to restrict the right of any
person duly licensed under the provisions of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law to operate a recreational motor vehicle, provided that the same
has been duly licensed and registered pursuant to the provisions of such
Vehicle and Traffic Law upon any public highway within the Town of West
Seneca where such vehicle may be operated or parked.
§ 117-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a violation punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) or by imprisonment for not more than fifteen (15) days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 120
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Conservation
Commission — See Ch. 10.
Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Appeals — See Ch. 28.
Building Code administration and
enforcement — See Ch. 55.
Electrical inspections — See Ch. 65.
Excavations and topsoil removal — See Ch.
68.
Public improvement construction — See Ch.
93.
Sewers — See Ch. 97.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 103.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 106.
C. In such manner as to create loud or unnecessary noise or so as to
interfere or disturb unreasonably other persons in the quiet enjoyment
of their property. To this end, no person shall operate a recreational
motor vehicle before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m., prevailing
time or sunset, whichever shall first occur.
D. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner.
E. On private property within one hundred (100) feet of property owned by
another.
§ 117-3 WEST SENECA CODE § 117-5
117:484
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 120-1. Title. [Added 8-17-1987]
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of West
Seneca" and shall constitute Chapter 120 of the Code of the Town of West
Seneca.
§ 120-1.1. Purpose. [Amended 8-17-1987]
As part of the Comprehensive Development Plan for the Town of West
Seneca, this Zoning Ordinance, set forth in the text and maps which
constitute this chapter, is adopted in order to promote public health, safety,
morality and the general welfare. These general goals include, among
others, the following specific purposes: to provide for adequate light, air
and convenience of access; to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
concentration of population; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other dangers; to lessen congestion in the streets and to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and
other public requirements; to encourage the most appropriate use of land
in order to protect and conserve property values throughout the town;
and to bring about the gradual conformity of land and buildings to the
Comprehensive Master Plan.
§ 120-2. Establishment of districts.
The Town of West Seneca is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
A. Residence districts.
(1) R-100A Residence District.
(2) R-90 Residence District.
(3) R-90A Residence District.
(4) R-75 Residence District.
(5) R-75A Residence District.
(6) 76R-65 Residence District.
(7) R-65A Residence District.
(8) R-50 Residence District.
(9) R-60A Residence District.
76.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), R-75B Residence District, was repealed 8-17-1987.
This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(7), (8), (9) and (10) as Subsection
A(6), (7), (8) and (9), respectively.
§ 120-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-2
117:485
§ 120-3. Zoning Map.
§ 120-4. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Zoning district boundaries are intended to follow property lines, center
lines of streets, railroads or streams, or to be parallel or perpendicular
thereto, unless otherwise located by appropriate reference on the Zoning
Map. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the zoning district
boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply;
§ 120-5. Interpretation of permitted uses.
B. Business districts.
(1) C-1 Commercial District.
(2) C-2 Commercial District.
C. Manufacturing districts.
(1) M-1 Manufacturing District.
(2) M-2 Manufacturing District.
A. The location and boundaries of the aforesaid zoning districts are shown
on a map entitled "Zoning Map, Town of West Seneca, New York." Said
map, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby deemed to be as
much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described herein.
B. As evidence of the authenticity of the "Zoning Map, Town of West
Seneca, New York," said map and amendments thereto shall be duly
certified by the Town Clerk and shall be posted and filed according to
law.77
A. Where district boundaries are indicated so as to approximately follow
property lines or center lines of streets, railroads or streams, such
property lines or center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to street center lines, such district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto. If no distance is given, the location
of the district boundary shall be measured from the nearest parallel
street line, using the graphic scale shown on the Zoning Map. However,
if the property abutting on said parallel street line has a lesser depth
than the distance so measured, then the rear lot line of said property
shall be construed to be the district boundary.
C. In the event that none of the above rules are applicable, the location of
such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimension on the map,
shall be determined by the use of the graphic scale on the Zoning Map.
77.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is available for examination in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 120-2 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-5
117:486
§ 120-6. General application of regulations.
Except as hereinafter provided:
§ 120-7. Use of land for public purposes.
A. If a use which is specifically named as a permitted use could also be
construed as being incorporated within a more general listing, the more
specific listing shall control and such use shall not be deemed to be
included in the more general listing.
B. No use shall be permitted in any zoning district unless it is listed
specifically or generally as a permitted use in said zoning district.
C. In the case of a use not listed separately or in a general use listing as a
permitted use in any zoning district, no building permit or certificate of
zoning compliance shall be issued for such use unless and until this
chapter has been amended to include such use as a permitted use in an
appropriate zoning district.
A. No building, other structure or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or other structure or parts thereof shall be
erected, relocated, altered, extended or enlarged, unless in conformity
with the use, height and area regulations specified herein for the
district in which such building, other structure or land is located and in
conformity with all other regulations of this chapter.
B. Lot and yard areas.
(1) No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that the yards or
other open space thereon shall be less than prescribed by this
chapter, nor shall the density of population be increased in any
manner except in conformity with area requirements herein
established. If, at the time of adoption of this chapter or of any
subsequent amendments increasing the area or open space
requirements, the lot area or required open spaces are less than
the minimum required by this chapter, such area or open space
shall not be further reduced.
(2) No yard or other open space provided on one lot for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space required on any other lot.
A. The regulations of this chapter shall not be so construed as to limit or
interfere with the dedication, development or use of any land or
building for public parks, public playgrounds or public schools required
for compulsory education; or with the use of land or buildings owned by
the United States Government, the State of New York, the County of
Erie or the Town of West Seneca and used for governmental purposes;
or with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance for
public utility purposes of water or gas pipes, mains or conduits, electric
light or electric power transmission lines or distribution lines,
§ 120-5 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-7
117:487
§ 120-8. Lots divided by district boundaries.
Where a lot is divided by any zoning district boundary so as to be in more
than one zoning district and where such lot was an existing lot when such
district boundary was established, a conforming use occupying 50% or more
of the area of said lot and having street frontage in the district where
permitted may be extended on such lot not more than 25 feet (measured
perpendicular to the district boundary) into any district where such use is
not permitted. Such use shall be subject to all regulations applicable to the
district where permitted.
§ 120-9. Approved permits and variances.
§ 120-10. Conflict with other regulations.
telephone or telegraph lines, oil pipelines, sewers, sewer mains or
incidental appurtenances, subject, however, to the prior approval of the
Town Board as to location, type of structure and effect upon adjacent
properties and subject also to regulations provided in M-1 and M-2
Districts; or with any highway or railroad right-of-way existing or
hereafter authorized by the State of New York, the County of Erie or the
Town of West Seneca.
B. These exceptions, however, shall not be interpreted to permit yards,
garages or other buildings for service or storage by said public utilities
which are otherwise permitted by this chapter in appropriate districts.
A. Building permits. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the
construction of a building or other structure for which a building permit
has been lawfully issued and which is made nonconforming by this
chapter, or subsequent amendments thereto, provided that either:
(1) Construction of the foundation shall have commenced prior to the
nonconforming date and construction thereafter is diligently
prosecuted, or
(2) The Board of Appeals makes a finding that substantial expenditures
have been made or substantial financial obligations have been
incurred for such nonconforming building or structure prior to the
nonconforming date.
B. Special permits and variances. Special permits or variances granted
prior to the effective date of this chapter and which are not permitted
by this chapter as of right in the district in which located shall be
subject to all the conditions and limitations placed thereon when such
special permit or variance was granted and to the provisions contained
herein pertaining to nonconforming uses (Article V). Any such special
permit or variance shall become null and void unless exercised within
one calendar year from the date so granted.
§ 120-7 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-10
117:488
§ 120-11. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction finds the application of any provision of
this chapter to any building, other structure or tract of land to be invalid in
whole or in part, the effect of such decision shall be limited to the person,
property or situation involved in the controversy, and the application of
any such provision to any other person, property or situation shall not be
affected.
§ 120-12. Filing fees.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be considered to be minimum requirements to promote and
protect public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and
other aspects of the general welfare.
B. Whenever any provision of this chapter is at variance or in conflict with
any other provision of this chapter or any other statute, local ordinance
or regulation covering any of the same subject matter, the most
restrictive provision or the one imposing the higher standard shall
govern.
A. Fees for applications. Before acceptance for filing of an application for a
hearing before the Board of Appeals, for a special permit or for a zoning
amendment, fees shall be charged and collected in accordance with a
schedule adopted from time to time by the Town Board.78
B. Waiver of filing fees. Application fees shall not apply to any town official
making application in an official capacity or to any board or commission
duly appointed by the Town Board.
78.Editor's Note: By motion adopted by the Town Board on 5-10-1999, the fee for the Zoning
Board of Appeals was set at $100, effective 5-13-1999.
§ 120-10 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-12
117:489

ARTICLE II
Use Regulations
§ 120-13. Permitted uses in R-90, R-75 and R-65 Districts.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Church or similar place of worship, parish house, convent, rectory
or parsonage.
(3) Private, nonprofit elementary or secondary school accredited by
the New York State Department of Education.
(4) Cemeteries by special permit authorized by the Town Board.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Private garage or off-street parking area.
(2) Private family swimming pool, subject to the issuance of a building
permit, provided that it is located in the rear of the front setback
line and does not occupy any part of a required side yard.
(3) Building for private horticultural purposes, provided that no solid
fuel is used and that such building shall be located at least 20 feet
from any lot line and shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
(4) Private stable on lots of two acres or more, provided that no
manure or other odor- or dust-producing substance shall be stored
within 100 feet of any lot line.
(5) Between May 15 and September 15, the storage of only one trailer,
camper or boat, owned by the occupant of the premises for his/her
personal use, will be allowed to be stored on the property. It shall
not be in front of the principal building nor in required side yards.
Otherwise, it shall be stored in a completely enclosed building.
[Amended 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
(6) The storage of gasoline or similar flammable liquids in quantities
not to exceed 10 gallons. Such limitation shall not apply to fuel oil
used for heating purposes on the premises.
(7) (Reserved)79
(8) Other customary accessory uses, but not including any use
conducted for gain, or an access drive or walk to a business or
industrial premises.
79.Editor's Note: Former § 120-13B(7), which concerned certain signs permitted in the R-90,
R-75 and R-65 Districts, was deleted 8-20-1979. For current provisions regarding signs,
see Art. IIIA of this chapter.
§ 120-13 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-13
117:491
§ 120-14. Permitted uses in R-90A, R-75A and R-65A Districts.
§ 120-15. (Reserved)81
(9) Emergency generators and air-conditioner condensation units shall
not be allowed in any required setbacks. [Added 11-28-2011 by
L.L. No. 3-2011]
A. Principal uses.
(1) As permitted in § 120-13A.
(2) Fire stations without club facilities.
(3) Two-family dwellings. [Amended 8-17-1987; 12-7-1992]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) As permitted in § 120-13B except as hereinafter modified.
(2) Studio or office of a resident medical or osteopathic physician,
dentist, chiropodist, podiatrist, physiotherapist, chiropractor,
lawyer, engineer, architect, landscape architect, accountant,
insurance agent or real estate agent, provided that:
(a) Such use shall be located within the dwelling and shall be
clearly incidental to the primary residential use.
(b) Not more than one additional person shall be employed on said
premises as an assistant to the professional occupant.
(c) Such use shall not include the confinement of any person under
care or treatment.
(3) Home occupations as regulated in Article IIIC. [Amended
8-17-1987]
(4) The keeping of not more than two nontransient roomers or lodgers.
(5) (Reserved)80
(6) Parking of not more than one commercial vehicle, provided that the
vehicle is used by the occupant of the premises, does not exceed
three-fourths (3/4) ton rated capacity and is stored within a
completely enclosed building.
(7) Other customary accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal
use.
80.Editor's Note: Former § 120-14B(5), which concerned certain signs permitted in the
R-90A, R-75A and R-65A Districts, was deleted 8-20-1979. For current provisions
regarding signs, see Art. IIIA of this chapter.
81.Editor's Note: Former § 120-15, Permitted uses in R-75B District, as amended, was
repealed 8-17-1987.
§ 120-13 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-16
117:492
§ 120-16. Permitted uses in R-50 Districts. [Amended 6-5-1972]
§ 120-17. Permitted uses in R-100A Districts.
A. Principal uses.
(1) As permitted in § 120-14A.
(2) 82Group dwellings and multiple-family dwellings by special permit
authorized by the Town Board.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) As permitted in § 120-14B.
A. Principal uses.
(1) As permitted in § 120-14A.
(2) Agricultural operations conducted for gain, including but not
limited to plant nurseries, greenhouses or truck farms, provided
that:
(a) The lot area is five acres or more.
(b) No odor- , smoke- or dust-producing substance or use shall be
located within 100 feet of any abutting lot line in any R District.
(c) Such operation shall not include the raising or breeding of
poultry, farm animals or fur-bearing animals.
(3) Veterinarian, small animal hospital or kennel by special permit
authorized by the Town Board pursuant to § 120-23 of this chapter,
provided that buildings, pens or runways used for the confinement,
treatment or exercise of animals shall be located at least 50 feet
from any abutting lot line in any R District. [Amended 8-4-1969]
(4) Radio towers and transmitting stations by special permit
authorized by the Town Board. See Article IIIB, Tower Regulations.
[Amended 8-17-1987]
(5) Commercial picnic grove, provided that no amusement devices
shall be permitted other than customary playground apparatus.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) As permitted in § 120-14B except as hereinafter modified.
(2) Seasonal display for sale of locally grown produce. No new building
shall be constructed for such display or sale.
82.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), which permitted two-family dwellings with consent
of the Town Board, was repealed 8-17-1987. This ordinance also renumbered former
Subsection A(3) as Subsection A(2).
§ 120-16 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-17
117:493
§ 120-18. Permitted uses in R-60A Districts.
(3) (Reserved)83
(4) The parking of equipment and commercial vehicles used in
connection with a permitted use, but not in any required front yard.
(5) 84Refreshment stand dispensing food and beverages incidental to
the operation of a commercial picnic grove.
(6) Other customary accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal
use.
A. Principal uses.
(1) As permitted in the R-50 District (§ 120-16A).
(2) Telephone exchange.
(3) Real estate or insurance offices.
(4) Mortuary.
(5) Art, dance, music or photographer studios.
(6) Optician or optometrist.
(7) Fire stations with club facilities.
(8) Meeting rooms for private club, lodge or fraternal organization.
(9) The following uses, provided that when used primarily for
contagious diseases, mental patients, drug or liquor addicts or for
penal or correctional purposes, a special permit authorized by the
Town Board shall be required:
(a) Medical building consisting of offices or clinics for medical
doctors, dentists, chiropractors, chiropodists or podiatrists.
(b) Nursing or convalescent home.
(c) Nonprofit institutions for charitable, religious, cultural or
community social purposes.
(d) Hospital.
(10) College, library or historical building.
(11) Hotel or motel without restaurant facilities.
83.Editor's Note: Former § 120-17B(3), which concerned certain signs permitted in the
R-100A District, was deleted 8-20-1979. For current provisions regarding signs, see Art.
IIIA of this chapter.
84.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), which dealt with storage of gasoline for
agricultural purposes, was repealed 8-17-1987. This ordinance also renumbered former
Subsection B(6) and (7) as Subsection B(5) and (6), respectively.
§ 120-17 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-18
117:494
§ 120-19. Permitted uses in C-1 District.
(12) Other administrative, professional or executive offices, but not
including the handling, repairing, processing, keeping, displaying,
selling, manufacturing, servicing or storing of any goods or
merchandise upon the premises.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) As permitted in § 120-14B without the limitations on accessory
offices within a dwelling.
(2) Restaurant, newsstand, pharmacy or other incidental services in
connection with a hospital, medical building or nonprofit
institution, but only when conducted and entered from within the
building, provided that no exterior display or advertising shall be
permitted.
(3) Restaurant in connection with any club facilities, lodge or fraternal
organization.
(4) Club swimming pool.
(5) (Reserved)85
(6) Other customary accessory uses incidental to a permitted use.
(7) Storage of propane gases for use by the occupant of the premises
as a secondary fuel. Said gases must be stored above ground in
containers which comply with the requirements of the State
Building Code or any applicable Fire Prevention Code. [Added
5-12-1975]
A. Principal uses. [Amended 10-19-1970]
(1) As permitted in the R-60A District (§ 120-18A).
(2) The following uses when conducted entirely within an enclosed
building, but not including any use first permitted in the C-2, M-1
or M-2 Districts:
(a) Retail sales, except that the seasonal displays of outdoor
furniture, nursery stock or gardening supplies shall be
permitted, provided that such displays are not located in any
required yard or off-street parking space. [Amended
6-11-1973; 8-17-1987]
(b) Personal service establishments, for example, barbershop,
beauty shop or shoe repair.
85.Editor's Note: Former § 120-18B(5), which concerned certain signs permitted in the R-60A
District, was deleted 8-20-1979. For current provisions regarding signs, see Art. IIIA of
this chapter.
§ 120-18 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-19
117:495
(c) Laundromat; laundry or dry-cleaning pickup stations.
(d) Dry-cleaning and pressing establishment limited to 2,000
square feet of floor area per establishment, provided that only
solvents with a flash point of not less than 138.2º F. shall be
used and the total aggregate dry load of machines shall not
exceed 60 pounds.
(e) Business or professional offices not otherwise permitted in the
R-60A District.
(f) Radio, television or small household appliance service or
repair.
(g) Amusement enterprises.
(h) Shopping center. [Added 5-9-1994]
(3) Drive-in banks. [Amended 8-17-1987]
(4) Hotel or motel with or without restaurant facilities.
(5) Day-care center and/or day nursery. [Added 2-2-1976]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Shops for the manufacture or processing of articles incidental to
the conduct of a retail business lawfully conducted on the premises,
provided that:
(a) All such articles are sold at retail on the premises.
(b) Not more than four persons are engaged in such
manufacturing or processing at any one time in any one
establishment.
(c) Such activity shall not produce offensive odors, noise,
vibration, heat, glare or dust.
(2) (Reserved)86
(3) Other customary accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal
use, including applicable accessory uses permitted and as
regulated in the R-60A District (§ 120-18B).
(4) Coin-operated vending machines when located not within a
building, by special permit authorized by the Town Board, provided
that such machines are not located in any required yard or offstreet
parking space. [Added 7-12-1971]
86.Editor's Note: Former § 120-19B(2), which concerned certain signs permitted in the C-1
District, was deleted 8-20-1979. For current provisions regarding signs, see Art. IIIA of
this chapter.
§ 120-19 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-19
117:496
§ 120-20. Permitted uses in C-2 Districts.
(5) Outdoor sales of fruits, vegetables and/or other products, provided
that: [Added 6-17-1974]
(a) Such sales shall not take place within a required yard or offstreet
parking space nor within 50 feet of any intersection.
(b) There is an adequate hard-surface parking area.
(c) A bond or deposit of $150 to cover cleanup is provided. Any
bond must be approved by the Town Attorney.
A. Principal uses. [Amended 10-19-1970]
(1) As permitted in the C-1 (§120-19A) District without the
requirement of conduct in an enclosed building, except as
hereinafter provided.
(2) Commercial greenhouse or plant nursery.
(3) Boat or marine sales or service, subject to § 120-26.
(4) Machine, tool or farm or garden equipment sales, rental or service,
provided that servicing is conducted within a completely enclosed
building and there is no use of the lot, except for landscaping or
screening, within 20 feet of any R District boundary.
(5) Monument sales with incidental processing to order, but not
including the shaping of headstones; provided, however, that all
processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building.
(6) Bus terminal facilities.
(7) The following uses, provided that they are conducted within a
completely enclosed building or within an area shielded from
public view: [Amended 8-17-1987]
(a) Building material supply, including incidental millwork.
(b) Warehouse, but not including the storage of explosive or highly
flammable material.
(c) Custom shops, including but not limited to printing, electricity,
heating, plumbing or woodworking.
(d) Laundry or dry-cleaning plant.
(e) Cider mill, creamery or milk-bottling plant.
(f) Contractors' equipment or materials storage.
(g) Grain or feed sales or storage.
§ 120-19 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-20
117:497
(h) Public utility service or storage facilities.
(i) Small animal hospital, veterinarian or kennel, provided that
buildings, pens or runways used for the treatment, keeping or
exercise of animals shall be at least 50 feet from any R District
boundary.
(j) Restaurants serving alcoholic beverages incidental to food
service, if located within a shopping center, and restaurants
not serving alcoholic beverages, including drive-in facilities,
but in either case not on a lot where a side lot abuts any R
District boundary. [Amended 5-9-1994]
(8) The following uses by special permit authorized by the Town Board:
[Amended 6-11-1973]
(a) Drive-in theater.
(b) Golf driving range.
(c) New or used motor vehicle sales, service or rental, public
garage or gasoline service station, subject to § 120-26 and
provided that:
[1] No gasoline or oil pump, no oiling or greasing mechanism
and no other service appliance shall be installed in
connection with any gasoline service station or public
garage within 20 feet of any street line.
[2] Where gasoline is normally sold at retail, two reservoir
spaces for each gasoline pump shall be provided on the lot
for waiting vehicles.
[3] Storage of gasoline or diesel fuel shall be in underground
tanks of a type approved by the National Board of Fire
Underwriters.
[4] All servicing or repairing of vehicles shall be conducted
within a completely enclosed building, except fueling,
adding motor lubricants, water or antifreeze or making
minor emergency repairs.
[5] There shall be no use of the lot, except for landscaping or
screening, within 20 feet of any R District boundary.
(d) Eating or drinking establishments, provided that any
entertainment shall be limited to television, radio or recorded
music, and further provided that no sales of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises shall be permitted
on any lot where a side lot line abuts any R District boundary.87
87.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(8)(e) and (f), which dealt with drive-in eating and
drinking establishments and supermarket facilities, respectively, and which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 8-17-1987.
§ 120-20 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-20
117:498
§ 120-21. Permitted uses in M-1 Districts.
(9) Mobile home parks in accordance with a special development plan
authorized by the Town Board. [Added 8-23-1982]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal use,
including applicable accessory uses permitted and as regulated in
the C-1 District (§ 120-19B).
(2) Coin-operated vending machines when located not within a
building, by special permit authorized by the Town Board, provided
that such machines are not located in any required yard or offstreet
parking space. [Added 7-12-1971]
(3) Outdoor sales of fruits, vegetables and/or other products, provided
that: [Added 6-17-1974]
(a) Such sales shall not take place within a required yard or offstreet
parking space nor within 50 feet of any intersection.
(b) There is an adequate hard-surface parking area.
(c) A bond or deposit of $150 to cover cleanup is provided. Any
bond must be approved by the Town Attorney.
A. Principal uses.
(1) The following uses when conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building:
(a) Any use, except permanent dwellings, permitted in the C-2
District (§ 120-20A).
(b) Laboratory engaged in research, testing or experimental work,
provided that all necessary safeguards are employed to
prevent hazard or annoyance to the community.
(c) The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of
articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials,
but not including any use first permitted in the M-2 District
(§ 120-22A).
(d) Adult uses by special permit authorized by the Town Board
pursuant to § 120-23 of this chapter, provided that no such use
shall be located: [Added 10-20-1980]
[1] Within 1,000 feet of another existing adult use.
[2] Within 500 feet of the boundaries of any R District.
[3] Within 1,000 feet of a school or place of worship.
§ 120-20 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-21
117:499
§ 120-22. Permitted uses in M-2 Districts.
(2) Continuation of dwellings existing on the effective date of this
chapter, provided that such dwellings shall not be converted in any
manner that would increase the number of dwelling units.
(3) Airfield by special permit authorized by the Town Board.
(4) Agricultural uses permitted and regulated in the R-100A District
(§ 120-17A).
(5) Major power transformer or switching facilities.
(6) Petroleum storage tanks, provided that they are located not less
than 100 feet from any R District boundary.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Quarters for caretaker or watchman.
(2) (Reserved)88
(3) Other customary accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal
use, including applicable accessory uses permitted and as
regulated in the C-2 District (§ 120-20B).
C. Limitations on permitted uses in the M-1 District.
(1) No use of land, building or structure shall be permitted the
operation of which normally results in any:
(a) Fire or explosive hazard.
(b) Dissemination of atmospheric pollutant, noise, vibration or
odor beyond the boundaries of the premises on which such use
is located.
(2) Storage of flammable liquids, except propane gases, shall be
entirely underground and in storage tanks approved by the
National Board of Fire Underwriters. Safety containers shall be
used within any building or structure in which flammable liquids
are handled. [Amended 5-12-1975]
A. Principal uses. [Amended 6-6-1966]
(1) As permitted in the M-1 District (§ 120-21A) without the limitations
therein, provided that no permanent dwelling shall be constructed
therein.
(2) Railroad classification yard or repair facilities.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 120-21B(2), which concerned certain signs permitted in the M-1
District, was deleted 8-20-1979. For current provisions regarding signs, see Art. IIIA of
this chapter.
§ 120-21 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-22
117:500
§ 120-23. Uses requiring special permit by Town Board.
All uses listed as subject to special permit authorized by the Town Board
are declared to possess characteristics of such unique and special form
that each such use shall be considered as an individual case. Such uses
shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject
to the requirements of this section in addition to other requirements of this
chapter. Application for special permits shall be obtained from the Town
Clerk.
(3) Public utility storage yards.
(4) Storage yards, including junkyards, as regulated under the Town of
West Seneca Junkyard Ordinance. [Amended 8-17-1987]
(5) Truck terminal, provided that all loading or unloading and parking
of trucks or trailers is provided for on the lot.
(6) The following uses by special permit authorized by the Town Board:
(a) Concrete products manufacture.
(b) Redimix cement plant.
(c) Processing or treatment of bituminous products, but not
including the manufacture thereof.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) As permitted in the M-1 District (§ 120-21B).
C. Limitations on uses in the M-2 District.
(1) No use of land, building or structure shall be permitted, the
operation of which normally results in any:
(a) Fire or explosive hazard beyond the boundaries of the
premises on which such use is located.
(b) Dissemination of atmospheric pollutant, noise, vibration or
odor into any R District, any C District or an M-1 District.
A. Standards applicable to special uses.
(1) The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size
of the site in relation to it and the location of the site in respect to
streets giving access thereto shall be such that such use will be in
harmony with the orderly development of the district in which it is
located.
(2) Screening or other protective measures shall be adequate to
protect any adjacent properties in any R District from objectionable
aspects of any such special use.
§ 120-22 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-23
117:501
§ 120-24. Temporary structures or uses.
The following temporary structures shall be deemed to be permitted uses in
all zoning districts:
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be of adequate size for the particular
use, and access drives shall be laid out so as to achieve maximum
safety.
(4) The Town Board may prescribe any conditions that it deems to be
necessary or desirable and shall require a site plan of the proposed
development showing pertinent information to aid it in making a
determination on the application. [Amended 8-17-1987]
B. Public hearing.
(1) Before authorizing a special permit, the Town Board shall give
public notice and hold a public hearing on the application for such
special permit in the same manner as required by law for
amendments to a zoning ordinance. In case of a protest against
such special permit by the owners of 20% or more of the area of the
land immediately adjacent to the land involved and extending 100
feet therefrom or of the land directly opposite thereto and land
extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land,
such special permit shall not be authorized except by the favorable
vote of at least four members of the Town Board.
(2) Prior to such public hearing, the application shall be referred to the
Town Planning Board for report and recommendation. In the event
that the Planning Board shall fail to submit a report within 45 days
after said referral, the Town Board shall hold such public hearing at
the earliest possible date.
C. Limitations. A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the
particular use or uses specified in the permit and shall apply only to the
area specified in the permit. A special permit shall expire if the special
use or uses shall cease for more than one year for any reason.
D. Exceptions. The requirement for a special permit shall not apply to any
use lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or, in the case
of a special permit for a cemetery, to land owned by a cemetery
corporation or religious organization and which, on the effective date of
this chapter, was dedicated for cemetery purposes.
A. Temporary portable storage containers shall require a building permit
if they are to remain on the property for over a thirty-day period of time.
The placement is not permitted in any required setback. [Added
11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
B. The temporary use of a dwelling as a model home shall be permitted for
a period of time not to exceed one year.
§ 120-23 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-24
117:502
§ 120-25. Lot and street frontage requirements.
§ 120-26. Limitations on automotive use areas.
Any portion of a lot used for open off-street parking or reservoir space or
for open sales, service or storage areas for motor vehicles, contractors'
equipment or boats shall be deemed to be an automotive use area. New
automotive use areas or enlargements of existing automotive use areas shall
be subject to the following requirements:
C. Any temporary structure or use permitted by the Board of Appeals as
authorized in Article VII.
A. Every building used as a dwelling shall be located on a lot, and, except
for permitted accessory dwellings or dwelling groups, there shall be not
more than one such building on a lot.
B. No dwelling shall be erected on any lot which does not have immediate
frontage on a street as defined in this chapter.
A. Surfacing. Every automotive use area and access driveway thereto shall
be surfaced with a durable and dustless material and shall be so graded
and drained as to dispose of surface water accumulation.
B. Lighting. Any fixture used to illuminate any automotive use area shall
be so arranged as to direct the light away from the street and away
from adjoining premises in any R District.
C. Screening. Every automotive use area, except off-street parking areas
for less than five vehicles, shall be screened from any adjoining lot in
any R District, including lots situated across the street, as follows:
(1) Along a street line, by a planting strip five feet wide; provided,
however, that no shrub planting or tree foliage shall be placed or
maintained which obstructs vision at an elevation between three
feet and seven feet above the street level. Such screening may be
interrupted by normal entrances and exits.
(2) Along a rear lot line or an interior side lot line which abuts on
existing or future rear yard or side yard on such adjoining lots, by a
compact evergreen hedge which will reach a height of five feet
within three years or by a solid fence or an unpierced masonry wall
five feet in height.
(3) Such screening shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
D. Access.
(1) No entrance or exit to any automotive use area shall be permitted
within 30 feet of any intersecting street lines, and except for offstreet
parking areas for uses permitted in any R District requiring
less than 10 parking spaces, no entrance or exit shall be permitted
within 10 feet of a lot in any R District.
§ 120-24 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-26
117:503
§ 120-27. Required screening.
§ 120-28. Excavating and removal of topsoil.
The removal of topsoil or the excavation of clay, gravel, rock, sand, shale or
other earth or mineral deposits shall be permitted in any district, subject
to separate regulating ordinances of the Town of West Seneca;89 provided,
however, that where any such material is to be sold or removed from the
premises, such use shall be permitted only by special permit authorized by
the Town Board.
(2) Access to automotive areas, except for off-street parking areas in R
Districts for less than 10 vehicles, shall be approved by the Town
Engineer and shall be so arranged that vehicles shall not back into
a street.
E. Restriction on use. No automotive use area shall be used for auto
wrecking or for the storage of wrecked, partially dismantled or junked
vehicles or equipment or of motor vehicles which do not qualify for New
York State motor vehicle registration.
A. Where a loading or unloading platform or any service entrance in any C
or M District faces any lot line which coincides with any R District
boundary, such platform or service entrance shall be affectively
screened from such R District in a manner approved by the Town Board.
B. In any C or M District where a side or rear lot line abuts a lot in any R
District, such lot line shall be fenced or screened in a manner approved
by the Town Board.
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 68, Excavations and Topsoil Removal.
§ 120-26 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28
117:504
ARTICLE IIA
Industrial Park Overlay Review District
[Added 8-10-1992]
§ 120-28.1. Establishment of district.
There is hereby established an Industrial Park Overlay Review District
or the "Park" which shall be a special zoning district within the Town of
West Seneca or the "town." The Industrial Park Overlay Review District
shall be overlaid upon existing zoning districts in areas of commercial,
manufacturing and industrial use as shown on maps in the offices of the
Town Clerk and the Department of Engineering, and the boundaries of such
district are described as follows:
A. Parcel A. All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of West
Seneca, County of Erie, State of New York, and being part of Lots 201,
206, 209, 214, 217, 226, 229, 241, 244, 255, 258, 267, 270, 285, 284,
283, 286 and 271, Township 10, Range 7, of the Holland Land
Company's survey, bounded and described as follows: Beginning at a
point in the east line of Ransier Road, said point of beginning being
200.00 feet southerly of the northwest corner of lands conveyed by
Liber 9633 of Deeds at Page 150; thence S 89º 11' 21" E, a distance of
270.01 feet to a point; thence N 00º 48' 55" E, a distance of 200.00 feet
to a point; thence S 89º 11' 21" E, a distance of 521.39 feet to a point;
thence N 00º 49' 39" E, a distance of 568.14 feet to a point; thence S
88º 57' 14" E, a distance of 151.54 feet to a point in the west line of Lot
209; thence S 00º 49' 39" W, along the west line of Lot 209, a distance of
100.00 feet to a point; thence S 88º 57' 14" E, a distance of 330.00 feet
to a point; thence N 00º 49' 39" E, a distance of 100.01 feet to a point;
thence S 88º 57' 14" E, a distance of 337.14 feet to a point on the west
line of Lot 214; thence S 88º 54' 43" E, a distance of 666.17 feet to a
point in the west line of Lot 217; thence S 88º 56' 36" E, a distance of
660.66 feet to a point in the west line of Lot 226; thence S 00º 35' 18" W,
along the west line of Lot 226, a distance of 33.01 feet to a point; thence
S 88º 42' 42" E, a distance of 661.51 feet to a point in the west line of
Lot 229; thence N 00º 38' 11" E, along the west line of Lot 229, a
distance of 33.02 feet to a point; thence S 89º 04' 23" E, a distance of
599.12 feet to a point; thence S 00º 38' 11" W, a distance of 33.00 feet to
a point; thence S 89º 04' 23" E, a distance of 65.00 feet to a point in the
west line of Lot 241; thence N 00º 38' 11" E, along the west line of Lot
241, a distance of 33.01 feet to a point; thence S 89º 27' 34" E, a
distance of 441.00 feet to a point; thence S 00º 38' 11" W, a distance of
232.08 feet to a point; thence S 88º 42' 17" E, a distance of 662.91 feet
to a point; thence S 00º 51' 25" W, a distance of 1,572.53 feet to a point
in the north line of Lot 245; thence S 89º 25' 25" E, along the north line
of Lot 245, a distance of 225.00 feet to a point in the northeast corner of
Lot 245; thence N 00º 51' 25" E, along the west line of Lot 255, a
distance of 1,627.14 feet to a point; thence S 89º 20' 07" E, a distance of
392.21 feet to a point; thence S 00º 54' 37" W, a distance of 91.99 feet to
a point; thence S 89º 20' 07" E, a distance of 392.70 feet to a point;
§ 120-28.1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.1
117:505
thence N 00º 54' 37" E, a distance of 254.12 feet to a point; thence S
89º 23' 21" E, a distance of 142.49 feet to a point; thence N 00º 14' 08"
E, a distance of 33.00 feet to a point; thence S 89º 23' 21" E, a distance
of 495.01 feet to a point; thence S 00º 14' 08" W, a distance of 100.00
feet to a point; thence S 89º 23' 21" E, a distance of 415.10 feet to a
point in the west line of Lot 270; thence S 00º 14' 08" W, along the west
line of Lot 270, a distance of 100.00 feet to a point; thence S 89º 30'
50" E, a distance of 458.45 feet to a point; thence N 00º 31' 59" E, a
distance of 200.00 feet to a point; thence S 89 30' 50" E, a distance of
144.38 feet to a point; thence S 00º 31' 59" W, a distance of 33.00 feet
to a point; thence S 89º 30' 50" E, a distance of 518.06 feet to a point;
thence S 00º 31' 59" W, a distance of 289.50 feet to a point; thence S
89º 30' 50" E, a distance of 206.28 feet to a point in the west line of Lot
286; thence S 00º 31' 59" W, along the west line of Lot 286, a distance
of 1,489.96 feet to a point in the northeast corner of Lot 284; thence
S 89º 35' 57" E, along the north line of Lot 283, a distance of 71.30
feet to a point; thence S 00º 12' 14" W, a distance of 1,583.34 feet to a
point; thence S 89º 35' 57" E, a distance of 441.00 feet to the center line
of Lein Road (66 feet wide); thence S 00º 12' 14" W, along the center
line of Lein Road, a distance of 195.42 feet to a point in the north line
of Conrail lands; thence N 82º 15' 05" W, along the north line of said
Conrail lands, a distance of 1,847.94 feet to a point on the west line
of Lot 271; thence north, along the west line of Lot 271, a distance of
1,542.42 feet to a point in the northeast corner of Lot 266; thence west,
along the north line of lands conveyed to New York State Electric and
Gas Corporation (NYSEG) recorded in the Erie County Clerk's Office
in Liber 6274 of Deeds at Page 23, also being the south line of Lots
267, 258, 255, 244, 241, 229, 226, 217, 214, 209 and 206, a distance
of 7172.14 feet to a point in the southwest corner of Lot 206; thence N
01º 28' 47" E, along the west line of Lot 206, a distance of 396.03 feet
to a point; thence N 89º 11' 21" W, a distance of 313.52 feet to a point in
the center line of Ransier Road; thence N 00º 48' 55", along the center
line of Ransier Road, a distance of 372.54 feet to the point or place of
beginning.
B. Parcel B. All that tract or parcel of land situate in the Town of West
Seneca, County of Erie, State of New York and being part of Lots 205,
210, 213, 218, 225, 230, 240, 245, 254, 259 and 266, Township 10,
Range 7, of the Holland Land Company's survey, bounded and
described as follows: Beginning at the northwest corner of lands
conveyed to New York State Electric and Gas Corporation (NYSEG)
recorded in the Erie County Clerk's Office in Liber 6274 of Deeds at
Page 23, being further described as a point in the north line of Lot 205;
thence east, along the north line of said NYSEG lands and the north line
of the following Lots: 205, 210, 213, 218, 225, 230, 240, 245, 254, 259
and 266 to a point in the northeast corner of Lot 266; thence south,
along the east line of Lot 266, a distance of 1,542.42 feet to a point in
the north line of the Conrail lands; thence N 82º 15' 05" W, along the
northerly lands of Conrail, a distance of 3,052.93 feet to an angle point
therein; continuing thence N 75º 49' 32" W, along said Conrail lands, a
§ 120-28.1 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.1
117:506
§ 120-28.2. Objectives and purpose.
distance of 1,155.95 feet to an angle point therein; continuing thence
N 82º 02' 14" W, along said Conrail lands, a distance of 470.00 feet to
a point; continuing thence S 07º 57' 46" W, along said Conrail lands, a
distance of 190.00 feet to a point; continuing thence N 82º 14' 03" W,
along said Conrail lands, a distance of 539.87 feet to a point; thence N
00º 35' 18" E, a distance of 804.86 feet to a point; thence N 89º 05' 02"
W, along the south line of said NYSEG lands, a distance of 665.50 feet
to a point in the east line of Lot 210; thence N 88º 27' 22" W, continuing
along the south line of said NYSEG lands, a distance of 674.89 feet to
a point in the east line of Lot 205; thence N 89º 11' 21" W, continuing
along the south line of said NYSEG lands, a distance of 377.80 feet to
the southwest corner thereof; thence N 00º 48' 55" E, along the west
line of said NYSEG lands, a distance of 150.00 feet to the point or place
of beginning; excepting, however, all lands 300.00 feet south measured
from the center line of Seneca Creek Road between the east line of
Ransier Road (extended north to the center line of Seneca Creek Road)
and the west line of Lein Road.
A. The objectives and purposes of establishing the Industrial Park Overlay
Review District are to:
(1) Develop a high quality industrial park complex and provide a
balance between the requirements of new industries and the
community's desire for an attractive environment.
(2) Attract growth-oriented, light manufacturing service and
distribution firms into the town and to encourage new industry and
investment in the town resulting from trade between the United
States, Canada and other nations.
(3) Attract new industry to the town, expand the tax base of the town,
improve the town's ability to retain existing industries in the town
and promote employment opportunities.
(4) Redevelop and replan unsanitary and substandard vacant areas in
the town and provide a land area for balanced light industrial use to
promote and encourage the sound economic growth of the town,
the County of Erie and the Western New York region.
(5) Remedy inadequate access and unsuitable topographic and other
physical conditions impeding the economic development of the
park property.
(6) Increase the amount of land in the town, County of Erie and
Western New York region available for industrial development by
converting lots of such form, shape or size, which are incapable of
effective development, into developable industrial sites.
(7) Construct improved road, water, sanitary sewer, surface drainage
and necessary utility systems and infrastructure improvements to
§ 120-28.1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.2
117:507
promote commercial, manufacturing and industrial development of
the Park.
(8) Promote efficient use of land resulting in lesser burden on utilities,
streets, water resources and sewer facilities and prevent soil
erosion and promote preservation of usable open space.
(9) Promote the creative use of land and related physical development
which allows for an orderly transition of land from vacant to
commercial-industrial uses.
(10) Minimize and mitigate adverse environmental impacts that may be
caused by development of the Park and establish a more desirable
environment than would be possible through strict application of
other sections of this chapter.
B. The Town Board finds that to achieve the objectives set forth above, it is
necessary and appropriate to establish a general overall plan for the
improvement and development of commercial, manufacturing and
industrial uses, whereby the town imposes standards for the benefit of
all of the landowners, operators and tenants in the Park and for the
benefit of the Town of West Seneca and the community in general. It is
the intent of this Article to provide flexible land use and design
regulations through the use of performance standards and criteria so
that small- to large-scale commercial, manufacturing and industrial
uses may be developed within the Park property in a manner which
incorporates a variety of commercial, manufacturing and industrial
uses and achieves the objectives and purposes of this Article to the
maximum extent practicable.
C. Among the purposes of this Article are the encouragement of innovation
in land development so that the growing need of economic development
in the town, County of Erie and Western New York region may be met by
a greater variety in type, design and siting of structures, the
conservation and more efficient use of land in such developments and
the encouragement and maintenance of environmental quality
throughout the Park development. Therefore, in lieu of existing zoning
and subdivision controls otherwise applicable to park property, this
Article establishes new procedures and substantive requirements
under which a developer may prepare and implement development
plans particularly designed to meet the objectives of this Article.
D. The Town Board further finds that the objectives, purposes, procedures
and substantive standards and criteria of this Article are in accordance
with the Comprehensive Development Plan for the Town of West Seneca
and in accordance with the purposes of this chapter set forth in
§ 120-1.1.
E. To encourage coordinated and planned development of Park property
and to achieve the objectives of this Article, the Town Board hereby
declares that the Park property is now held, and that all land and
buildings therein shall only be developed, used, transferred, sold,
§ 120-28.2 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.2
117:508
§ 120-28.3. Restricted use permit required.
Any person seeking to establish or extend a use in the Park or who is
a transferee of an existing permit holder restricted by § 120-28.4 of this
Article shall file an application and obtain a restricted use permit as
provided by the procedures in §§ 120-28.5 and 120-28.6 of this Article.
§ 120-28.4. Applicability of other regulations; development plan;
use restrictions.
leased, conveyed and occupied, subject to the restrictions and
provisions herein set forth. Each owner, operator or tenant of any
parcel or building in the Park shall use the Park only in accordance
with the provisions and restrictions herein set forth and shall refrain
from using the Park in any way inconsistent with or prohibited by
the provisions of this Article and other applicable provisions of the
ordinances of the Town of West Seneca and the laws and regulations of
the County of Erie, State of New York and United States of America.
A. General. Except as otherwise provided herein, any of the uses which
presently are permitted under zoning district regulations of this
chapter of the Code of the Town of West Seneca or which may be
established or extended pursuant to such chapter shall be permitted
uses in the Industrial Park Overlay Review District, but only upon the
issuance of a restricted use permit as provided by this Article. This
Article's requirement of a restricted use permit shall be in lieu of any
existing zoning ordinance requirements for issuance of a special use
permit, and all requirements for a special use permit for uses in the
Park property shall be deemed inapplicable.
B. Other authorities. Except as otherwise provided herein, all other town
ordinances or other local laws, rules or regulations shall be applicable
to development and use of the Park; provided, however, that the Town
Board may waive or modify the application of any other ordinance, local
law, rule or regulation it deems is inconsistent or more stringent than
the procedures and substantive requirements of this Article.
C. Development and subdivision reviews. Site plan review and approval
under the provisions of this Article shall suffice for all Town Board and
other town review of subdivision regulations and shall suffice to satisfy
all preconditions of filing a subdivision plat in the form referred to
below, subject to the following:
(1) The Town Board shall review and approve of all subdivision of Park
property in lieu of the Town Planning Board. Information on a
preliminary and final plat shall be provided in accordance with
informational requirements set forth in Chapter 103, Subdivision of
Land, of the Code of the Town of West Seneca, and shall be
prepared in sets of subdivision plats, as specified in said Chapter
103, suitable for filing with the offices of the Town and County
Clerks. Appropriate town officials, as designated by the Town
§ 120-28.2 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.4
117:509
Board, shall provide such endorsements thereon or other evidences
of such approval as may be necessary to effect such filing. The
Town Board shall review such plats according to the substantive
standards prescribed in said Chapter 103 and according to
procedures it may otherwise prescribe.
(2) Except as otherwise provided herein, Chapter 103, Subdivision of
Land, of the Town Code shall not apply to division and development
of property within the Park, and notwithstanding such Chapter 103,
a subdivision of property within the park shall mean a division of
any parcel of land into five or more lots, plots, blocks or sites with
or without streets or highways. Such subdivision shall include
resubdivision of parcels of land for which an approved plat has
already been filed in the office of the County Clerk and which is
entirely or partially undeveloped.
(3) If a person wishes to phase development he may submit only those
phases he wishes to develop for site plan approval in accordance
with his phasing plan. If development within the Park is to be
implemented in phases, each phase shown on a site must have
adequate provision for access, parking, open space, drainage and
stormwater management, water availability and sewage disposal
and other improvements in accordance with the applicable site
plan approval criteria set forth in this Article. Each phase shall
contain facilities to appropriately serve the functions described in
the preceding sentence in the event that other phases of the Park
development are not constructed.
(4) No building permits shall be issued for construction within the park
until public road access, drainage and all utility improvements are
installed or a performance bond is posted in accordance with
procedures established by the Town Board or a firm contract or
commitment to provide such improvements is delivered to the
town, upon terms and conditions acceptable to the Town Board, by
the person willing to undertake such commitment or contract.
D. Permitted and beneficial Park uses.
(1) Among the purposes of the Park are the development of high
technology, research, development, manufacturing, offices and
related support services, distribution and warehousing facilities.
Land uses within the Park will be designed and located in such a
manner that they will neither encroach upon surrounding uses nor
will surrounding uses interfere with efficient development of these
facilities. Property uses will be subject to performance standards
established in this Article.
(2) Subject to issuance of a restricted use permit and compliance with
this Article, the following land uses are deemed permitted and best
promote the purposes and objectives of the Park:
§ 120-28.4 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.4
117:510
(a) Research-development facilities, including but not limited to
experimental, research and testing facilities, including but not
limited to the construction and operation of small-scale
experimental and pilot plant operations and production
operations, if ancillary to or resulting from a permitted
experimental research or testing operation.
(b) Compounding, manufacturing, fabricating and assembly
facilities, including but not limited to:
[1] Electrical and electronic equipment and appliances,
electronic instruments and devices.
[2] Household items, furniture and furnishings, office
equipment.
[3] Musical, scientific, medical, dental and photographic
instruments, equipment and supplies.
[4] Recreational equipment and toys.
[5] Clothing and other textile products.
[6] Pharmaceutical products, cosmetics and toiletries.
[7] Panels, sheets, tubes and rods.
[8] Automobile and boating products and accessories from
previously prepared materials.
[9] Printing, publishing and engraving.
[10] Manufacturing, compounding, assembly or treatment of
articles or merchandise from the following previously
prepared or recycled materials: bone, cellophane, canvas,
cloth, cork, feathers, steel, ferrous materials, felt, fiber,
fur, glass, hair, leather, paper, plastics, precious or
semiprecious metals or stones, light sheet metals, shell,
textile, tobacco, wire, yarns, wood not involving planing
mills, and paint not employing a boiling process, steel,
copper, aluminum and other metal alloys.
[11] Manufacturing of pottery and figurines or other similar
ceramic products.
(c) Warehousing and wholesale distribution and transportation.
(d) Retail or wholesale sale of products manufactured
compounded, assembled or stored in the Park.
(e) Manufacturing, processing, treatment, packaging,
warehousing, storage and distribution of food, frozen food and
beverages.
§ 120-28.4 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.4
117:511
(f) Offices for commercial and professional use, including but not
limited to: optician, optometrist, medical or osteopathic
physician, dentist, chiropedist, podiatrist, physiotherapist,
chiropractor, lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant,
insurance agent or real estate agent.
E. Prohibited uses. The Town Board has determined that the following
uses do not promote the objectives of this Article and hence are
prohibited from being established or extended within the park
property:
(1) Single-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, mobile
home parks and any private garages accessory thereto.
(2) Church or similar place of worship, parish house, convent, rectory
or parsonage.
(3) Private, nonprofit elementary or secondary school accredited by
the New York State Department of Education.
(4) Private stables and barns.
(5) Storage of house trailers, utility trailers and boats owned by the
occupant of the premises for his or her personal use.
(6) Home occupation as regulated by Article IIIC of this chapter.
(7) Agricultural and horticultural operations conducted for personal
use or commercial gain, including but not limited to plant
nurseries, greenhouses and truck farms; provided, however, that
such operations are permissible in connection with or incidental to
any research, experimental or development activity otherwise
permitted herein.
(8) Husbandry operations, including the raising and breeding of
poultry, farm animals or fur-bearing animals; provided, however,
that such operations are permissible in connection with or
incidental to any research, experimental or development activity
otherwise permitted herein.
(9) Veterinarian, small animal hospital or animal kennels.
(10) Commercial picnic grove or any refreshment stand dispensing food
and beverages incidental to the operation of a commercial picnic
grove.
(11) Art, dance, music or photographer's studio.
(12) Meeting rooms for private clubs, lodges or fraternal organizations.
(13) Nursing or convalescent home.
(14) Nonprofit institutions for charitable, religious, cultural or
community social purposes.
§ 120-28.4 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.4
117:512
§ 120-28.5. Application procedures for restricted use permits.
(15) Hospital.
(16) College, library or historical building.
(17) Hotel, motel or other transient habitation facilities.
(18) Restaurant, cafeteria or newsstand services, except when
conducted as an incident and accessory to a commercial,
manufacturing or industrial use otherwise permitted by this Article
and entered from within the building.
(19) Personal service establishments; for example, barbershop, beauty
shop, laundry, dry cleaners or shoe repair, except as an accessory
use made available to the occupants and persons employed on Park
property.
(20) Day-care center and or day nursery, except as an accessory use
made available to the occupants and persons employed on Park
property.
(21) Bus terminal facilities.
(22) Cider mill, creamery or milk-bottling plant.
(23) Drive-in or other theater.
(24) Golf driving ranges, baseball batting ranges, volleyball courts, ice
hockey and other public recreational centers.
(25) Adult uses, as defined pursuant to § 120-64 of this chapter.
(26) Junkyards, including autowrecking and dismantling.
(27) Animal slaughterhouses, stockyards, abattoir or facilities for the
rendering of grease, tallow or fats.
F. Uses not specifically enumerated above nor specifically prohibited may
be permitted with the approval of the Town Board, so long as the uses in
question are compatible with adjacent uses and are consistent with the
purposes and objectives of this Article.
A. Application. Any person seeking to establish or extend a use deemed
restricted hereby or to construct, modify or remodel any building or
improvement which will be devoted to such a use shall file an
application for a restricted use permit on forms to be supplied by the
Town Building Inspector. Such forms shall be completed by the
applicant. The application shall include information to the extent
applicable to such use or project, set forth in the checklist in Appendix
A attached hereto and made a part hereof.90 In addition, the applicant
shall certify compliance with all other applicable ordinances, laws and
90.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 120-28.4 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.5
117:513
regulations. The applicant shall file such application with the Town
Building Inspector, together with filing fees in accordance with a
schedule adopted from time to time by the Town Board. Upon filing,
all applications and exhibits thereto shall be made available for public
inspection.
B. Reviews and recommendation to the Town Board.
(1) Within three days of receipt of a complete application, the Town
Building Inspector shall forward a copy of such application to the
Town Clerk and the Town Board. Promptly after such filing, the
Town Building Inspector shall review such application with a Park
Review Committee whose members shall include the Town Building
Inspector, the Town Engineer, the Town Fire Inspector, the
Chairman of the Town Planning Board and a person appointed by
the Town Board. The Town Building Inspector shall serve as
Chairman of the Park Review Committee. As deemed desirable or
necessary by such Committee, the application may also be
reviewed by other local, county, state or federal officials whose
jurisdictions affect the applicant's proposal. Notwithstanding the
provisions of Chapter 67, Environmental Quality Review, of the
Town Code, the Park Review Committee, in lieu of the Technical
Advisory Committee designated therein, shall initiate review of
such application in accordance with the requirements of said
Chapter 67 and of the State Environmental Quality Review Act91
and all applicable regulations thereto and make an advisory report
to the Town Board of its review. The Town Board shall make its own
review and determinations pursuant to the State Environmental
Quality Review Act and all applicable regulations thereto.
(2) Based upon the Park Review Committee's coordinated review, the
Town Building Inspector shall deliver an advisory report with
written recommendations to the Town Board to approve or deny
such application, and any conditions or restrictions that are
recommended to be attached to the restricted use permit, if it is
issued. The Town Building Inspector's report shall expressly state
the extent to which such application complies with the review
standards set forth in § 120-28.8 and shall certify that all reviews
required herein have been completed. The review and
recommendations specified herein shall be completed no later than
30 days after the filing of the application, except where
circumstances require further time. The Town Building Inspector
shall submit a written statement to the Town Board which explains
the necessity for such further time, if any.
C. Public hearing. Before authorizing a restricted use permit, the Town
Board shall hold a public hearing on the application for a restricted use
permit for all lots or properties adjacent to residence districts as set
forth in § 120-2A. In all other cases, the Town Board may conduct a
91.Editor's Note: See Environmental Conservation Law § 8-0101 et seq.
§ 120-28.5 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.5
117:514
public hearing on the application for a restricted use permit if it is
determined desirable by a majority vote of its members. Prior to any
public hearing, the Town Clerk shall publish a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation in the town setting forth the name of the applicant,
the location and owner of the property, the proposed use and the time
and place of a public hearing to be held by the Town Board no sooner
than five business days after the day of publication.
D. Town Board procedures.
(1) Notwithstanding any ordinance or local law to the contrary, in
taking any actions or conducting any proceedings relating to the
responsibilities of the Town Board under this Article, the Town
Board shall act as the local public body responsible for
administering the substantive criteria, standards and regulations of
this Article.
(2) The Town Board shall keep accurate minutes of all such actions or
proceedings and shall furnish to the applicant, within 20 days
following any such action or proceeding, a complete copy of the
minutes, including exhibits and submissions made a part of the
record, describing the action or proceeding. The official record of
such actions or proceedings shall include any material or
documents submitted by the applicant to the Town Board in
connection with the application for approval.
(3) If the Town Board determines that an application does not comply
with the objectives, substantive criteria, standards or regulations
of this Article, then the record of such determination, to be
delivered to the applicant as aforesaid, shall include a separate
statement setting forth the exact nature of such noncompliance and
all factors included in the basis for the Town Board's determination.
(4) After the submission of an application to the Town Board, as
provided in this section, and so long as any Town Board procedures
contemplated by this section shall be in progress, the applicant
shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity, on one or more
occasions as circumstances require, to appear before the Town
Board, on reasonable notice, to present its position concerning
compliance of the proposed project with the objectives, substantive
criteria, standards and regulations of this Article.
(5) The Town Board shall consider the recommendations of the Town
Building Inspector and the Park Review Committee and may
independently consult with any other persons. In unique or largescale
projects, the Town Board may retain expert consultants to
assist in the application review. The applicant for a restricted use
permit shall pay or reimburse the Town of West Seneca for the fees,
costs and expenses of such expert consultants, if any.
E. Decision by the Town Board.
§ 120-28.5 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.5
117:515
§ 120-28.6. Administration and transfer of permits.
(1) Not later than 30 days after receipt of the Town Building
Inspector's report and recommendations on an application, the
Town Board shall act to approve or deny the issuance of the
restricted use permit; provided however, that, upon a majority vote,
the Town Board may defer such decision pending receipt of reports
or other information it deems necessary to fully determine the
acceptability of the proposed use or project.
(2) The Town Board may attach to the restricted use permit such
conditions and restrictions, in addition to the bulk, density or area
regulations and other standards of the district, as are necessary to
minimize or mitigate adverse environmental impacts and attain the
objectives and purposes of this Article.
(3) Once approved by such Town Board action, the restricted use
permit shall be issued by the Town Building Inspector who shall
maintain a file of all application documents and permit documents.
A. Compliance.
(1) The Town Building Inspector shall keep records of all restricted use
permits issued and review all permits, except those for which all
conditions have been permanently satisfied and so noted, at least
once annually.
(2) The Town Building Inspector shall cause an inspection to occur
upon the land or structure where the restricted use is located in
order to ascertain that the property owner, operator or tenant is in
compliance with all of the conditions or restrictions listed thereon
and with the ordinances applicable to said permit and property
affected.
(3) The Town Building Inspector shall issue to a permit holder who is
not in compliance with such permit or this chapter a written order
to comply and remedy said violations within 30 days, or less time if
deemed necessary by the Town Building Inspector, and such
violator shall be subject to imposition of penalties set forth in
§ 120-53 of this chapter.
B. Enforcement. Upon submission to the Town Board of a written report of
the Town Building Inspector that the permit holder is in violation of the
conditions established and has failed to remedy the violations or comply
with the provisions herein, the Town Building Inspector shall have the
authority to suspend or revoke the previously issued restricted use
permit upon findings that the holder has failed to remedy or comply
with applicable conditions and/or ordinances. In the event of
suspension of such permit, the Town Board may establish conditions for
compliance which, when fulfilled to the Town Board's satisfaction and
upon a written recommendation that the Town Board may require from
§ 120-28.5 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.6
117:516
§ 120-28.7. Performance standards.
Without limiting the effect of any federal, state or local law, ordinance or
regulation which may be applicable to buildings and structures in the Park
and their use, this section imposes on Park uses additional performance
the Town Building Inspector, may allow for a reinstatement of such
permit. No reinstatement, however, may occur without payment of all
outstanding penalties.
C. Abandonment of use. All restricted use permits issued under this Article
shall expire and terminate upon the cessation or abandonment of the
use permitted, after a one-year period.
D. Transfer of permits.
(1) All restricted use permits hereinafter issued shall run with the
land; provided, however, that the transferee or assignee of such
permit shall provide written notice to the Town Building Inspector
of any conveyance, assignment or other transfer of title, ownership,
leasehold or other beneficial interests in the property or use so
affected. Such notice shall be provided not later than 20 business
days before the effective date of such conveyance, assignment or
other transfer. Such notice shall provide at a minimum the identity
of the transferee, mailing address (including street address and
principal place of business, if a corporation or partnership),
property manager or natural person to contact for information and
notices, telephone number and a certification by the holder of such
permit and the transferee thereof that no material change in use
has occurred or is intended to occur from the use specified in the
original application for a restricted use permit and current records
of the Town Building Inspector. Upon satisfaction that no material
changes have occurred or are contemplated, the Town Building
Inspector shall issue a new permit to such transferee and file a
copy thereof with the Town Board.
(2) In the event that the notice provided for herein specifies that a
material change will or has occurred, the transferee shall file an
application as prescribed in § 120-28.5; provided, however, that the
applicant shall indicate thereon the changes that have occurred or
are contemplated to occur from the use or improvements and other
information set forth in the original or previous applications and
current records of the Town Building Inspector. The Town Building
Inspector and Town Board shall review such application as
prescribed in § 120-28.5 and in accordance with the other
requirements of this Article.
(3) Nothing herein shall abridge or impair the right of the Town Board
or Town Building Inspector to suspend or revoke a restricted use
permit in the event of violation of restrictions, conditions or for
noncompliance therewith.
§ 120-28.6 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.7
117:517
standards set forth below. Uses in the Park shall comply with such
performance standards as a precondition of occupancy and use.
A. Prohibition. Except as the Town Board may expressly allow, condition or
restrict, no building, structure or lot in the Park shall at any time, be
used, erected or converted:
(1) For the manufacture, storage, distribution or sale of any products
or items which shall increase the fire hazard to adjoining buildings,
lots or lands adjacent to the Park; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be deemed to prohibit the use of liquids or gases,
including but not limited to nitrogen, propane or oxygen, when
used in connection with lawful manufacturing, storage, processing,
distribution or other operational purposes.
(2) For any business, purpose or use which constitutes a nuisance or
causes the emission of odors or gases which could reasonably be
expected to be injurious, noxious or offensive to the general public
or to products properly manufactured or stored upon such
buildings, lots or lands.
(3) For any business, purpose or use in violation of the laws and
regulations of the United States, the State of New York, Erie
County or the Town of West Seneca.
(4) For the storage in bulk of junk or secondhand material.
(5) For the use of equipment or manufacturing processes which cause
earth tremors or vibrations beyond the boundaries of any building
lots upon which they are situated.
(6) For the manufacturing, storage and distribution and sale of
explosives.
B. Smoke, dust and other atmospheric pollutants. Emissions to the
outdoor atmosphere, including but not limited to any dust, fumes, gas,
mist, odor, smoke, vapor, pollen, toxic or deleterious emission, either
alone or in combination with others, shall be subject to the specific air
quality standards and emission limits set forth in the Federal Clean Air
Act, as amended, and other applicable laws, ordinances, regulations
and permits of any governmental authority with jurisdiction of air
quality and emissions thereto.
C. Glare and heat. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a
reflection of a strong, dazzling light or glare as shall be visible from any
point along a lot line. There shall be no emission or transmission of heat
or heated air so as to be discernible at any lot line.
D. Sound.
(1) At all points along the edge of a lot, sound levels produced by
equipment or motor vehicles on that lot shall meet the following:
§ 120-28.7 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.7
117:518
(a) The sound level measured on a sound-level meter set to show
response shall not exceed 75 dBA, except for truck and rail
traffic in, out or on the lot.
(2) All measurements shall be taken with equipment conforming to
International Electrotechnical Commission 651, Type 2, or Type 1 if
impulsive noise is present.
(3) The above performance standards apply only to sound from the lot
in question which must be assessed separately from other sounds.
E. Vibration. No use shall be operated so as to cause ground vibration
which is detectable, without instruments, at any point along any lot line
on which the use is located.
F. Fissionable or radioactive substances or electrical disturbance. The
handling, storage, discharge or disposal of fissionable or radioactive
material or waste by-products in the Park shall be prohibited. No
activities shall be permitted which produce an electrical and/or
electromagnetic disturbance affecting the operation of any equipment
other than that of the creator of such disturbance. Nothing herein,
however, shall prohibit the use of such materials or devices when used
in the regular operations of a manufacturing, medical or research
facility where such operation is otherwise lawful and in full compliance
with applicable laws, rules, regulations and permits.
G. Enclosure. All permitted principal and accessory uses and operations
which, as a result of not being enclosed, would constitute a nuisance or
offense beyond the lot line or which, as a result of not being enclosed,
would conflict with any of the specific performance standards set forth
in this Article shall be performed wholly within an enclosed building or
buildings.
H. Maintenance.
(1) Each property owner, tenant or operator shall, at all times, keep the
premises, buildings, improvements, appurtenances and paved
areas (including green areas within the right-of-way) in a safe,
clean, neat and sanitary condition and shall comply with all laws.
Park rules, ordinances and regulations pertaining to health and
safety. Each property owner, operator or tenant shall provide for
the prompt removal of trash and rubbish from his premises,
including construction debris.
(2) During construction, it shall be the responsibility of each property
owner, operator or tenant to ensure that construction sites are kept
free of unsightly accumulations of rubbish and scrap materials and
that construction materials, equipment, shacks and the like are
kept in a neat and orderly manner. Dumpsters, as may be required
by the Town Building Inspector, shall be located on or adjacent to
the construction site to ensure compliance with this provision.
§ 120-28.7 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.7
117:519
(3) The Park, its tenants, operators and Park lot owners will participate
in any established solid waste recycling program which may be
instituted by the town or County of Erie or other governmental
entity.
I. Temporary outside storage. When it is necessary to store or keep
articles, goods or materials in the open upon any building lot in the
Park, the area used for storage shall be limited to the rear one-half (1/2)
of such building lot outside of the setback area, and this area shall be
totally fenced with a screening fence six feet in height. No articles,
goods or materials shall be stored in any setback area but shall be
stored in such a manner as to reasonably attempt screening from public
view so as to avoid an unsightly condition.
J. Trenching or blasting.
(1) No person shall use explosives for the purpose of construction
foundations, trenches, etc., except as expressly permitted by
applicable law. Such explosives shall only be used by qualified
personnel to ensure that adjoining buildings do not suffer from
structural damages resulting from actions of the party utilizing the
explosives.
(2) Any party utilizing explosives shall provide written notice to the
Town Building Inspector and adjacent building owner/occupants
within the blasting area of their use and the time of the explosion
within five days in advance thereof.
K. Fences. The placement of all fences and the materials utilized shall be
subject to the approval of the Town Building Inspector and be in
accordance with town ordinances.
L. Fill.
(1) Where fill is necessary to attain the approved finished grade of any
site in the Park, it shall be free of waste material and shall not
contain noxious materials that will give off odors of any kind. No
hazardous materials or nonhazardous industrial wastes shall be
used or allowed. No fill materials shall be deposited on site without
grading. All grading and drainage shall be done in a timely manner
so as to not cause an unsightly condition, as may be determined by
the Town Building Inspector.
(2) All filling and grading activities that affect lands or resources
otherwise protected or regulated by the laws of New York or the
United States of America, including but not limited to wetland
areas, shall be performed in compliance with all applicable laws,
regulations, permits and orders of government agencies with
jurisdiction thereof. All site fill, grading and construction activities
shall be performed in accordance with approved silt, sediment,
erosion control and stormwater management plans for the park.
§ 120-28.7 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.7
117:520
§ 120-28.8. Specific standards; site plan review standards.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the existing standards and
requirements of a zoning district upon which these Park standards and
restrictions are overlayed shall govern uses and development of property
within the Park. In the absence of such provisions or to the extent additional
or different standards and requirements are set forth herein, the following
specific standards, review standards and requirements shall apply and
govern the restricted uses or the designated areas in the Park:
M. Underground utilities. Each owner, tenant or operator shall be required
to install all utilities underground from the main line located at the
perimeter of the site to the buildings located thereon. No building or
facilities shall have, including, without limitation, poles or wires for the
transmission of electricity or telephone messages and water, gas,
sanitary and storm sewer drainage and other conduits (except hoses
and movable pipes used for temporary irrigation purposes) placed or
maintained above ground on any portion of the site, except such
retention or detention basins otherwise established as part of the Park
development.
A. Specific standards.
(1) The minimum size of any building lot within any industrial park
shall be two acres (87,120 square feet).
(2) The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
(3) The minimum lot depth shall be 300 feet.
(4) Minimum setbacks.
(a) Minimum setbacks for structures shall be as follows:
[1] Front yards: 50 feet.
[2] Rear yards: 20 feet, except that where a rear yard abuts an
R District boundary, the rear yard in an M-1 District shall
be not less than 50 feet, and the rear yard in an M-2
District shall be not less than 75 feet.
[3] Side yards: 10 feet, except that where a side yard abuts an
R District boundary, the side yard in an M-1 District shall
be 50 feet, and the yard in an M-2 District shall be not less
than 75 feet.
[4] Reasonable consideration shall be given to staggering the
setbacks of the buildings on adjoining sites.
(b) Maximum building coverage. All building(s) and any additions
thereto erected in the Park shall together occupy not more
than 60% of the total gross area of the building lot upon which
§ 120-28.7 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.8
117:521
such buildings or additions thereto are erected, not including
parking lots, driveways or walks.
(c) Design and construction. In order to assure architectural
continuity and compatibility within the Park, all buildings and
site plans shall be designed by a registered architect or
professional engineer duly licensed in the State of New York.
(d) Building materials.
[1] All structures, buildings or additions thereto erected in the
Park shall be of fire-resistant materials, and all structure
and building designs shall comply with the New York State
Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code as published in
the New York Codes, Rules and Regulations,92 as well as
any other applicable local, state and federal building code
requirements.
[2] Where the office portion of a building is shown of a
physical proportion different from the bulk of the building,
the architectural treatment shall be upgraded to comport
with other office buildings within the Park. Finish
materials for such area shall be consistent, preferably
brick or materials classed "better than ordinary." Where
different materials are used for aesthetic purposes, the
transition of materials shall appear as a planned design
bearing strong geometric outlines. A facade, unrelated to
the rest of the building, shall be deemed not an acceptable
design.
(e) Landscaping. Each lot within the Park shall be developed with
a minimum of 20% of its area set aside for planting, which
includes lawns, trees and shrubs, however used. Landscaping
shall most often include berming, seeding and screen planting,
as well as shrub and tree planting within the lot or parcel. Such
landscaping shall be done with the intent to improve the
appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use areas and
property abutting public rights-of-way thereby reducing
conditions which lead to urban blight, to prevent soil erosion
and soil water retention, to help prevent flooding and to break
up large expanses of pavement typical in parking areas.
[1] Landscape plans. Any landscape plan in the Park shall
include and comply with the landscape requirements
specified in Appendix B to this Article, attached and made
a part hereof.93
[2] Garbage and refuse collection areas shall be screened
from view from a public right-of-way and structures on
92.Editor's Note: See 9 NYCRR Part 600 et seq. and the Executive Law § 370 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 120-28.8 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.8
117:522
adjoining lots. The screening shall be of live landscape
material, such as but not limited to trees, shrubs and
hedges and shall provide 60% or more summer opacity
and 40% winter opacity within two years when viewed
from between two feet and six feet above ground level. The
layout of the landscape screen shall in no way impede the
pickup and collection operation.
(f) Sight distance for landscaping to public rights-of-way and
points of access. When a driveway intersects a public right-ofway
or when the property abuts the intersection of the public
right-of-way, all landscaping within the corner triangular areas
described below shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility. All
shrubs located in the triangular areas shall not be permitted to
grow to a height of more than 30 inches above the sidewalk
grade, in order that the view of the driver of a vehicle not be
obstructed. Trees may be planted and maintained in this area,
provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear
vision for a vertical height of eight feet above the roadway.
Landscaping, except required grass or ground cover, shall not
be located closer than three feet to the edge of an accessway
pavement. The triangular areas referred to above are:
[1] The area formed at a corner intersection of a public rightof-
way and a driveway, the two sides of the triangle area
being 10 feet in length measured along the right-of-way
line and driveway line and the third side being a line
connecting these two lines.
[2] The area formed at a corner intersection of two public
rights-of-way, the two sides of the triangular area being 30
feet in length measured along the abutting public right-ofway
line and the third side being a line connecting these
two lines.
(g) Parking and drives.
[1] All parking areas and drives shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete surface materials and shall have appropriate
bumper guards where needed.
[2] All drives and parking areas shall have a minimum base of
eight inches, a two-inch binder and one inch of topping.
Proper surface and under-pavement drainage will be
required, as specified by the Town Engineer.
[3] Each owner, tenant or operator shall provide off-street
parking for all employees, visitors and invitees on-site, for
manufacturing, storage, warehouse or other industrial
uses without regard to gross floor area of a building, as
follows: not less than one space for each two employees
and not more than one space for each 1.5 employees. All
§ 120-28.8 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.8
117:523
other uses shall conform to the parking requirements set
forth in § 120-41.
[4] Stacking and loading requirements and units of
measurement shall be as set forth in §§ 120-41 and 120-42
of this chapter.
(5) Site plan review standards.
(a) Consistency with other plans and laws.
[1] The Town Board's review of an application for a restricted
use permit within the Park shall be directed to a
consideration of the extent to which the application and
project proposal embodies and achieves the purposes and
objectives of this Article and to ensure that it is in
conformance with this chapter, the Town Urban Renewal
Plan and all other applicable ordinances, laws, regulations
and permits of the town, County of Erie, State of New York
and the United States of America, and no restricted use
permit may be issued except in compliance therewith.
[2] In determining whether to issue a restricted use permit
and the imposition of conditions or restrictions, if any, on
such permit, the Town Board shall give due consideration
to the extent to which a proposed use or project, evidenced
by its application, demonstrates the likelihood of
compliance with the performance standards and the
specific standards and review standards set forth in
§§ 120-28.7 and 120-28.8, respectively.
(b) General standards. The Town Board's review of the application
shall include, as appropriate, the following general
considerations:
[1] Location, arrangement, size, design and general site
compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs.
[2] Adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersection, road widths, pavement
surfaces, markings, dividers and traffic controls.
[3] Location, arrangement and sufficiency of off-street parking
and loading.
[4] Adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian access and
circulation, walkway structures, control at intersections of
vehicular traffic and overall pedestrian safety.
[5] Adequacy of stormwater storage, disposal and drainage
facilities.
§ 120-28.8 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.8
117:524
§ 120-28.9. Working drawings to be submitted.
Prior to commencement of actual construction, the applicant shall submit a
set of final working drawings to the Town Building Inspector. These working
drawings will be the same as provided to and approved by the Town of West
Seneca for issuance of a building permit.
§ 120-28.10. Building permit and certificate of occupancy.
All buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building
Code.95 Nothing herein shall exempt any person from compliance with such
code or any other town requirements to obtain a building permit. Upon
[6] Adequacy of facilities for water supply and sewage
disposal.
[7] Adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and
other landscaping constituting a buffer from disturbances
caused by such things as noise, sight, dust and light
between the applicant's and adjoining lands, including the
maximum retention of appropriate existing vegetation.
[8] Adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the
provision of fire hydrants.
[9] Special attention to the adequacy and impact of
structures, roadways and landscaping in areas with
susceptibility to ponding, flooding and/or erosion.
[10] Location, size of improvements, uses of structures, nature
and intensity of operations involved, size of the site in
relation to its improvements, and location of the site with
respect to streets giving access to it such that it will be in
harmony with the orderly development of the Park and will
not discourage the development and use of adjacent land
and buildings.
[11] Protection of adjacent or neighboring properties against
noise, glare, unsightliness or nuisances.
[12] Signs are in compliance with applicable town ordinances
and are compatible with buildings, improvements and
signs on adjacent lots and the Park overall.94
[13] Such other considerations deemed appropriate and
necessary by the Town Board for the protection and
promotion of public health, safety and welfare and the
development of the park purposes and objectives.
94.Editor's Note: See Art. IIIA, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
95.Editor's Note: See Executive Law § 370 et seq.
§ 120-28.8 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-28.10
117:525
final inspection by the Building Inspector of the Town of West Seneca, and
when it has been found that the proposed construction has been completed
in accordance with applicable building codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations and also in accordance with the procedures, restrictions and
standards set forth herein, a temporary or final certificate of occupancy
shall be issued, together with a restricted use permit. No building shall be
occupied until a certificate of occupancy and a restricted use permit have
been issued.
§ 120-28.11. Access to construction site by town.
The Town of West Seneca and its employees, agents and authorized
representatives and consultants shall have full access onto the construction
site for the purpose of assuring that the facility is being constructed in
accordance with approved plans and complies with all restricted use permit
conditions and this Article.
§ 120-28.12. Special assessments.
Each parcel is or shall be, prior to initial occupancy of a building, structure
or improvement, appropriately serviced with access roads and sewer water
lines for which the owner, tenant or operator may be subject to special
assessments by the Town of West Seneca, unless otherwise provided in the
restricted use permit.
§ 120-28.13. Severability.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any term, phrase, clause, article,
paragraph, restriction, covenant or other provision hereof shall in no way
affect the validity or enforcement of any other provision or part hereof.
§ 120-28.10 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-28.13
117:526
ARTICLE III
Bulk Regulations
§ 120-29. Minimum lot sizes for dwellings or mixed occupancy.
A. Schedule of lot width and lot area requirements. [Amended
8-17-1987; 9-24-1990]
District
Lot Width
(feet)
Lot Area
(square feet)
R-100A 100 20,000
R-90 or R-90A 90 12,000
R-75 or R-75A 75 for the first dwelling
unit, plus 10 for a second
dwelling unit
10,000 for the first
dwelling unit, plus 1,350
for a second dwelling unit
R-65 or R-65A 65 for the first dwelling
unit, plus 10 for a second
dwelling unit
8,500 for the first dwelling
unit, plus 1,350 for a
second dwelling unit
R-60A 60 for first dwelling unit,
plus 10 for each
additional dwelling unit;
need not exceed 100 feet
10,000 for first dwelling
unit, plus 5,000 for each
additional dwelling unit
R-50 or any C 50 for first dwelling unit,
plus 10 for each 8,000 for
first dwelling unit, plus
5,000 for each additional
dwelling unit
additional
dwelling unit
need not
exceed 90 feet
B. Exceptions to lot size requirements.
(1) Lot size exception for existing small lots.
(a) The lot width or area requirements of this chapter shall be
automatically waived to permit the erection of a single-family
dwelling or the restoration, enlargement (but not including
additional dwelling units), moving, repair or alteration of an
existing single-family dwelling on any lot of record which was
owned separately and individually from all other tracts of land
on the effective date of this chapter or on the effective date of
any subsequent amendment increasing the lot size
requirements of such lot, provided that:
§ 120-29 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-29
117:527
§ 120-30. Minimum yards for one- and two-family dwellings.
[Amended 10-14-1963; 8-17-1987; 9-24-1990]
Side Yard
(two required)
District
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear yard
(feet)
Minimum
(feet)
Total
(feet)
R-100A 40 50 10 20
R-90 30 30 10 20
R-90A 40 30 10 20
R-75 30 30 5 10
R-75A 40 30 5 10
R-65 30 30 5 10
R-65A 40 30 5 10
R-60A 40 30* 5** 10**
R-50 30 30* 5** 10**
[1] Such use is permitted in the district where such lot is
located.
[2] All other regulations prescribed in this chapter shall apply
thereto.
(b) Vacant land or subdivision lots in the same record ownership
on the effective date of this chapter or on the effective date of
any subsequent amendment increasing the lot width
requirements of such lots or vacant land, having in the
aggregate a continuous frontage of more than 1 1/2 times and
less than two times the minimum width requirement of the
district where located, may be divided into two lots of equal lot
width, and the lot size requirements shall be waived to the
same extent as for existing small lots; provided, however, that
any such lots or vacant land shall have a depth of at least 100
feet. For subdivisions filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter and applicable amendments hereto, see § 265-a of the
Town Law. [Amended 10-14-1963]
(c) Flag lots. Lots having a reduced frontage for a driveway
servicing the main portion of the lot which is some distance
back from the street and which meets all other zoning
requirements may be allowed in R Districts, provided that the
minimum street frontage is 40 feet and the total lot area is a
minimum of one acre. The use would be restricted to a singlefamily
residence. [Added 8-17-1987; amended 11-28-2011
by L.L. No. 3-2011]
§ 120-29 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-30
117:528
Side Yard
(two required)
District
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear yard
(feet)
Minimum
(feet)
Total
(feet)
Any C 40 30* 5** 10**
* Or a distance equal to the height of principal building, whichever is
greater.
** For multifamily dwellings, each side yard shall be 25 feet or a distance
equal to one-half (1/2) the height of such building, whichever is greater.
The total of the two side yards shall be twice that required for one side
yard. The Town Board shall have the power to reduce said side yard
requirements upon showing of special circumstances or hardship.
§ 120-31. Minimum yards for other principal buildings.
A. In R Districts.
(1) Front yard in any R District: as required for dwellings.
(2) Rear yard in any R District: as required for dwellings.
(3) Side yards (two required).
(a) In R-50 or R-60A Districts: as required for multifamily
dwellings.
(b) In all other R Districts: each side yard 30 feet or a distance
equal to the height of such principal building, whichever is
greater.
(4) A thirty-foot drive for ingress and egress shall be provided for all
multifamily and special developments. If separate drives are
provided for ingress and egress, they shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
[Added 9-24-1990]
B. In any C District.
(1) Front yard: 40 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 10 feet; except where a rear yard abuts an R District
boundary, the rear yard shall be 30 feet or a distance equal to the
height of the principal building, whichever is greater.
(3) Side yards: none required, except:
(a) Where a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than five feet
in width.
(b) Where a side yard abuts an R District boundary, its width shall
be not less than that required for side yards for multifamily
§ 120-30 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-31
117:529
§ 120-32. Exceptions to yard requirements.
dwellings or buildings of mixed occupancy in such abutting R
District.
(c) Where a side yard is used for either vehicular ingress or
egress, it shall be not less than 12 feet in width.
(d) Where a side yard is used for ingress and egress, it shall be not
less than 25 feet in width.
(e) A required side yard may not be used for ingress or egress in
the multifamily or special development projects. The Town
Board shall have the power to allow this, upon showing of
special circumstances or hardship. [Added 9-24-1990]
(4) A thirty-foot drive for ingress and egress shall be provided for all
multifamily and special developments. If separate drives are
provided for ingress and egress, they shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
[Added 9-24-1990]
C. In M Districts:
(1) Front yards: 25 feet; except when opposite any R District or when
used for off-street parking, the front yard shall be not less than 50
feet.
(2) Rear yard.
(a) In M-1 Districts: 10 feet; except where a rear yard abuts an R
District boundary, the rear yard shall be not less than 50 feet.
(b) In M-2 Districts: 10 feet; except where a rear yard abuts an R
District boundary, the rear yard shall be not less than 75 feet.
(3) Side yards (two required).
(a) In M-1 Districts: 10 feet; except where a side yard abuts an R
District boundary, the side yard shall be 50 feet.
(b) In M-2 Districts: 10 feet; except where a side yard abuts an R
District boundary, the side yard shall be 75 feet.
A. Front yard exceptions.
(1) In R Districts. Any lot less than 100 feet in depth need not have a
front yard depth greater than the average front yard setback of
existing principal buildings on abutting lots fronting on the same
street.
(2) In C or M Districts. Any lot less than 100 feet in depth need not
have a front yard depth greater than the average front yard setback
of existing principal commercial or industrial buildings on abutting
lots fronting on the same street.
§ 120-31 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-32
117:530
§ 120-33. Visibility at intersections.
In any district where a front yard of 15 feet or more is required by this
chapter, no sign, fence, wall, hedge, shrub planting or tree foliage which
obstructs vision at elevations between three and seven feet above the street
level shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by two
intersecting street lines and a line connecting points on such street lines 50
feet distant from their point of intersection. This regulation shall not apply
to any necessary retaining wall or to buildings existing on the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 120-34. Maximum heights of buildings or structures.
§ 120-35. Height exceptions.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to:
(3) Coin-operated vending machines. The front yard requirement for
coin-operated vending machines shall be 20 feet. [Added
6-18-1973]
(4) The front yard requirements for outdoor selling of fruits,
vegetables and/or other products shall be 25 feet [Added
6-17-1974]
B. Rear yard exception for through lots. On a through lot where the rear
lot line coincides with a street line, a front yard equivalent shall be
provided. The rear yard depth requirements in the district regulations
shall not apply to that portion of a through lot where a front yard
equivalent is required.
C. Exterior side yard for corner lots. On a corner lot the required width of
the exterior side yard shall be the same as the front yard requirement
along the street on which the exterior side yard abuts. [Amended
8-17-1987]
D. Side yard exception. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
article, in any C or M District, where a side yard is used for parking or a
multilevel parking structure, the only required side yard shall be an
exterior side yard of 10 feet as measured from the property line at the
street. [Added 1-25-1999]
A. For one-family or two-family dwellings: 30 feet.
B. For multifamily dwellings and other principal buildings: 40 feet unless a
greater height is approved by the Town Board.
C. For accessory buildings.
(1) In R Districts: 12 feet.
(2) In C or M Districts: 40 feet (see § 120-40).
§ 120-32 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-35
117:531
§ 120-35.1. Solar access. [Added 8-17-1987]
To the fullest extent feasible, building heights and other obstructions to
sunlight shall be regulated (on southerly lots) to provide adjoining northerly
lots the following level of access to sunlight:
§ 120-36. Usable open space for mixed occupancy.
§ 120-37. Minimum size of dwellings. [Added 8-10-1970]
A. Chimneys, flues, spires or belfries.
B. Elevator or stair bulkheads, roof water tanks or cooling towers
(including enclosures), provided that such structures, in the aggregate,
do not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
C. Flagpoles, radio or television antennas, masts or aerials located on a
building and extending not more than 20 feet above the roof of such
building.
D. See Article IIIB, Telecommunications Facilities. [Added 8-17-1987]
E. Wind turbines or windmills located on a building and extending not
more than 20 feet above the roof of the principle building. If mounted
freestanding, said wind turbine or windmill shall not exceed 40 feet in
height and have a fall zone of said structure permitted in C-1 Zoning to
M-2 Zoning. [Added 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
A. Sunlight shall be available to rooftop solar collectors for approximately
three hours before and three hours past solar noon on November 1 (the
east-west limits of skyspace determined by the hours; the lower limit
determined by the month).
A. In the case of a building having mixed occupancy, 400 square feet of
open space for each dwelling unit contained in such building shall be
provided on the lot exclusively for recreation and household service
activities.
B. No part of any required front yard or required side yard shall be
counted as usable open space as herein required.
A. In determining the minimum livable floor area as required in any
district, no area shall be included whose floor is below the finished
grade.
B. "Finished grade" shall be the natural surface of the ground within 15
feet of the building or the surface of the ground within 15 feet of the
building after completion of any change in contour.
§ 120-35 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-37
117:532
§ 120-38. Open space requirements for group dwellings.
All required yards for group dwellings shall be measured from the dwellings
nearest the respective front, side and rear lot lines. No principal building
shall be nearer any other principal building than a distance equal to the
average height of such buildings.
§ 120-39. Limitations on accessory uses in R Districts.
Table—Minimum Sizes of Dwellings [Amended 8-17-1987]
District Livable Floor
Area
(square feet)
Conditions
R-90 or R-90A 1,500 Where apartment or
2-family dwelling is
permitted, area of
R-75 or R-75A 1,100 each dwelling unit shall be
approved by
R-100A, R-65 or
R-65A
900 1,200 the Town Board but
2-family dwelling shall be
not less than 500 square
feet.
R-50, R-60A or any C 900 Single-family dwelling
1,200 2-family dwelling
500 For each dwelling unit in
multifamily dwellings
A. Location of accessory buildings, structures and other improvements.
No accessory building, structure or other improvement shall be erected
or altered so as to: [Amended 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 10-2014]
(1) Be in any required front yard or required side yard, except that an
attached garage may extend three feet into a required side yard,
provided that such garage is not nearer than five feet to any lot
line. [Amended 10-14-1963]
(2) Be nearer than 10 feet to any dwelling unless attached thereto or
nearer than five feet to any other building.
(3) Be within three feet of any side or rear lot line.
B. Fences in R Districts. Fence heights shall not exceed four feet in height
in any front or side yard or six feet in height in any rear yard. Fences
shall not be allowed to project any more than 10 feet into a front yard. If
a building does not have required front yard setback as per § 120-30, no
projection shall be allowed. [Amended 8-17-1987; 1-22-1990]
§ 120-37 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-39
117:533
§ 120-40. Limitations on accessory uses in C or M Districts.
[Amended 8-17-1987]
Except for gasoline pumps, identification signs or off-street parking, as
regulated by other provisions of this chapter, no storage or processing of
any kind shall be permitted in any required yard in any C or M District.
Accessory buildings shall be set back from R District boundaries for a
distance at least equal to the height of any such accessory building. This
provision shall not apply to uses accessory to a permitted dwelling, but such
accessory uses shall be subject to the provisions of § 120-39. Fences shall
be permitted as regulated in R Districts.
C. Projections into required yards. The following structures shall be
permitted within required yards:
(1) Accessory uses as permitted by the district regulations shall be
permitted in required rear yards.
(2) Roof projections of not more than two feet.
(3) Windowsills or other ordinary projections to an extent of not more
than four inches.
(4) Unenclosed porches or unenclosed steps not extending above the
first floor level may project into a required yard not more than 1/4
the required width or depth of such yard, but not nearer any lot line
than five feet.
D. Coverage of rear yards. In any R District, accessory buildings and
roofed projections shall not occupy more than 30% of a required rear
yard of an interior lot nor more than 40% of a required rear yard of a
corner lot.
E. Driveways. Driveways shall be a minimum of three feet from the side lot
line. [Added 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 10-2014]
F. Pools. Pools, in-ground or aboveground, shall be a minimum of 10 feet
from any principal structure and five feet from any accessory structure.
Decks, patios or other similar structures are not permitted to connect
the principal structure to the pool. [Added 9-8-2014 by L.L. No.
10-2014]
§ 120-39 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40
117:534
ARTICLE IIIA
Sign Regulations
[Added 8-20-1979; amended 3-30-1981; 11-18-1985; 5-10-1999;
5-14-2007 by L.L. No. 6-2007; 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 7-2011;
9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 10-2014; 8-7-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
§ 120-40.1. Purpose and intent.
§ 120-40.2. Sign permit required.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall erect, alter, construct,
relocate or cause to be erected, altered, constructed or relocated any sign
without first having obtained a sign permit from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
A. Purpose. The primary purpose of these sign regulations for the Town of
West Seneca is to permit the erection and display of signage within the
Town, while protecting public health, safety and general welfare. All
signs and sign systems are subject to the regulations that follow in this
article.
B. Objectives. These regulations also serve to achieve the following
objectives:
(1) Ensure the right to free speech as protected under the
Constitution;
(2) Protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate, and protect the physical appearance of the
community;
(3) Provide structures and uses with effective means of identification
while reducing visual clutter through the prevention of excessive
and confusing sign displays;
(4) Reduce traffic conflicts or hazards by minimizing visual distractions
or obstacles in or visible from the public rights-of-way;
(5) Minimize the adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
property;
(6) Avoid personal injury and property damage from unsafe or
confusing signs; and
(7) Establish a clear and impartial process for those seeking to install
signs.
C. Applicability. The regulations of this article shall govern and control the
erection, enlargement, expansion, renovation, operation, maintenance,
relocation and removal of all signs within the Town visible from any
street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or public space.
§ 120-40.1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.2
117:535
A. Application requirements. The following information shall be provided
to the Code Enforcement Officer for a sign permit application:
(1) Name, address, contact information, and signature of the
applicant.
(2) Name, address, and signature of the building and/or property
owner (if not the applicant).
(3) Dimensions and drawings indicating the size, shape, construction,
materials, and layout of the sign(s).
(4) Site plan and elevations indicating the proposed location and size
of the sign(s), to scale.
(5) Any additional site and/or sign information as requested by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Situations not requiring sign permit. The following situations shall not
require the issuance of a sign permit, provided such maintenance,
changes, or alterations do not in any way alter the physical size, design,
or nature of the sign.
(1) The repainting, repairing, changing of parts, and maintenance of
signs.
(2) A change in the message of a sign.
(3) Repainting of supports and sign area.
C. Planning Board review. New developments subject to review and
approval by the Planning Board, at the request of the applicant, may
have proposed signage reviewed and approved as part of the special
permit or site plan review process. In the event of such review, all
required sign permit application materials shall be provided to the
Planning Board as part of the complete application.
D. Alteration. Any sign for which a permit has been issued shall not be
modified, relocated, altered, or replaced, unless an amended or new
sign permit is obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. Expiration. A sign permit shall expire if the sign for which the permit
has been issued is not fully constructed within 180 days from the date of
issuance of the sign permit.
F. Revocation. The Code Enforcement Officer or designee may, at any time
for a violation of this regulation, issue a notice of violation. A written
notice of the violation including all reasons for the violation shall be
mailed to the property and/or building owner. Said violation must be
corrected within 30 days of the date of notice; otherwise the sign permit
shall be revoked and the sign in question shall be required to be
removed.
§ 120-40.2 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.3
117:536
§ 120-40.3. Measurement.
A. Sign area.
(1) Single sign face. The area of a sign shall be computed by means of
the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or geometric
combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem, graphic, and/or other display,
together with any material, backdrop, or structure on which it is
placed (see Figure 1).
(2) Multifaced signs. In the case of a multifaced sign, only one side of
the sign is considered in determining sign area if the sides of the
sign are back-to-back or diverge at an angle of 45° or less.
(3) Structural support not included. The supporting structure or
bracing of a sign shall not be computed as part of the sign area,
unless such supporting structure or bracing is made a part of the
message with the inclusion of any text or graphics. If such is the
case, a combination of regular geometric shapes which can
encompass the area of said text or graphics shall be included as
part of the total sign area computation.
B. Sign height.
(1) Freestanding sign. The height of a freestanding sign shall be
calculated by measuring the vertical distance between the top part
of such sign or its structure, whichever is highest, to the elevation
of the ground directly beneath the center of the sign (see Figure 2).
(2) Other signs. The height of an awning, projecting, suspended, wall,
or window sign shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance between the top part of the sign face or structure,
whichever is highest, to the bottommost edge of the sign face (see
Figure 1).
(3) Structural support included. Any material whose major function is
to provide structural support for a sign shall be considered part of
the sign for purposes of determining sign height.
§ 120-40.3 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.3
117:537
§ 120-40.3 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.3
117:538
§ 120-40.4. Regulations applicable to all signs.
A. Safety provisions. All signs shall be designed, constructed, and located
in accordance with the following criteria to protect the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public.
(1) No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct free egress
from a window, door or fire escape or to become a menace to life,
health or property.
(2) No sign shall be erected at or near any intersection of streets,
alleys, or railways in a manner that obstructs free and clear vision
for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists.
(3) No sign shall be of a shape or color that may be confused with any
authorized traffic control device.
(4) No rotating beam, beacon, or flashing illumination resembling an
emergency light shall be used with any sign display.
(5) The erection of any sign and its supports, including any wiring and/
or electrical components utilized therein, shall be consistent with
§ 120-40.3 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.4
117:539
the generally accepted standards and practices of the New York
State Building Code.
(6) The erection of any sign, its supports, wiring, or other structural
and/or electrical elements may be subject to inspection and
approval by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Design and construction. All signs shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the following criteria:
(1) All signs shall be constructed of permanent, weather-resistant, and
durable materials, except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and
window signs otherwise in conformance with this article.
(2) Where applicable, signs shall be supported by sign structures that
are designed to resist wind pressures, dead loads, and lateral loads
in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the New York
State Building Code. All sign supports shall be reviewed as part of
the sign design.
(3) All sign lettering shall be permanently affixed to the sign. Manual
changeable copy signs shall be enclosed and locked. Electronic
changeable copy signs are subject to the regulations set forth in
§ 120-40.9.
(4) No permanent sign may be constructed of untreated or unpainted
wood, sandblasted metal, or other unfinished material.
C. Location. All signs shall be so located in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) Signs shall not be erected within nor project into any public rightof-
way, unless otherwise specified within this article. Signs must be
located on private property and comply with the dimensional and
setback requirements herein.
(2) Off-premises signs are prohibited, except for billboards as
regulated in § 120-40.10. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be
located on the site being promoted, identified, or advertised.
(3) All signs, unless otherwise noted within this article, are to be set
back at least five feet from any property line.
D. Visibility at intersections. No sign or any part of a sign exceeding three
feet in height, other than a supporting pole or brace no greater than 18
inches in width or diameter, shall be located within the designated clear
sight triangle of any intersecting streets. The clear sight triangle shall
be defined by the triangle formed by the center lines of the intersecting
streets measured 20 feet outward from the point of intersection of said
center lines along such center lines (see Figure 3).
§ 120-40.4 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.4
117:540
E. Illumination. All signs shall be illuminated in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Light sources for illuminated signs shall not be of such brightness
as to constitute a hazard to pedestrians or motorists and shall be
shielded so as not to cast an illumination of more than two
footcandles on adjacent nonresidential properties or more than 0.1
footcandle on adjacent residential properties.
(2) Uplighting, or the illumination of signs from a light source below
that of the sign face, shall be permitted for ground signs only.
(3) Intermittent illumination or illumination which involves movement
or causes the illusion of movement resulting from the arrangement
of lighting, is prohibited, except as regulated for electronic
changeable copy signs (see § 120-40.9).
F. Maintenance and repair. All signs shall be maintained in safe and good
structural condition, in compliance with all applicable building and
electrical codes, and in conformance with this article at all times. Such
maintenance includes replacement of all defective bulbs, parts and
materials, painting, repainting, cleaning, replacement of copy, and
other acts required for maintenance of such sign. If any sign does not
comply with these standards, the Code Enforcement Officer may
require its removal.
G. Public property. Signs shall not be posted on public property or within a
public right-of-way, unless otherwise stated in this article or approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 120-40.4 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.4
117:541
§ 120-40.5. Signs authorized without permit.
The following types of signs may be erected in the Town without obtaining
a sign permit. Although permits are not required for these signs, they
shall conform to all other requirements of this article or may be subject to
removal by the Code Enforcement Officer per § 120-40.4I.
H. Obsolete signs. Any sign that no longer advertises or identifies the
current or permitted use of the property must be removed within 30
days after written notification from the Code Enforcement Officer.
I. Removal of signs.
(1) Where required by this article, the removal of signs shall be the
sole responsibility of the sign owner and/or sign permit holder. If
said sign is not removed within 30 days of the date of written notice
by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer or
his/her designee is authorized to effect its removal.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer may remove any temporary sign or
sign not requiring a permit that is found to be in violation of this
article. The property and/or sign owner shall subsequently be given
written notice of such sign removal. If the sign is not claimed within
10 days of the written notice, the Code Enforcement Officer may
dispose of said sign.
(3) Any costs incurred for the removal of a sign shall be fully
reimbursed to the Town of West Seneca by the sign owner and/or
sign permit holder. Such costs may be placed on the tax roll for
collection by the Town.
A. Directional signs. Signs that provide direction to pedestrians, bicyclists,
or motorists shall not require a sign permit, provided the following
conditions are met. Such signs may include, but are not limited to, signs
providing direction to parking, restrooms, walkways, entrances, or
exits.
(1) Directional signs shall be located entirely on the property to which
they pertain and shall not contain a commercial message (e.g.,
business name).
(2) The total of directional signs on any one property shall not exceed
an area of six square feet in a residential district, or 16 square feet
in a nonresidential district.
(3) Directional signs shall not exceed four feet in height.
(4) Directional signs shall not be illuminated.
(5) Directional signs may not extend above the first floor of any given
structure or project beyond property lines.
§ 120-40.4 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.5
117:542
(6) Directional signs shall be set back at least five feet from all
property lines.
(7) Directional signs shall not impede the traffic or visibility of
pedestrians, bicyclists, or motorists.
B. Signs on gasoline pumps. Signs attached to a gasoline pump shall not
require a permit, provided they do not exceed six square feet in area.
C. Governmental signs: any official sign, public notice, or warning sign
supported by federal, state or local law, including but not limited to
signs erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any
government functions. (Example: New York State inspection station or
authorized repair shop identification.) There are no size requirements
or time limits for governmental signs.
D. Historical signs: signs such as cornerstones, commemorative tablets,
and historical markers, provided that said signs are less than six square
feet in area and not illuminated.
E. Home occupation signs. Any home occupation permitted by the Town
may have one sign without a permit, provided it does not exceed six
square feet in area and four feet in height. The sign shall not be
illuminated.
F. Internal signs: signs within a building not legible from the public rightof-
way or adjacent lots, or any sign within an enclosed outdoor space,
such as an athletic field, where such sign is not legible beyond the
property lines.
G. Lawn signs. A single lawn sign shall be allowed on any lot without a
permit, provided it is in conformance with the regulations below.
(1) The sign does not exceed three feet in height and six square feet in
area.
(2) The sign is not displayed for more than 30 days in a ninety-day
period.
(3) The sign is not illuminated.
(4) The sign maintains at least a five-foot setback from all property
lines.
(5) The sign does not impede the traffic or visibility of pedestrians,
bicyclists, or motorists.
H. Noncommercial signs on residential property. Any sign on a residential
property that does not contain a commercial message shall not require
the issuance of a sign permit, provided such sign is in conformance with
the following:
(1) There shall be no more than one sign per dwelling unit.
§ 120-40.5 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.5
117:543
§ 120-40.6. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited within the Town:
(2) A sign shall not exceed three feet in height and six feet in area.
(3) The total square footage of all signs on a single lot shall not exceed
12 square feet.
(4) The sign is not illuminated.
(5) The sign maintains at least a five-foot setback from all property
lines.
(6) The sign does not impede traffic or visibility of pedestrians,
bicyclists, or motorists.
(7) The sign is not attached to any permanent building or structure.
I. Sandwich board signs. Sandwich board signs shall not require a permit,
provided the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no more than one sign per lot.
(2) The sign is not illuminated.
(3) The sign does not exceed six square feet in area.
(4) The sign does not exceed six feet in height.
(5) The sign does not impede pedestrian or motorist traffic or safety.
(6) The sign is brought in each day at the close of business.
A. Signs for which no sign permit was issued or for which a sign permit
has been revoked.
B. Signs that are not properly maintained or that are considered
structurally unsound, hazardous, or otherwise unsafe. The Town
reserves the right to remove any sign considered to be a danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare without notice to be held for a period of
10 days. If the sign is not claimed within that time, it shall be discarded.
C. Signs that contain words or pictures of an obscene or pornographic
nature.
D. Signs that emit audible sounds, odor, or visible matter.
E. Signs placed on a curb, sidewalk, hydrant, utility pole, trees or other
objects located on or over any public street unless otherwise permitted.
The Town reserves the right to remove any sign placed on public
property without notice to be held for a period of 10 days. If the sign is
not claimed within that time, it shall be discarded.
§ 120-40.5 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.6
117:544
§ 120-40.7. Temporary sign requirements.
F. Signs that may be confused with a traffic control sign, signal or device
or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle or hide from
view any traffic or street sign, signal, or device.
G. Signs that flash, blink, rotate, or revolve, or utilize unshielded lighting
devices or reflectors to outline or provide the background of a sign.
H. Signs that are animated or utilize full motion or video technology.
I. Signs that are mounted on wheels or mounted on any structure on
wheels.
J. Signs with mirrors or any other reflective material.
K. Portable signs that are permanently displayed.
L. Banners, pennants, or windblown or inflated signs that are permanently
displayed.
M. Roof signs, obsolete signs, and off-premises signs, except for billboards
as provided for in § 120-40.10.
N. Signs painted directly on an exterior wall.
A. Permit required. Temporary signs, as defined in § 120-40.13, shall
require the issuance of a sign permit by the Code Enforcement Office.
No more than one temporary sign may be permitted per lot or use at
any given time. Temporary signs shall be permitted in all zoning
districts.
B. Requirements. Any proposed temporary sign shall conform to the
following:
(1) Such sign shall not exceed four feet in height and 32 square feet in
area in any nonresidential district.
(2) Such sign shall not exceed four feet in height and 16 square feet in
area in any residential district.
(3) Such sign shall not be displayed for more than 30 days in a ninetyday
period.
(4) Such sign shall not be illuminated.
(5) Such sign shall not extend above the first floor of any given building
and shall not project beyond property lines.
(6) Such sign shall maintain at least a five-foot setback from all
property lines.
(7) Such sign shall not impede the traffic or visibility of pedestrians,
bicyclists, or motorists.
§ 120-40.6 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.7
117:545
§ 120-40.8. Sign provisions by zoning district.
§ 120-40.9. Electronic changeable copy sign regulations.
The use of electronic changeable copy within a sign, in whole or in part,
is permitted in any district other than a residential district. Any use of
electronic changeable copy shall be in accordance with the following:
C. Banners or pennants. For the purposes of this article, banners or
pennants shall be permitted as temporary signs. No banner shall be
displayed over any sidewalk, Town street or highway except upon
approval by the Town Board. A public liability bond or policy in the sum
of at least $50,000 shall be furnished for each banner which extends
across a sidewalk, street or highway.
A. Residential districts.
(1) No lot or use shall have more than one sign type, as provided for in
§ 120-40.12.
(2) The illumination of signs in residential districts is prohibited.
(3) The use of electronic changeable copy in residential districts is
prohibited.
B. Nonresidential districts.
(1) No use or lot shall have more than two sign types, as provided for in
§ 120-40.12.
(2) Where multiple operations or uses are located on a single lot, such
as, but not limited to, industrial centers, business parks, or
shopping plazas, each use shall be permitted two signs of any type
in addition to one freestanding sign for the lot.
(3) Window signs shall not be included in the count of total allotted
signage for any lot or use.
A. Electronic changeable copy shall not be utilized in any wall sign,
suspended sign, awning sign, or window sign.
B. The area of electronic changeable copy shall not exceed 75% of the area
of the face of the sign to which it is attached (see Figure 4), except for
digital billboards as provided for in § 120-40.10.
§ 120-40.7 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.9
117:546
§ 120-40.10. Billboards.
C. Signs with electronic changeable copy shall display static messages
with no animation, no effects simulating animation, and no video.
D. Any change in electronic copy shall occur no more than once every 30
seconds. Each transition shall be accomplished immediately with no
fade, scroll, travel, flash, spin, revolution or shaking and shall not
include any other type of movement or motion.
E. Electronic changeable copy signs shall be shut off at the close of
business.
F. Signs with electronic changeable copy shall be equipped with
photosensitive equipment that is programmed to automatically adjust
the brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient
outdoor illumination. Maximum brightness levels for electronic
changeable copy signs shall not exceed a limit of 465 lumens per square
foot in the daytime and 26 lumens per square foot after sundown. The
brightness levels shall be measured from a distance of no more than
five feet from the sign face.
G. Signs shall be programmed or set in such a manner that the display will
turn dark and emit no light in case of malfunction.
H. No signs with electronic changeable copy shall be located within 500
feet of a residentially zoned property as measured in a straight line
from the location of the sign to the nearest residential property line.
A. Size requirements.
(1) No billboard shall exceed a height of 35 feet above ground level as
measured from the elevation of the ground at the center of the sign
to the topmost edge of the sign face.
(2) The maximum sign area for any one billboard shall be 380 square
feet, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base or
pedestal.
§ 120-40.9 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.10
117:547
(3) For the purposes of this article, a back-to-back billboard shall be
considered one sign area.
B. Location.
(1) Billboards shall only be permitted within the M-1 and M-2 Zoning
Districts of the Town.
(2) No billboard shall be erected in the Union Road Corridor as defined
by § 120-70 of this chapter.
(3) No billboard shall be located within 500 feet of a residential district
or the property line of any public or private school.
(4) No billboard shall be located within 1,250 feet of any other
billboard as measured from the center of each sign.
(5) Billboards shall observe the same required setback for buildings
within the zoning district in which they are located, or 15 feet,
whichever is greatest.
(6) Billboards attached to a building shall be only upon the front or
face and must be constructed and maintained flat or parallel to the
building wall to which they are attached and shall not extend more
than 12 inches from such exterior wall.
(7) No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view,
from the road or street, of any existing business sign, logo sign, or
residential or nonresidential structure.
C. Appearance and design.
(1) The general ground area surrounding any billboard must be kept
free and clear of weeds, debris, trash and other refuse.
(2) Billboards may utilize electronic changeable copy and/or video
technology, provided the minimum duration of a message is at least
eight seconds. All transitions of messages and/or graphics shall
occur instantaneously with no movement or flashing.
(3) No billboard structure or sign face shall move, flash, or emit noise.
No display lighting shall cause distraction, confusion, nuisance or
hazard to traffic or aircraft.
(4) Digital billboards with electronic changeable copy and/or video
technology shall be equipped with photosensitive equipment that is
programmed to automatically adjust the brightness and contrast of
the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination.
Maximum brightness levels for billboards shall not exceed a limit of
465 lumens per square foot in the daytime and 26 lumens per
square foot after sundown as measured from the edge of the
nearest public street or roadway.
§ 120-40.10 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.10
117:548
§ 120-40.11. Nonconforming signs.
§ 120-40.12. Regulations by sign type.
The following tables outline the requirements for various sign types that
may be proposed for installation within the Town. The tables permit each
type of sign by the zone in which it is located. For the purposes of this
article, the Union Road Corridor shall be considered a "zone" as defined by
§ 120-70 of this chapter.
(5) Billboards shall be programmed or set in such a manner that the
display will turn dark and emit no light in case of malfunction.
(6) No billboard shall be constructed which resembles any official
marker erected by any governmental agency or which by reason of
position, shape, or color conflicts with or obscures the proper
functioning of any traffic sign or signal.
A. Compliance. All nonconforming signs shall be removed or brought into
compliance within three years of the adoption date of this article.
B. Discontinuance. Any nonconforming sign that is removed from its
position or siting and not replaced in-kind within 30 days shall be
presumed to be abandoned and discontinued and may not be restored
or re-erected except in compliance with this article.
C. Alteration. No nonconforming sign may be altered in any way that
would increase its nonconformity with the regulations of this article,
including but not limited to area, height, setback, and illumination.
D. Repair. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent maintaining a
nonconforming sign in good repair and safe condition.
A. Ground signs.
Ground Sign: A sign not attached to any building or structure, which
may be supported by one or two columns or posts provided the
distance between the ground and bottommost edge of the sign is no
greater than three feet
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum No. 1 per lot 1 per lot 1 per lot 1 per lot
Maximum
Area
8 square feet 32 square feet 32 square feet 32 square feet
with 10-foot
setback; OR
24 square feet
Maximum
Height1
3 feet 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet
§ 120-40.10 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.12
117:549
Ground Sign: A sign not attached to any building or structure, which
may be supported by one or two columns or posts provided the
distance between the ground and bottommost edge of the sign is no
greater than three feet
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Minimum
Setback2
5 feet 10 feet 10 feet 0 feet; 10 feet
for larger sign
area
Illumination Not Permitted Permitted Permitted Permitted
NOTES:
(1) Measured from the elevation of the ground at the center of the sign to
the topmost edge of the sign.
(2) Measured from the nearest edge of the sign to the front or side lot
line.
B. Pedestal signs.
PEDESTAL SIGN: A sign not attached to any building or structure
supported by one or two columns or posts with a distance exceeding
seven feet from the ground and the bottommost edge of the sign.
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufact
uring
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum No. Not Permitted 1 per lot 1 per lot Not Permitted
Maximum
Area
— 40 square feet 40 square feet —
§ 120-40.12 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.12
117:550
PEDESTAL SIGN: A sign not attached to any building or structure
supported by one or two columns or posts with a distance exceeding
seven feet from the ground and the bottommost edge of the sign.
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufact
uring
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum
Height1
— 25 feet 25 feet —
Minimum
Setback2
— 10 feet 10 feet —
Illumination — Permitted Permitted —
NOTES:
(1) Measured from the elevation of the ground at the center of the sign to
the topmost edge of the sign.
(2) Measured from the nearest edge of the sign to the front or side lot
line.
C. Wall signs.
WALL SIGN: Any sign fastened to a building or structure that does
not project more than 12 inches from the facade.
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum No. 1 per
structure
1 per facade 1 per facade 1 per facade
Maximum
Area
6 square feet 10% of the
facade
10% of the
facade
10% of the
facade
§ 120-40.12 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.12
117:551
WALL SIGN: Any sign fastened to a building or structure that does
not project more than 12 inches from the facade.
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum
Height
2 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
Illumination Not Permitted Permitted Permitted Permitted
D. Projecting signs.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign wholly or partly dependent upon a
building or structure for support which projects more than 12 inches,
but less than 40 inches from the facade.
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum No. Not Permitted 1 per use 1 per use 1 per use
Maximum
Area
— 8 square feet 8 square feet 8 square feet
Maximum
Height
— 3 feet 3 feet 3 feet
Minimum
Clearance1
— 9 feet 9 feet 9 feet
Illumination — External Only External Only Not Permitted
NOTES:
(1) Measured from the elevation of the ground directly beneath the center
of the sign to the bottommost edge of the sign.
§ 120-40.12 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.12
117:552
E. Suspended signs.
SUSPENDED SIGN: A sign attached to and supported by the
underside of a horizontal plane.
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum No. Not Permitted 1 per use 1 per use 1 per use
Maximum
Area
— 8 square feet 8 square feet 8 square feet
Maximum
Height
— 3 feet 3 feet 3 feet
Minimum
Clearance1
— 9 feet 9 feet 9 feet
Illumination — External Only External Only Not Permitted
NOTES:
(1) Measured from the elevation of the ground directly beneath the center
of the sign to the bottommost edge of the sign.
F. Awning signs.
AWNING SIGN: A sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor area.
Zone Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum No. Not Permitted 1 per awning 1 per awning 1 per awning
Maximum
Height1
— 18 inches 18 inches 12 inches
§ 120-40.12 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.12
117:553
AWNING SIGN: A sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor area.
Zone Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Illumination — Backlit Only Backlit Only Backlit Only
NOTE:
(1) As measured by the height of any shape fully encompassing all
graphics and/or type. Said sign shall only be permitted on the
bottommost edge of the canvas, fabric, or other material to which it is
applied.
G. Window signs.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign which is applied or attached to the exterior or
interior of a window or is installed inside of a window within 12
inches of the window through which it can be seen.
Zone
Residential
Districts
Commercial
Districts
Manufacturing
Districts
Union Road
Corridor
Maximum
No.1
— None None None
Maximum
Area
— Up to 100% of
the window
area
Up to 100% of
the window
area
Up to 20% of
the window
area
Illumination — Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted
NOTE:
(1) Window signs shall not be included in the count of total allotted
signage for any lot or use.
§ 120-40.12 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.12
117:554
§ 120-40.13. Definitions.
The following terms and definitions shall apply to this article for the
purposes of administration and enforcement. All other terms shall be
interpreted as defined by Article IX (Definitions) of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — Any message where the primary purpose of
which is the commercial advertisement or promotion of a commercial
product, event, or service (including content on an Internet website
operated for a commercial purpose).
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including but not limited to words,
letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or project
images. "Signs" shall also include all sign structures. A sign, for the
purposes of this chapter, does not include the following:
SIGN TYPE — The design and/or structure of a sign as identified below.
A flag or emblem of any nation, organization of nations, state or city, or
any fraternal, religious or civic organization;
A.
Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services incorporated
in a window display;
B.
Official notices issued by any court or public office or officer in the
performance of a public or official duty;
C.
Traffic control signs as defined in the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law; and
D.
Works of art, including murals, that do not contain any commercial
message, logo, graphic, or trademark.
E.
§ 120-40.12 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.13
117:555
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A freestanding sign that is composed of
two sign faces diverging at a 45° angle from their adjoined edge.
A.
AWNING SIGN — A sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor area.
B.
BANNER — A temporary sign composed of lightweight canvas-like
material, which can be attached to a structure or suspended by
attachment at each end.
C.
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign designed to be viewed from streets,
roads, and/or highways and meeting industry standards for design and
construction.
D.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of traffic or pedestrian direction or control. Such a sign shall
not carry a commercial message.
E.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign not attached to, dependent upon, or
supported by a building, including ground signs, pedestal signs, and
portable signs.
F.
GROUND SIGN — A sign not attached to any building or structure,
which may be supported by one or two columns or posts, provided the
distance between the ground and bottommost edge of the sign is no
greater than three feet.
G.
LAWN SIGN — A sign, not exceeding three feet in height and six feet in
area, constructed of materials not intended for permanent installation
that are attached to a single post or multiple posts for support and
stuck into the ground. The height of a lawn sign shall include any posts
or supports. Political campaigns, garage sales, and charitable events,
for example, are often advertised with lawn signs.
H.
MARQUEE SIGN — A permanent sign that extends from and across
part or all of a building edifice and is constructed of durable materials,
including metal, glass or plastic, and upon which a changeable message
may be placed.
I.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a
location other than where such sign is located. This shall not include
billboards.
J.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof
or on top of or above the parapet of a building.
K.
PEDESTAL SIGN — A sign not attached to any building or structure
and which is supported by one or two columns or posts with a distance
exceeding seven feet between the ground and the bottommost edge of
the sign.
L.
§ 120-40.13 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.13
117:556
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign wholly or partly dependent upon a
building or structure for support which projects more than 12 inches,
but less than 40 inches, from the facade.
M.
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign attached to and supported by the
underside of a horizontal plane.
N.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not intended to be used for a
period of time exceeding 30 days and is not attached to a building,
structure, or ground in a permanent manner, such signs usually being
constructed of poster board, cardboard, masonite, plywood, or plastic
material and mounted to wood, metal, wire or rope frames or supports.
O.
WALL SIGN — Any sign fastened to a building or structure that does
not project more than 12 inches from the facade.
P.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is applied or attached to the exterior or
interior of a window or is installed inside of a window within 12 inches
of the window through which it can be seen.
Q.
§ 120-40.13 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.13
117:557

ARTICLE IIIB
Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 8-17-1987; amended 1-27-1997]
§ 120-40.14. Authority.
The Planning Board of the Town of West Seneca is hereby authorized to
review and recommend to the West Seneca Town Board approval, approval
with modifications or disapproval of tower special permits and site plans
consistent with Town Law §§ 274-a and 274-b.
§ 120-40.15. Intent.
The Town of West Seneca recognizes the increased demand for wireless
communication transmitting facilities and the need for the services they
provide. Often, these facilities require the construction of a communications
tower and/or similar facilities. The intent of this article is to regulate
telecommunication facilities in accordance with the guidelines of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 by:
§ 120-40.16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — An accessory facility or structure serving
or being used in conjunction with a communications tower and/or similar
facility, and located on the same lot as the communications tower. Examples
of such structures include utility or transmission equipment storage sheds
or cabinets.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
frequency signals. Such signals shall include, but not be limited to radio,
A. Accommodating the need for telecommunication towers/antennas while
regulating their location and number in the community.
B. Minimizing adverse visual impacts of these towers/antennas through
proper design, siting and screening.
C. Preserving and enhancing the positive aesthetic qualities of the built
and natural environment in the Town of West Seneca.
D. Avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure,
falling ice, etc., through engineering and proper siting.
E. Requiring the joint use of towers when available and encouraging the
placement of antennas on existing structures to reduce the number of
such structures in the future. No new tower may be established if there
is a technically suitable space available on an existing communications
tower or structure within the search area that the new cell site is to
serve.
§ 120-40.14 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.16
117:559
television, cellular, paging, personal communication services (PSC) and
microwave communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Towers and/or antennas and
accessory structures together used in connection with the provisions of
cellular telephone service, personal communications services, paging
services, radio and television broadcast services and similar broadcast
services.
TOWER — A structure designed to support antennas. It includes without
limit, freestanding towers, guyed wires, monopoles and similar structures
which or which do not employ camouflage technology.
§ 120-40.16.1. Where permitted, approvals and bulk requirements.
A. Colocated/existing structure antennas. An antenna that is to be
attached to an existing communications tower, smoke stack, water
tower or other structure is permitted in all zoning districts. The antenna
is permitted upon issuance of a building permit in all areas. The
building permit application will include a structural analysis/report
verifying the ability of the structure to handle the antenna. The height
of the new antenna shall not extend above the height of the existing
structure by more than 50 feet. [Amended 2-23-1998]
B. Noncollocated/new structure antennas. An antenna that will not be
mounted on an existing structure as defined above or is more than 50
feet higher than the existing structure on which it is mounted is
permitted as follows:
(1) Municipal or government-owned property, or industrially zoned
(M-1, M-2 areas): site plan application per this article. If the tower
is to be set back a distance of less than the height of the proposed
tower plus 150 feet to any adjacent residential district, then the
application will require a tower special permit and site plan
approval.
(2) All commercial zoning districts: site plan review and a tower
special permit as set forth in this article. Applicant must provide
written documentation that municipal, government-owned or
industrially zoned property is unavailable for this site.
(a) The tower must be set back a minimum of the height of the
tower plus 150 feet from any residentially zoned property or
any front yard line.
(b) Towers exceeding 195 feet in height in commercial (C-2 and
C-1) zoning districts shall be treated as type-1 actions under
the State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
(3) All residential zoning districts: site plan review and a tower special
permit.
§ 120-40.16 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.16.1
117:560
§ 120-40.16.2. Tower special permit application materials.
All applicants for a tower special permit shall make written application
to the Planning Board through the Town Building Department. This
application, with all forms properly completed in duplicate copies of 20 sets,
submitted 21 days prior to the scheduled hearing date, shall include:
(a) The tower must be set back a minimum of the height of the
tower from all property lines and any existing building.
(b) The maximum height of a tower in these zoning districts is 175
feet. An area variance for height will be required from the
Town Board to exceed this height following initial review by the
Planning Board.
(c) All applications for telecommunications facilities in these
zoning districts shall be treated as type-1 actions under the
State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA). The
applicant must provide written documentation that site
locations or access roads in nonresidentially zoned areas are
unavailable.
A. Tower special permit application form (town-supplied).
B. Proof of notification (certified mail, return receipt to be given to the
town by the applicant) of all property owners within 500 feet of the
boundaries of the property that the tower is to be constructed.
C. Appropriate fee (see Town Fee Schedule96).
D. Site plan application forms, including long form EAF.
E. Site plan, in form and content acceptable to the town, prepared to scale
and in sufficient detail and accuracy showing at a minimum:
(1) The exact location of the proposed tower, together with guy wires
and guy anchors, if applicable.
(2) The maximum height of the proposed tower.
(3) A detail of tower type (monopole, guyed, freestanding or other).
(4) The color or colors of the tower.
(5) The location, type and intensity of any lighting on the tower.
(6) The property boundaries [a copy of a current (no older than five
years, with a notarized affidavit of no change) property survey must
also be provided]. A topographical drawing shall be submitted
covering an area no less than 500 feet beyond the proposed lease
area of the tower location.
96.Editor's Note: The Town Fee Schedule is on file in the office of the Building Inspector.
§ 120-40.16.1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.16.2
117:561
(7) Proof of the landowner's consent if the applicant will not own the
property. (A copy of a lease agreement must also be provided if the
applicant will not own the property.)
(8) The location of all structures on the property and all structures on
any adjacent property within 50 feet of the property lines, together
with the distance of these structures to the tower.
(9) The names of adjacent landowners.
(10) The location, nature and extent of any proposed fencing and
landscaping or screening.
(11) The location and nature of proposed utility easements and access
road, if applicable.
(12) Building elevations of accessory structures or immediately
adjacent buildings. The exterior appearance of companion
buildings must be compatible with other buildings in the site plan
area.
(13) Photographs of the site (with compass direction) and proposed
tower design shall be submitted.
(14) Letter of intent regarding whether or not the applicant plans to
lease space for colocation or to other carriers.
F. "Before" and "after" propagation studies prepared by a qualified radio
frequency engineer (signed and sealed by a professional engineer
registered in the State of New York) demonstrating existing signal
coverage, contrasted with the proposed signal coverage resulting from
the proposed telecommunications facility.
G. A "search ring" prepared by a qualified radio frequency engineer
(signed and sealed documents by a professional engineer registered in
the State of New York) and overlaid on an appropriate background map
demonstrating the area within which the telecommunications facility
needs to be located in order to provide proper signal strength and
coverage to the target cell. The applicant must be prepared to explain
to the Planning Board why it selected the proposed site, discuss the
availability or lack of availability of a suitable structure within the
search ring, which would have allowed for a colocated antenna(s), and
to what extent the applicant explored locating the proposed tower in a
more intensive use district. Correspondence with other
telecommunications companies concerning colocation is part of this
requirement.
H. The Town Planning Board, upon reviewing the application, may request
reasonable additional visual and aesthetic information as it deems
appropriate on a case-by-case basis. Such additional information may
include, among other things, enhanced landscaping plans, line-of-sight
drawings and/or visual simulations from viewpoints selected by the
§ 120-40.16.2 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.16.2
117:562
§ 120-40.16.3. Tower special permit standards.
The following criteria will be considered by the town prior to the approval/
denial of a request for a tower special permit. The criteria listed may be
used as a basis to impose reasonable conditions on the applicant.
Town Planning Board. Line-of-sight drawings and visual simulations are
mandatory for applications in residential zoning districts.
A. Siting preferences.
(1) The town may express a preference that the proposed
telecommunications facility be located in an alternate
technologically feasible and available location. A guideline for the
town's preference, from most favorable to least favorable districts/
property, is as follows:
(a) Property with an existing structure suitable for colocation.
(b) Municipal or government owned property.
(c) M-1 and M-2 Districts.
(d) All commercial zoning districts.
(e) All residential zoning districts.
(2) Any request by the town for information on a preferred alternate
site shall not unreasonably delay the applications.
B. Aesthetics. Telecommunications facilities shall be located and buffered
to the maximum extent which is practical and technologically feasible
to help ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses. In order to
minimize any adverse aesthetic affect on neighboring residences to the
extent possible, the Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions
on the applicant, including the following:
(1) The Planning Board may require a monopole or guyed tower (if
sufficient land is available to the applicant) instead of a
freestanding tower.
(2) The Planning Board may require reasonable landscaping consisting
of trees or shrubs to screen the base of the tower and/or to screen
the tower to the extent possible from adjacent residential property.
Existing on-site trees and vegetation shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
(3) The town can request additional site plan requirements such as
specially designed towers, additional screening, greater setbacks
and improved landscaping to address aesthetic concerns.
(4) The town may require the applicant to show that he has made good
faith efforts to colocate on existing towers or other available and
appropriate structures and/or to construct new towers near
§ 120-40.16.2 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.16.3
117:563
existing towers in an effort to consolidate visual disturbances.
However, such request shall not unreasonably delay the
application.
(5) Towers should be designed and sited so as to comply with
application of FAA lighting and painting requirements. Towers in
excess of 100 feet shall be artificially lighted, as well as all those
required to be lighted by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA). Towers shall be of a nonreflective finish, the color of which
shall be subject to approval. Any lights, which may be required by
this article or by the FAA, shall not consist of strobe lights, unless
specifically mandated by the FAA.
(6) No tower shall contain any signs or advertising devices. A small
sign on the fencing shall be placed to identify the ownership of the
facility and a telephone number for emergencies.
(7) The applicant must submit a copy of its policy regarding colocation
on the proposed tower with other potential future applicants. Such
policy should allow colocation under the following conditions:
(a) The new antenna(s) and equipment do not exceed structural
loading requirements, interfere with town space used or to be
used by the applicant nor pose any technical or radio
frequency interference with existing equipment;
(b) The party desiring to colocate pays the applicant an
appropriate and reasonable sum to colocate; and
(c) The party desiring to colocate has the similar policy of
colocation for the applicant.
C. Radio-frequency effect. The Planning Board may impose a condition on
the applicant that the communication antennas be operated only at
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) designated frequencies
and power levels and/or Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
technical exposure limits, and that the applicant provide competent
documentation to support that maximum allowable frequencies, power
levels and exposure limits for radiation will not be exceeded. The
applicant shall provide documentation that limits are not exceeded
after installation of the tower. These are to be submitted to the Town
Engineer.
D. Traffic, access and safety.
(1) A hard-surfaced road turnaround and one parking space shall be
provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. In
residential zones, access roads must be located not less than 20
feet from any adjoining lot. Maximum use of existing roads, public
or private, shall be made. The use of public roadways or road rightof-
ways for the siting of a tower or antenna(s) accessory structures
is prohibited.
§ 120-40.16.3 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.16.3
117:564
§ 120-40.16.4. Exemptions.
§ 120-40.16.5. Waivers.
The Planning Board may waive or vary any requirements in this article for
good cause shown.
(2) All towers and guy anchors, if applicable, shall be enclosed by a
fence not less than eight feet in height or otherwise sufficiently
protected from trespassing or vandalism. An antivandalism fence
extension shall be placed above said fence to further deter access.
No barbed or similar type wire is to be used. Additionally, no access
ladder or steps shall exist within 30 feet of ground level.
E. Removal of tower. The applicant shall agree to remove the tower if the
telecommunications facility becomes obsolete or ceases to be used for
its intended purpose for 12 consecutive months. The applicant is to
inform the town within 30 days if the tower is no longer being used for
its permitted purpose. The Planning Board shall require the applicant to
provide a demolition bond (in an amount determined by the Planning
Board based on at least double the cost of removal) for purposes of
removing the telecommunications facility in case the applicant fails to
do so as required above.
F. Structural safety. During the application process and every three years
after construction of the tower, the applicant/owner shall provide a
certificate from a qualified professional engineer certifying that the
tower meets applicable structural safety standards.
G. Maintenance of telecommunications facility. All telecommunications
facilities shall be maintained in good order and repair.
H. In any instance where a site is denied for a tower by the Town Board, a
twelve-month estoppel period shall be in effect barring another
application on that site for one year.
A. Tower and antenna(s) may be repaired and maintained without
restriction.
B. Antennas used solely for residential household televisions and radio
reception.
C. Satellite antennas measuring two meters or less in diameter and
located in commercial districts and satellite antennas one meter or less
in diameter regardless of locations.97
97.Editor's Note: FCC Rule regarding preemption of local zoning regulations for satellite
antennas, 47 CFR Part 25.
§ 120-40.16.3 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.16.5
117:565

ARTICLE IIIC
Home Occupation Regulations
[Added 8-17-1987]
§ 120-40.17. Intent.
The purpose of these provisions is to allow for home occupations which are
compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are allowed.
§ 120-40.18. Conditions.
The Town Board may, upon application and a public hearing thereon, permit
a home occupation in any R District (with the exception of R-90, R-75
and R-65 Districts), subject to the applicant's ability to provide reasonable
evidence that all the following conditions will be met. Home occupations
shall be limited to one per single-family dwelling.
A. The occupation will be conducted entirely within a dwelling or existing
accessory structure.
B. The occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use
of the dwelling.
C. The establishment and conduct of a home occupation shall not change
the principal character or use of the dwelling unit involved.
D. No more than one person other than members of the immediate family
residing on the premises may be employed.
E. Not more than 25% of the floor area of one story of the dwelling is
devoted to such home occupation.
F. No stock-in-trade is kept or commodities sold, other than incidental
supplies necessary for and consumed in the conduct of such home
occupation.
G. No storage or display of materials, goods, supplies or equipment
related to the operation of a home occupation shall be visible from the
outside of any structure located on the premises.
H. No mechanical equipment is used except such as may be used for
domestic or household purposes (or as deemed similar to power and
type).
I. Such occupation shall not require internal or external alteration or
invoke construction features not customarily in a dwelling.
J. The use shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or
electrical interference beyond what normally occurs in the applicable
zoning district.
K. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
§ 120-40.17 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.18
117:567
§ 120-40.19. Procedure.
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of
such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in
required front yard.
L. The home occupation shall not involve the use of advertising signs. Only
one nonilluminated nameplate not to exceed two by two (2 x 2) feet
shall be allowed. It may display the name of the occupant and/or the
name of the home occupation.
A. Application. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made by
the resident to the Town Board on a form provided by the Town Building
Department and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set by the Town
Board.
B. Planning Board review. All applications for a home occupation permit
shall be reviewed by the Town Planning Board, which shall report its
findings to the Town Board.
C. Town Board review and public hearing. After considering the Planning
Board's recommendations and after a duly scheduled public hearing,
the Town Board may issue a home occupation permit. Notices of the
public hearing shall be mailed by the Town Clerk to adjacent property
owners.
D. Permit renewal.
(1) The time limit for the home occupation permit shall be one year.
(2) Requests for renewal shall be submitted in writing to the Town
Board, accompanied by a fee as set by the Town Board.
(3) The request shall be reviewed and an inspection made of the
property by the Building Inspector to verify continued compliance
with the necessary criteria and conditions established with the
initial approval. The Building Inspector shall report his findings to
the Town Board, which, upon a determination of compliance, may
renew the home occupation permit for one year.
E. Voiding of permit.
(1) The Town Board may void any home occupation permit for
noncompliance with the conditions set forth in approving the
permit.
(2) Failure of the applicant to renew the permit shall result in
automatic termination of the home occupation. For renewal, the
applicant must pay an initial application fee and reapply for
another permit.
§ 120-40.18 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.19
117:568
ARTICLE IIID
Adult Uses
[Added 3-23-1998]
§ 120-40.20. Purpose; intent.
It is recognized that buildings and establishments operated as adult uses
have serious objectionable operational characteristics. In order to promote
the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town of West
Seneca, this part of the Zoning Ordinance is intended to restrict Adult Uses
to certain nonresidential areas of the Town of West Seneca and otherwise
regulate their operation. This part of the Zoning Ordinance is intended to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town
of West Seneca by regulating the concentration of such uses.
§ 120-40.21. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following items shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment or business, whether retail or
wholesale, having, as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-intrade,
books, magazines and other periodicals, films and viewing materials
for sale or viewing on premises, by use of motion-picture devices or any
coin-operated means, including video tapes and props and toys, which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or an establishment or business containing a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT CABARET — A business enterprise which serves food or beverages
for consumption on the premises, with or without carry-out service, which
features entertainers or waiters and/or waitresses who display any specified
A. The Constitution and laws of the State of New York grant to the Town of
West Seneca powers, especially police power, to enact reasonable
legislation and measures to regulate and supervise adult entertainment
establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
B. It is not the intent of the Town of West Seneca, in enacting this
ordinance, to deny to any person rights to speech protected by the
United States and/or State Constitutions, nor is it the intent of the Town
of West Seneca to impose any additional limitations or restrictions on
the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented films, videotapes, books and/or other materials. Further, by
enacting this Ordinance, the Town of West Seneca does not intend to
deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain and/or view any
sexually oriented materials protected by the United States and/or State
Constitutions, nor does it intend to restrict or deny any constitutionally
protected rights that distributors or exhibitors of such sexually oriented
materials may have.
§ 120-40.20 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.21
117:569
anatomical area or who depict, describe or simulate specified sexual
activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private establishment
which presents topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or
exotic dancers or other similar entertainments.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building or structure,
or portion of a building or structure, used for presenting materials having as
a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical area for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT USE — An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult entertainment
cabaret, adult motion-picture theater, massage establishment, body rub
establishment, peep show or any other business(es) where specified
anatomical areas are displayed or specified sexual activities are
encountered.
BODY RUB ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where body rubs are administered for pay.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where massages are administrated for pay, including but not
limited to massage parlors, sauna baths and steam baths. This definition
shall not be construed to include a hospital, nursing home or medical
clinic or the office of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or duly
licensed physical therapist or barbershops or beauty salons in which
massages are administered only to the scalp, face, neck or shoulders.
This definition also shall exclude health clubs, which have facilities for
physical exercise, such as tennis courts, racquetball courts or exercise
rooms, and which do not receive their primary source of revenue through
the administration of massages. Such establishments are not prohibited,
provided that they have a duly licensed massage therapist on the premises.
PEEP SHOWS — A theater which presents material in the form of live
shows, films or videotapes, viewed from an individual enclosure, for which
a fee is charged and which is not open to the public generally.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than the completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy or bestiality.
§ 120-40.21 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.21
117:570
SUBSTANTIAL CONNECTION —
§ 120-40.22. Restrictions affecting adult uses.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
In a sole proprietorship, an individual who owns, operates, controls or
conducts, directly or indirectly, any premises, building or location upon
which any adult use takes place.
A.
In a partnership, limited or general, an individual who shares in any
potential profits or losses of the business or who shares in the
ownership of any of the assets of the partnership business.
B.
In a corporation, an individual who is an officer, director or a holder,
either directly, indirectly or beneficially, of more than 20% of any class
of stock.
C.
Any person who furnishes more than 20% of the capital financing or
assets of such business, whether in cash, goods or services.
These definitions are to include any type of business(es), or
combination of business(es) where specified anatomical areas are
displayed or specified sexual activities are encountered.
D.
A. The adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult entertainment cabarets,
adult motion-picture theaters, adult motels, massage establishments,
body rub establishments and peep shows or any other adult use
governed by these provisions shall be allowed only for properties
located in Manufacturing (M-2) Districts and subject to the
requirements herein established.
B. No more than one of the uses governed by these provisions shall be
permitted on any single lot in the Town of West Seneca.
C. None of the uses governed by these provisions shall be allowed:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of the boundary of any residential zoning district.
(2) Within 1,000 feet of the property line of a public or private school,
hospital, synagogue, church or other religious institution, day-care
center, youth center, park or playground, public library, or areas
where minors congregate.
(3) Within 1,000 feet of the property line of another lot containing an
adult use.
D. All adult uses, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult entertainment
cabarets, adult motion picture theaters, adult motels, massage
establishments, body rub establishments and peep shows, with the
exception of their permitted signs, landscaping, and off-street parking,
shall be conducted in an enclosed building. Regardless of location or
§ 120-40.21 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.22
117:571
§ 120-40.23. Certificate of registration; fee.
distance, no one who is passing by an enclosed building having a
use governed by these provisions shall be able to see any specified
anatomical area or any specified sexual activity by virtue of any act or
display which depicts or shows said area or activity. This requirement
shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, window or other opening.
E. A person who knowingly owns, manages, operates, conducts or
maintains any of the uses governed by these provisions in any way
which is contrary to these regulations shall be subject to prosecution
under this ordinance.
F. No such establishment as defined in this ordinance shall employ any
individual below the age of 18.
A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall lease, rent, maintain,
operate, use or allow to be operated or used any business or
establishment, any part of which contains an Adult Use, without first
complying with the provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance as
set forth below.
B. In addition to any and all other necessary licenses and permits, no form
of adult use shall be allowed to operate, or continue to operate, until a
certificate of registration is filed with the Town Clerk containing:
(1) The name and address of the business or the establishment subject
to the provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) The names, business and home addresses and business or home
phone numbers of all owners of the business or establishment
subject to the provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(3) The names, business and home addresses and business or home
phone numbers of all those person having a substantial connection
with the business or establishment subject to the provisions of this
part of the Zoning Ordinance.
(4) The date of the initiation of the adult use.
(5) The exact nature of the adult use.
(6) If the premises or the building in which the business containing the
adult use is located is leased, a copy of the lease, name of tenant
and name, address and telephone number of landlord.
(7) The applicant shall also submit a plan, drawn to appropriate scale,
of the premises proposed for registration, indicating the areas to be
covered by the registration, all windows, doors, entrances and exits
and the fixed features of the proposed registered premises. The
term "fixed features" shall include walls, stages, immovable
partitions, projection booths, admission booths, concession booths
§ 120-40.22 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.23
117:572
§ 120-40.24. Approval or disapproval of registration.
and stands, immovable counters and similar appurtenances that
are intended to be permanent.
C. If there occurs any change in the information required for the
information of registration, or the certification of registration, the Town
Clerk shall be notified of such change and a new or amended certificate
filed within 30 days of such change.
D. The processing fee for such certificate of registration or amendment
thereto shall be $500.
E. No certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this part of
the Zoning Ordinance shall be transferable to any person other than
registrant, nor shall a certificate of registration be transferable for use
at any premises, building or location other than stated in the certificate
of registration.
F. Change of name. A registrant may not move the registered adult use to
a new location without first following the same procedure for the
issuance of a new registration and the payment of an application fee of
$200. The registrant shall submit to the Town Clerk an application for a
change of location, accompanied by the application fee of $500.
G. The owner, manager or agent of any adult use shall cause a copy of the
certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this part of the
Zoning Ordinance to be prominently displayed on the premises,
building or location for which it is issued.
H. Any knowingly false statement, or any statement which the registrant
or applicant should reasonably have known to be false, which is
provided in the certificate of registration or any document or
information supplied therewith, shall be grounds for denial, rejection,
suspension or revocation of the certificate of registration.
I. It is a violation of this part of the Zoning Ordinance for the owner or
person in control of any property to establish or operate thereon or to
permit an Adult Use without having in force a certificate of registration
complying with this section.
J. No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public
way or from any property not registered as an Adult Use. This provision
shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, screen or
other opening.
A. Upon the completion of the investigation of an application by the
Building Inspector and the Chief of Police, the Building Inspector and/
or the Chief of Police shall submit a recommendation for approval or
disapproval of the application to the Town Clerk. If approved, the Town
§ 120-40.23 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.24
117:573
§ 120-40.25. Term of registration.
All registrations issued under this part of the Zoning Ordinance shall be
classified as annual registrations, which shall be paid for on or before
October 1 and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. A
registration beginning business after October 1, and before April 1, may
obtain a new registration upon application therefor and the payment of the
appropriate annual registration fee, and such registration shall expire on
the following September 30. A registrant beginning business after March
31, and before October 1, may obtain a new registration upon application
thereof and the payment of one-half of the appropriate annual registration
fee herein required, and such registration shall expire on September 30
of the same year. The provisions of this section shall not affect any other
provisions of this part of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 120-40.26. Denial of application.
A new or renewal application for registration shall be denied:
Clerk shall issue the registration upon the payment of the appropriate
registration fee.
B. If the Building Inspector recommends disapproval, that person shall
indicate the reason for the disapproval on the application or in a
separate written notice. The Town Clerk shall inform the applicant of
approval or disapproval. Any notice of disapproval shall state the
reason thereof. Notification of disapproval shall be by certified mail and
shall be sent to the address on the registration application, which shall
be considered to be the correct address.
A. When the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to
this part of the Zoning Ordinance have had their registration previously
suspended or revoked or have been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose
registration under this part of the Zoning Ordinance has previously
been suspended or revoked.
B. When any false statement is made on the application for registration.
C. When the applicant, or partner in a partnership, or an officer, director
or principal stockholder of a former or existing corporation, or the
corporation itself, has been convicted of a criminal act in this state or
any other state within five years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
D. Any new corporation formed by an officer, directors or principal
shareholders of a corporation which has been convicted of a criminal
act in this state or any other state within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application.
§ 120-40.24 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-40.27
117:574
§ 120-40.27. Revocation of registration.
The registration issued under this part of this Zoning Ordinance shall
be revoked immediately if the applicant or partner, officer, principal
stockholder of a former or existing corporation or the corporation itself is
convicted of a criminal act in this state or any other state.
§ 120-40.28. Amortization.
In all districts, except as provided in this part of the Zoning Ordinance, any
adult use shall terminate not later than one year after the effective date of
this part of the Zoning Ordinance, and thereafter, the space or premises or
building formerly occupied by such use shall be used only for a conforming
use.
§ 120-40.27 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-40.28
117:575

ARTICLE IV
Off-Street Parking Regulations
§ 120-41. Required off-street parking spaces.
A. After the effective date of this chapter, off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as hereinafter specified at the time a building or structure is
erected or within two years for existing buildings, provided that the
building owner owns sufficient land contiguous to the lot upon which
the building is situated, or at the time a new use of open land is
established. In the case of an enlargement of any existing building,
structure or use after the effective date of this chapter, off-street
parking spaces shall be provided as hereinafter specified for the
enlarged portion of such building, structure or use.
B. No existing or required off-street parking area shall be reduced in
capacity so as to be less than required by this chapter, and if such
parking capacity is already less than herein required, such parking area
shall not be further reduced; provided, however, that a reduction in
such existing parking area shall be allowed if equivalent parking space
is provided for the use involved.
C. In the case of a change of use which would result in a requirement for a
greater parking area than is provided, the Board of Appeals shall
determine the number of additional spaces to be required.
D. Table of Parking, Stacking and Loading Requirements.
(1) Minimum parking requirements. [Amended 10-14-1963;
8-17-1987; 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
Table of Parking, Stacking and
Loading Requirements
Use Parking Spaces
Dwellings
Single-family or two-family
dwelling
2 spaces for each dwelling
unit
Multifamily dwelling 2 spaces for each dwelling
unit
Hotel, motel or tourist home 1 space per guest room and
conference unit, plus 1 space
per 6 seats for restaurant bar
area
Institutional uses
Sanatorium or convalescent
home
1 space for each 5 beds
§ 120-41 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-41
117:577
Table of Parking, Stacking and
Loading Requirements
Use Parking Spaces
Home for aged or orphanage 1 space for each 5 persons in
residence
Places of assembly
School 1 space for each class room,
plus 1 space for each 5 seats
in the auditorium or stadium,
whichever is greater
Church, principal or
accessory auditorium,
theater, stadium or sports
arena
1 space for each 3 seats
Library, museum or art
gallery
1 space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area
Bowling alley 6 spaces per alley
Dance hall or studio, skating
rink or other place of public
amusement not otherwise
specified
1 space for each 100 square
feet of floor area
Eating or drinking
establishment, principal or
accessory
Drive-in type 3 spaces for each 25 square
feet of gross floor area
Other types 2 spaces for each 5 seats
Club or lodge 1 space for each 100 square
feet of floor area used for club
or lodge purposes, plus 1
space for each sleeping room
Mortuary or funeral parlor 10 spaces for each parlor
Permanent recreational uses
Ice skating, roller rinks and 1 space per 250 square
curling clubs feet of gross area devoted to
activity
Health and swimming clubs
and spas
1 space per 50 square feet of
gross floor area devoted to
activity
Tennis clubs 3 spaces per court
§ 120-41 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-41
117:578
Table of Parking, Stacking and
Loading Requirements
Use Parking Spaces
Golf courses and driving
ranges
3 spaces per hole; minimum
10 spaces
Conservation and gun clubs 10 spaces
Business or industrial uses
Furniture, floor covering or
appliance store, custom shop
or wholesale business
1 space for each 700 square
feet of gross floor area
New or used car sales 1 space for each 700 square
feet of sales area within a
building, but not less than 5
spaces for customer parking
and 1 space for each 2
employees. Such spaces shall
be clearly marked and shall
not be used for the parking of
unregistered motor vehicles.
Gasoline station, public
garage or repair garage,
principal or accessory
3 spaces for each service bay
Shopping center or stores
over 20,000 square feet of
gross floor area
5 spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area
Individual retail stores 6 spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area
Grocery or supermarket 10 spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area
Doctor or dentist 3 spaces for each office, plus
3 spaces for each treatment
room
Barber- and beauty shops 3 spaces per chair
Other business or
professional offices
1 space for each 100 square
feet of gross floor area
Manufacturing, storage or
other industrial floor area
1 space for each 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area used
for such purposes, but shall
not be less than 1 space for
each 2 employees and need
not be more than 1 for each
1.5 employees
§ 120-41 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-41
117:579
Table of Parking, Stacking and
Loading Requirements
Use Parking Spaces
Shopping center or stores over
20,000 square feet of gross floor
area [Added 5-9-1994]
Less than 400,000 square
feet of gross floor area
5 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Greater than 400,000 and
less than 600,000 square feet
of gross floor area
4.75 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Greater than 600,000 square
feet of gross floor area
enumerated or excepted
4.5 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area
All other principal uses not above 1 space for each 350 square
feet of gross floor area
(2) Minimum stacking requirements. In addition to minimum parking
requirements established above, the following stacking areas shall
be required. The minimum size of each space shall be 20 feet in
length and nine feet in width.
Use Stacking Area
Rapid car wash 30 spaces for 1 stall, plus 15 spaces
for each additional stall
Coin car wash 5 spaces per stall
Drive-in bank, accessory to
bank offices
8 spaces per booth, customer
facility or service window
Drive-in bank, not accessory
to bank offices
10 spaces per booth, customer
facility or service window
Other drive-in facilities 5 spaces per booth, customer
facility or service window
(3) Minimum loading requirements. Loading and unloading facilities
shall be provided and maintained as long as such building is
occupied or unless equivalent facilities are provided in
conformance with the regulations of this section. Off-street loading
spaces shall be provided as required herein for the following uses:
§ 120-41 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-41
117:580
§ 120-42. Units of measurement.
Schedule of Required Loading Facilities
Use
Gross Floor Area of
Single Enterprise
Building or Per
Enterprise Within a
Building
(square feet)
Required
Number of
Spaces
Retail stores and services
and types [Amended
5-9-1994]
Under 20,000 1
20,000 to 50,000 2
Over 50,000 3
Retail stores and services
utilizing either common
service corridors or
common loading docks
[Added 5-9-1994]
N/A 1 per 50,000
square feet of
gross floor
area
Printing, publishing,
warehouses and storage
establishments
Under 40,000 2
40,000 to 100,000 4
Manufacturing and
processing of products
Under 20,000 2
20,000 to 40,000 4
Each additional 25,000 1
(4) Multifamily and special developments, in addition to required
parking. [Added 9-24-1990]
Number of Dwelling
Units Required Visitor Parking Spaces
0 to 10 2
11 to 25 5
26 to 50 10
51 to 100 20
101 thereafter 5 per 25 units
A. Size of parking space. For the purpose of computing gross parking area
for required off-street parking, 350 square feet of unobstructed net
standing, maneuvering or access area shall be considered one parking
space. However, a lesser area may be considered as one space if the
§ 120-41 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-42
117:581
§ 120-43. Modifications of required spaces.
Building Inspector certifies that the layout and design of the parking
area are adequate to permit convenient access and maneuvering. In
any event, the size of a parking space shall be at least 18 feet long and
nine feet wide, exclusive of access or maneuvering area. [Amended
5-9-1994]
B. Gross floor area. Gross floor area shall include all areas of a building
used or occupied by any traffic generator mentioned in § 120-41;
provided, however, that basement or cellar floor area not used for
processing, servicing or sales of goods or merchandise shall not be
counted as gross floor area.
C. Seats. In places of assembly where bench-type seats are provided or
where standing patrons are served at a counter or bar, each 20 linear
inches of such seating or standing space shall be considered as one seat
for the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements.
D. Fractional units. When application of the units of measurement to
determine required off-street parking spaces results in a fractional
parking space of one-half (1/2) or more, one parking space shall be
required for such fractional parking space.
A. Accessory uses.
(1) No off-street parking shall be required for uses accessory to any
institutional use specified in the Table of Required Parking
Spaces,98 or for an accessory restaurant used primarily for
students, patients, tenants or employees occupying a principal
building.
(2) In the case of accessory retail sales, boat berths, restaurants or
swimming pools, the parking requirement for either the accessory
use or the principal use, whichever requirement is less, shall be
reduced by 50%.
B. Joint facilities.
(1) In the case of a church and school on the same lot, the lesser
parking requirement shall be waived.
(2) Where places of assembly specified in the Table of Required
Parking Spaces99 are located on the same lot with other uses, the
Board of Appeals may permit a reduction in the number of required
off-street parking spaces for such places of assembly.
98.Editor's Note: See now the Table of Parking, Stacking and Loading Requirements in
§ 120-41D.
99.Editor's Note: See now the Table of Parking, Stacking and Loading Requirements in
§ 120-41D.
§ 120-42 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-43
117:582
§ 120-44. Site requirements for off-street parking spaces.
(3) Where public off-street parking facilities are available, other than
off-street parking provided for a public building, the Board of
Appeals may permit a reduction in the number of required offstreet
parking spaces for uses located on any lot within 600 feet of
such public parking facility.
A. Location of required parking spaces.
(1) General provisions. All required off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the same lot with the building or use they serve, except
as provided in Subsection A(2) (Group facilities).
(2) Group facilities. In any C or M District, required off-street parking
spaces may be provided in group parking facilities designed to
serve two or more buildings or uses on different lots, provided that:
(a) The total parking spaces in such group facility shall not be less
than the sum of the requirements for the various uses
computed separately.
(b) All required parking spaces shall be not more than 600 feet
from the boundary of the lot on which such buildings or uses
are located.
B. Setback for all off-street parking spaces.
(1) In any R District.
(a) Enclosed off-street parking spaces shall be subject to the
regulations of this chapter for accessory buildings.
(b) No open off-street parking space shall be permitted in a
required front yard or exterior side yard, except that reserved
parking spaces may be located in such yards, provided that
they are situated no closer than 20 feet to any street line and
no closer than three feet to any side lot line and not directly in
front of a principal building. [Amended 8-17-1987]
(c) No open off-street parking area for five or more vehicles shall
be located within five feet of any side or rear lot line of an
adjoining lot in any R District.
(2) In any C or M District. No open or enclosed off-street parking space
shall be permitted within 10 feet of any street line or within 10 feet
of any R District boundary. When a front yard is used for parking,
the required building setback shall be increased a minimum of 10
feet. [Added 8-17-1987]
C. Encroachment of required parking spaces prohibited. All areas counted
as required off-street parking area shall be unobstructed and free of
other uses except off-street loading or unloading.
§ 120-43 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-44
117:583
D. Guaranty for off-site parking spaces. In any case where required offstreet
parking spaces are provided in off-site facilities, such off-site
parking spaces shall be subject to deed, lease or contract restrictions
acceptable to the Town Attorney of the Town of West Seneca, binding
the owner, his heirs or assigns to maintain the required number of
spaces available throughout the life of such use.
E. Additional requirements for all open off-street parking spaces. All open
off-street parking spaces shall be considered as automotive use areas
and shall be subject to the requirements of § 120-26 in addition to the
provisions of this section.
F. All parking areas, driveways, drive lanes, access roads, private roads or
similar private areas intended for vehicular travel and parking shall be
constructed of concrete, asphalt or similar material to create a hard
surface area. Stone or gravel is not permitted as a finished construction
material for such areas. [Added 9-8-2014 by L.L. No. 10-2014]
§ 120-44 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-44
117:584
ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Use Regulations
§ 120-45. Continuation of use.
A. Except for signs which are regulated by § 120-40.10, any use which is
made nonconforming by any use regulation of this chapter or by any
subsequent amendments hereto may be continued, except as
hereinafter provided. [Amended 8-20-1979]
B. Change in use.
(1) Such nonconforming use may be changed as follows:
(a) A use which is not classified herein may be changed to a
conforming use or, when approved by the Board of Appeals, to
an appropriate classified use.
(b) A classified use may be changed to a use of a higher
classification.
(c) A classified use may be changed to a use of the same
classification if the Board of Appeals determines that the new
use is no more detrimental to the adjacent properties that the
existing use and that off-street parking is adequate (see
§ 120-41).
(d) Once changed to a conforming use or to a use of a higher
classification, such use shall not thereafter revert to a use of a
lower classification.
(2) Uses are hereby classified as follows with the lower number
indicating the higher classification:
(a) Class I: uses first permitted in R-90, R-75 or R-65 Districts.
(b) Class II: uses first permitted in R-90A, R-75A or R-65A
Districts. [Amended 8-17-1987]
(c) Class III: uses first permitted in R-50 District.
(d) Class IV: uses first permitted in R-60A District.
(e) Class V: uses first permitted in C-1 District.
(f) Class VII: uses first permitted in C-2 District. [Amended
8-17-1987]
(g) Class VI: uses first permitted in M-1 District. [Amended
8-17-1987]
(h) Class VIII: uses first permitted in M-2 District.
§ 120-45 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-45
117:585
§ 120-46. Discontinuance.
(3) Nonclassified uses include uses first permitted in the R-100A
District and uses not listed in any district in the use regulations of
this chapter.
C. Enlargement or extension. Such nonconforming use shall not be
enlarged or extended, except that in any C or M District any
nonconforming building may be enlarged to an extent not exceeding
25%, in the aggregate, of the gross floor area devoted to such
nonconforming use. In no case shall such enlargement extend beyond
the lot occupied by such nonconforming use nor violate any height,
yard, parking area or other open space requirement of this chapter.
When the total of all enlargements equals 25% of the gross floor area
existing at the time such use became a nonconforming use, no further
enlargements shall be permitted.
D. Repair or alteration.
(1) Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent normal maintenance of
a building or other structure containing a nonconforming use,
including nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations not
extending the nonconforming use.
(2) No structural alterations shall be made in a building or other
structure containing a nonconforming use except:
(a) When required by law.
(b) To restore to a safe condition any building or structure
declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
(c) To accomplish permitted enlargements.
(d) To accomplish a change to a conforming use or to a use of a
higher classification.
E. Restoration. Such nonconforming building or other structure which has
been damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50% or more
of its equalized assessed value as determined by the Town Assessor of
the Town of West Seneca, or which has been condemned by the Building
Inspector and ordered to be demolished, shall not be rebuilt or repaired
except in conformance with the regulations of this chapter. In the case
of a permitted restoration of a nonconforming use, neither the floor
area nor the cubical content shall be increased from the original
nonconforming building or other structure.
A. In any district, whenever a nonconforming use of land, building or other
structure, or any part or portion thereof, has been discontinued for a
period of one year, such nonconforming use shall not thereafter be
reestablished, and all future use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Such discontinuance of the active and
§ 120-45 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-46
117:586
§ 120-47. Cessation.
The following nonconforming uses may be continued for the period of
time specified, provided that after the expiration of such period any such
nonconforming use shall become an unlawful use and shall be terminated:
continuous operation of such nonconforming use or a part or portion
thereof for such period of one year is hereby construed and considered
to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use regardless of any
reservation of an intent not to abandon same or of an intent to resume
active operations. If actual abandonment in fact is evidenced by the
removal of buildings, other structures, machinery, equipment or other
evidences of such nonconforming use of the land and premises, the
abandonment shall be construed and considered to be completed within
a period of less than one year and all rights to reestablish or continue
such nonconforming use shall thereupon terminate.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to agricultural land which
is not used because of participation in federal or state agricultural
programs or because of normal agricultural practices.
A. Within one year.
(1) In any R District, any nonconforming use not in an enclosed
building, including but not limited to junk business, auto wrecking
or dismantling or the storage of motor vehicles which normally
stand for 24 hours or more.
(2) In any R District, the outdoor storage of contractor's equipment or
of commercial vehicles exceeding three-fourths (3/4) ton rated
capacity.
(3) In any district, any adult use. [Added 10-20-1980]
B. Within three years.
(1) In any R District, the parking or storage of equipment or
commercial vehicles exceeding three-fourths (3/4) ton rated
capacity.
(2) In any R District, a nonconforming sign or a non-conforming
building or other structure with an assessed value under $500. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to nonconforming
roadside stands accessory to agricultural use of the premises nor to
identification signs accessory to the buildings designed for
business or industrial use.
(3) In any R District, any nonconforming accessory use conducted
within a garage or other accessory building which is capable of
being used for a conforming use.
C. Within 12 years.
§ 120-46 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-47
117:587
§ 120-48. Nonconformity as to lot size, open space, etc.
(1) In any R District except an R-60A District, any gas station or public
garage.
A. Continuation. Any building, other structure or use of land which is
made nonconforming by any lot size, open space, height or building size
regulations of this chapter or by any subsequent amendments thereto
may be continued, except as hereinafter provided.
B. Enlargement or extension. Such nonconforming building, other
structure or use of land may be enlarged or extended, provided that any
such enlargement or extensions shall comply with the regulations of
this chapter.
C. Repair or alteration. Such nonconforming building or other structure
may be repaired or structurally altered, provided that alterations
creating enlargements or extensions shall conform to the regulations of
this chapter.
D. Restoration. Such nonconforming building or other structure which has
been damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 75% or more
of its equalized assessed value as determined by the Town Assessor of
the Town of West Seneca, or which has been condemned by the Building
Inspector and ordered to be demolished, shall not be rebuilt or repaired
except in conformance with the regulations of this chapter. In the case
of a permitted restoration of any such nonconforming use, the degree of
nonconformance of the original building or other structure shall not be
increased.
§ 120-47 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-48
117:588
ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 120-49. Administrative and enforcement officer.
Unless otherwise provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Building Inspector of the Town of West
Seneca. The Building Inspector shall keep a complete file of all applications,
permits, orders, certificates, requirements and decisions affecting each and
every application filed with the Town of West Seneca pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 120-50. Building permits.
The provisions of the Building Code100 and other applicable regulations of
the Town of West Seneca shall control the issuance of building permits. In
addition to such provisions, every application for a building permit shall be
accompanied by a plat, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions
of the plot to be built upon, the size and location of the building or other
structure on the plot and such other information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of the regulations contained in this chapter.
No building permit shall be issued unless the provisions of this chapter are
complied with.
§ 120-51. Certificates of zoning compliance.
A. No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of or repairs
to, any building or other structure shall be issued until an application
has been made for a certificate of zoning compliance.
B. No land shall be occupied or used and no building or other structure
hereafter erected, altered or extended shall be used or changed in use
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the
Building Inspector, stating that the building, other structure or
proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of this chapter.
C. All applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be in
writing, signed by the property owner or his duly authorized agent, on
forms furnished by the Building Inspector, and shall contain the
following information:
(1) Nature and definite purpose of the building, other structure or use.
(2) Description of the property and buildings or other structure
thereon and to be placed thereon.
(3) Statement of any restrictions by deed or other instrument of
record.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Construction.
§ 120-49 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-51
117:589
§ 120-52. Inspections.
The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to cause any building, other
structure or tract of land to be inspected and examined and to order in
writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in
violation of any provision of this chapter. After any such order has been
served, no work shall proceed on any building, other structure or tract of
land covered by such order except to comply with such order.
§ 120-53. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 5-6-1974; 8-17-1987]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted hereunder is guilty of an offense punishable by a fine not exceeding
$350 for the first violation; a minimum of $350 and a maximum of $700
for a second violation within five years; and a minimum of $700 and a
maximum of $1,000 for a third or subsequent violation within five years; or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. Each week's
continued violation shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 120-54. Additional remedies.
In addition to the foregoing remedies, the Town of West Seneca may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, correct or
restrain any violation of this chapter.
(4) An agreement to comply with this chapter and all other laws,
ordinances and regulations that may be applicable.
D. Upon written request and application for a certificate of zoning
compliance by the property owner or his duly authorized agent, the
Building Inspector shall inspect any building, other structure or tract of
land existing on the effective date of this chapter and shall issue a
certificate of zoning compliance therefor, certifying:
(1) The use of the building, other structure or tract of land.
(2) Whether such use conforms to all the provisions of this chapter.
(a) However, no certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued if
there are any pending violations of law or orders of the
Building Inspector, the Board of Appeals or the Town Board.
E. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued within 10 days after
the erection or alteration shall have been approved as complying with
the provision of this chapter and shall void any previous certificate of
zoning compliance for the same premises.
§ 120-51 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-54
117:590
ARTICLE VII
Board of Appeals
§ 120-55. Creation and organization.
The Board of Appeals, consisting of five members, as constituted and
empowered under § 267 of Article 16 of the Town Law on the effective date
of this chapter, shall be continued. Vacancies occurring in such Board shall
be filled in accordance with Town Law. The Board of Appeals shall have
all the powers and perform all the duties prescribed by statute and by this
chapter.
§ 120-56. Appellate jurisdiction.
A. Appeals for interpretation. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged that there is an error or misinterpretation in
an order, requirement, decision or determination by any administrative
official of the Town of West Seneca charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. The Board of Appeals may reverse, modify or
affirm, in whole or in part, any such appealed order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be
made in strictly applying and interpreting the provisions of this chapter,
and for such purposes shall have all the powers of the officer from
whom the appeal is taken.
B. Appeals for variance. On an appeal from an order, requirement,
decision or determination of any administrative official charged with
the enforcement of this chapter, and where there are practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of this chapter, the Board of Appeals shall have the power,
in passing upon appeals, to vary or modify the application of any of the
regulations or provisions of this chapter relating to the use,
construction or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of land,
so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and
welfare secured and substantial justice done. Toward this end, the
Board of Appeals may prescribe such conditions or restrictions as it
may deem necessary. [Amended 8-17-1987]
(1) Use variance. Before the Board of Appeals may grant a use
variance, unnecessary hardship must be established based upon all
the following criteria:
(a) Based on actual monetary values, the land in question cannot
yield a reasonable return if used only for a purpose allowed in
that zone.
(b) The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances and not
to the general conditions in the neighborhood.
§ 120-55 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-56
117:591
§ 120-57. Original jurisdiction.
(c) The use to be authorized by the variance will not alter the
essential character of the neighborhood and is compatible with
the area.
(2) Area variance. Area variances may be considered where setback,
frontage, lot size, density or yard requirements of this chapter
cannot be reasonably met. The Board of Appeals may grant an area
variance on the ground of practical difficulty, such practical
difficulty to be determined by consideration of the following:
(a) How substantial the variation is in relation to the requirement.
(b) The effect, if the variance is allowed, of the increased
population density thus produced on available governmental
facilities (fire, water, garbage and the like).
(c) Whether a substantial change will be produced in the
character of the neighborhood or a substantial detriment to
adjoining properties created.
(d) Whether the difficulty can be obviated by some method,
feasible for the applicant to pursue, other than a variance.
(e) Whether, in view of the manner in which the difficulty arose
and considering all of the above factors, the interests of justice
will be served by allowing the variance.
(3) Conditions. No variance under the provisions of Subsection B(1)
and (2) above, shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that
such variance:
(a) Will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
chapter or such regulation, taking into account the location
and size of use, the nature and intensity of the operations
involved in or conducted in connection with it and the size of
the site in respect to streets giving access thereto.
(b) Will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent property,
taking into account the possibility of screening or other
protective measures to protect adjacent properties.
(c) Will not create a hazard to health, safety or general welfare.
(d) Will not alter the essential character of or be detrimental to the
neighborhood.
(e) Is the minimum necessary to afford relief.
A. General provisions.
(1) The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide, in accordance with the
provisions of this Article, all applications for modifications of
§ 120-56 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-57
117:592
§ 120-58. Procedure.
provisions of this chapter in all such cases upon which the Board
of Appeals is specifically authorized to pass or to make any other
determination required by this chapter.
(2) In authorizing any specified modification or in making any required
determination, all required findings shall be made, and in the case
of modifications, the Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate
conditions to minimize adverse effects on the character of the
surrounding area and to safeguard the public health, safety,
convenience or general welfare.
(3) No modification of the provisions of this chapter shall be authorized
by the Board of Appeals unless, in addition to other findings
specified in this chapter, it finds that such special permit or
modification:
(a) Will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this
chapter.
(b) Will not tend to depreciate the value of adjacent property.
(c) Will not create a hazard to health, safety or the general
welfare.
(d) Will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood nor
be detrimental to the residents thereof.
(e) Will not otherwise be detrimental to the public convenience
and welfare.101
A. General provisions. The Board of Appeals, consistent with law and
ordinance, may adopt rules of conduct and procedure.
B. Filing appeals. An appeal to the Board of Appeals from any ruling of any
administrative officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter
may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department,
board or bureau of the town. Such appeal shall be taken within such
time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rules, by
filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board
of Appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
Board of Appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
C. Filing applications. An application for any matter upon which the Board
of Appeals is required to pass may be made to the Town Clerk by the
duly authorized agent, the owner or tenant of the property for which
such appeal or application is sought.
101. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Modification of regulations, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 8-17-1987.
§ 120-57 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-58
117:593
D. Meetings, witnesses and records.
(1) Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board of Appeals may
determine. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Chairman
of the Board of Appeals or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(2) The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon every question or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official action. Every rule, regulation, every
amendment or repeal thereof and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board of Appeals shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be a
public record.
E. Stay of proceedings. Any appeal to the Board of Appeals shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, except as
otherwise provided in Subsection 4, Section 267 of the Town Law.
F. Public hearing. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a
hearing of an appeal, applications for modifications of regulations or
other matters referred to it and shall give public notice thereof in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection 5, Section 267 of the
Town Law.
G. Decisions of the Board of Appeals.
(1) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from, or to decide in favor of
the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under
this chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter.
(2) Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution.
Where findings are required, the decision shall set forth each
required finding, supported by substantial evidence or other data
considered by the Board of Appeals in each specific case, or in the
case of denial, the decision shall include the findings which are not
satisfied.
H. Lapse of authorization. Any variance or modification of regulations
authorized by the Board of Appeals shall be automatically revoked
unless a building permit conforming to all the conditions and
requirements established by the Board of Appeals is obtained within six
months of the date of approval by the Board of Appeals and
construction commenced within one year of such date of approval.
I. Violation of conditions or restrictions. Failure to comply with any
condition or restriction prescribed by the Board of Appeals in approving
any appeal for a variance or application for a modification of
§ 120-58 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-58
117:594
regulations shall constitute a violation. Such violation may constitute
the basis for revocation of a variance or a modification or for imposing
penalties and other applicable remedies.
J. Rehearing. There shall be no rehearing of an appeal or application by
the Board of Appeals, except in accordance with Subsection 6, Section
267, Article 16 of the Town Law.
§ 120-58 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-58
117:595

ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 120-59. General provisions.
The Town Board may from time to time, on its own motion or on petition
or on recommendation of the Town Planning Board, amend, supplement or
repeal the regulations, provisions or district boundaries of this chapter in
accordance with the provisions of the Town Law applicable thereto.
§ 120-60. Submission of development plans.
In the case of a proposed amendment which creates a new or enlarged
zoning district, the Town Board may require the submittal of development
plans showing the location and character of proposed structures and
conditions of use for the premises concerned. The Town Board may require
that such plans be modified and may qualify its approval of any such
amendment by attaching a special endorsement thereto. Where any such
amendment to the Zoning Map is qualified by a special endorsement, such
amended district shall be identified on the Zoning Map by the letter "S"
after the district classification. A copy of such qualified development plans
shall be kept in a special file to be maintained by the Building Inspector, and
no building permit or certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued with
respect to any premises within such amended district except in accordance
with the approved plans and conditions.
§ 120-61. Procedure.
A. Filing of petition. A petition to amend, change or supplement the text of
this chapter or any zoning district as designated on the Zoning Map
established herein shall be filed with the Town Clerk on forms obtained
from his office and shall be transmitted by him to the Town Board.
B. Referral to Planning Board. Each proposed amendment, except those
initiated by the Town Planning Board, shall be referred to the Town
Planning Board for an advisory report prior to the public hearing held
by the Town Board. In reporting, the Town Planning Board shall fully
state its reasons for recommending or opposing the adoption of such
proposed amendment and, if it shall recommend adoption, shall
describe any changes in conditions which it believes make the
amendment desirable and shall state whether such amendment is in
harmony with a comprehensive plan for land use in the town.
C. Public hearings, official notice, recording. Unless otherwise provided,
the provisions of § 265 of Article 16 of the Town Law and subsequent
amendments thereto, pertaining to public hearings, official notice and
proper recording of zoning actions taken by the Town Board, shall apply
to all amendments to this chapter.
D. Protests. In case of a protest against any change signed by the owners
of 20% or more either of the area of the land included in such proposed
§ 120-59 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-61
117:597
§ 120-62. Changes in zoning regulations by Planning Board.
[Amended 5-9-1994]
The Town Planning Board102 is hereby authorized to make reasonable
changes in the zoning regulations affecting the land within a subdivision
plat at the time such subdivision plat is approved by the Planning Board.
Such changes shall be made in accordance with the provisions of § 278 of
the Town Law.
change or of that immediately adjacent extending 100 feet therefrom
or of that directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite land, such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of at least four members of the
Town Board.
E. Rehearing on petition. The disposition of a petition for amendment by
the Town Board shall be final, and disapproval or denial of the proposed
amendment shall void the petition. No new petition for an amendment
which has been previously denied by the Town Board shall be
considered by it, except for a vote to table or to receive and file, and no
public hearing shall be held on such amendment, within a period of one
year from the date of such previous denial, unless the Town Planning
Board shall submit a recommendation, with reasons stated therefor,
certifying that there have been substantial changes in the situation
which would merit a rehearing by the Town Board.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Planning Board.
§ 120-61 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-62
117:598
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 120-63. Word usage.
The following rules of construction of language shall apply to the text of this
chapter:
§ 120-64. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURES — A use or structure customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and (except as
otherwise provided) located on the same lot with such principal use or
building.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment or business having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines and
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the
plural include the singular.
C. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
D. The word "person" includes an individual, firm or corporation.
E. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
F. The words "used" and "occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
G. Any reference to an R District shall be interpreted to mean any district
with the prefix letter "R."
H. The word "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof.
I. Any reference to a C District shall be interpreted to mean any district
with the prefix letter "C."
J. Any reference to an M District shall be interpreted to mean any district
with the prefix letter "M."
K. "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply.
L. "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
M. "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly but not in any combination.
§ 120-63 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-64
117:599
other periodicals and/or films for sale or viewing on premises, by use of
motion-picture devices or any coin-operated means, which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an
establishment or business containing a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.[Added 10-20-1980]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — A public or private establishment
or business which is licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages,
which features topless dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or
similar entertainers.[Added 10-20-1980]
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building or
portion of a building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.[Added
10-20-1980]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building or portion
of a building having a capacity of 50 or more persons used regularly and
routinely for presenting material having as a dominant theme material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.[Added 10-20-1980]
ADULT USE — Any establishment or business involved in the dissemination
of material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, including but not limited to adult bookstores, adult
motion-picture theaters, adult mini-motion-picture theaters and adult
entertainment cabarets.[Added 10-20-1980]
ALTERATION — Any change, rearrangement or addition to, or any
relocation of, a building or structure; any modification in construction or
equipment.
ATTIC — Any area under a roof, with or without a finished floor, which does
not meet other requirements for livable floor area.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly below grade and
which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling, above
the average established finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
having a roof, to form a structure affording shelter for persons, animals or
property, but not a trailer.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED — A building separated on all sides
from the adjacent open area or from other buildings or other structures by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by window
or normal entrances or exit doors.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the proposed finished grade of the building to the highest point
§ 120-64 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-64
117:600
of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard (a roof with a double
pitch on all sides) roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridge
of gable, hip or gambrel roofs. For the purpose of determining maximum
permitted height for principal buildings, such measurement shall be made
from the average finished grade at the front setback. For the purpose of side
yard or rear yard determination, such measurement shall be made from the
average finished grade of the wall extending along such side yard or rear
yard.
CELLAR — That portion of a building that is partly or entirely below grade
and which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to ceiling,
below the average established finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.
COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES — Any vending machine which,
upon the insertion of a coin, token, plate or disc or key into any slot, crevice
or other opening, or by the payment of any price, may be operated by
the public generally for the dispensing of food, drink, confections, candies,
goods, wares or merchandise or any other tangible property or for the
rendering of any service for profit or gain, except that public telephone
booths or installations designed for public telephone use shall not be
included.[Added 7-12-1971]
DAY-CARE CENTER and/or DAY NURSERY — A place for the care only, of
five or more children away from their own residence who stay for a period
of three or more but less than 24 hours during any day irrespective of
compensation, reward or otherwise.[Added 2-2-1976]
DISSEMINATION — The transfer of possession, custody, control or
ownership of or the exhibition or presentation of any performance to a
customer, member of the public or business invitee of any material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.[Added 10-20-1980]
DRIVEWAY — A vehicle access from a public way to a principle or accessory
building. For the purposes of a side yard setback, it shall be considered an
accessory structure.[Added 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
DWELLING — A building used as the living quarters for one or more
families, but not including a building of mixed occupancy.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling unit
and designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one family.
A.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling units
and designed or used exclusively for occupancy by two families living
independently of each other; or two one-family dwellings having a party
wall in common.
B.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more
dwelling units and designed or used for occupancy by three or more
families living independently of each other.
C.
§ 120-64 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-64
117:601
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more dwellings located on the
same lot and having any yard or open space in common.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed for occupancy by one
family for cooking, living and sleeping purposes.
ENLARGEMENT — An increase in floor area of an existing building, or an
increase in the area of land use for an existing open use.
EXTENSION — An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an
existing use in an existing building.
FAMILY — One or more persons living together in one dwelling unit and
maintaining a common household, including domestic servants and
gratuitous guests, together with boarders, roomers or lodgers not in excess
of the number allowed by this chapter as an accessory use.
FENCE — A tangible barrier or obstruction of any material, or a line of
obstacles above the surface of the ground, interposed along a line between
two portions of land with the purpose or intent or having the effect of
preventing passage of view across the fence line. A fence may include
hedges and walls. A fence shall be a minimum a 18 inches in height.[Added
8-17-1987; amended 11-28-2011 by L.L. No. 6-2011]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of a main building
used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles used by the occupant's of the
premises and which may include space for not more than one passenger
vehicle used by others.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used primarily for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle
fuel; accessory uses may include the sale of oil, other lubricating substances
or motor vehicle accessories, or facilities for lubricating, washing, the
incidental replacement of parts or for motor service to passenger
automobiles or trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1 1/2) tons rated
capacity, but shall not include general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning
of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, or collision service, body repair,
frame straightening, painting, undercoating, vehicle steam cleaning or
upholstering.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful
employment involving the manufacture, provision or sale of goods and/or
services.[Amended 8-17-1987]
HOTEL — A building containing sleeping rooms and in which lodging is
provided primarily for transient guests for compensation and which may
include public dining facilities.
JUNK BUSINESS — The maintenance of a place where junk, waste,
discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, sorted,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, handled or abandoned, but not
including pawnshops, antique shops, establishments for the sale, purchase
or storage of used furniture, household equipment, clothing, used motor
vehicles capable of being registered or machinery to be reused for the
purpose for which originally manufactured.
§ 120-64 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-64
117:602
KENNEL — The keeping of more than two dogs that are more than six
months old.
LIVABLE FLOOR AREA — The area of floors of a dwelling, excluding
basements not designed for human occupancy, cellars, garages,
breezeways, unenclosed or unheated porches and attics. It shall include
only such floor area under a sloping roof for which the headroom is not
less than five feet, provided that at least 65% of such floor area has a
ceiling height of at least seven feet; that if any such floor area is situated
above another story, it has access to the floor below by a permanent builtin
stairway; and that it meets the requirements of the Building Code103 for
light and ventilation. Measurements of "livable floor area" shall be made
from exterior faces of exterior walls or from center lines of party walls.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a principal
building or use or a group of principal buildings or uses that are united by a
common interest, including customary accessory buildings or uses and such
open spaces as are required in connection with such buildings or uses. A
"lot" may or may not be a lot of record.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding a lot. Where a lot abuts on a
street or is partly contained in a street, the "lot line" shall be deemed to
be a line drawn parallel to the center line of the street and 30 feet distant
therefrom measured at right angles thereto, but the actual street line shall
be construed as the "lot line" if such street line is established and lies at a
greater distance than 30 feet from the center of such street.
CORNER LOT — A "lot" at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.
A.
B. INTERIOR LOT — A "lot" other than a corner lot.
THROUGH LOT — A "lot" in which the front lot line and rear lot line
abut a street.
C.
FRONT LOT LINE — Where a lot abuts upon only one street, the lot
line along such street shall be the "front lot line." Where a lot abuts
upon more than one street, the assessment roll of the municipality shall
determine the "front lot line."
A.
REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is opposite and more or less
parallel with the front lot line. In the case of a lot which comes to a
point at the rear, the "rear lot line" shall be an imaginary line 10 feet
in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to and most distant from the
front lot line.
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
C.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Construction.
§ 120-64 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-64
117:603
LOT WIDTH — The least horizontal distance across the lot between side
lot lines, measured at the front setback of a main building erected or to
be erected on such lot or at a distance from the front lot line equal to the
required depth of the front yard.
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building in part as the living
quarters for one or more families and in part for some other use not
accessory thereto. For the purpose of determining off-street parking
requirements, that part of such building used as living quarters shall be
considered as dwellings.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed
primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing accessory offstreet
parking facilities. The term "motel" includes buildings designated as
motor lodges, auto courts and similar appellations.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any lawful building or structure or any lawful
use of land, premises, building or structure which does not conform to the
regulations of this chapter for the district in which such building, structure
or use is located either on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments hereto.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — Any building where persons are
housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.
PUBLIC GARAGE or REPAIR GARAGE — Any garage, other than a private
garage or gasoline service station, which is used for storage, repair, rental,
greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other
motor vehicles.
REPAIR — Replacement or renewal, excluding additions, of any part of a
building, structure, device or equipment with like or similar materials or
parts for the purpose of maintenance of such building, structure, device or
equipment.
RESERVOIR SPACE — A temporary storage space, exclusive of street area
or required parking spaces, for a vehicle waiting for service or admission.
SETBACK — The least horizontal distance from any existing or proposed
building or structure to the nearest point in an indicated lot line or street
line.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed and managed as an integrated operating entity, consisting of
two or more buildings with a total of not less than 50,000 square feet gross
floor area, including all customarily related and ancillary uses, such as onsite
parking, restaurant and automotive accessory service area, excluding
automotive body, frame, engine or transmission repair, gasoline storage and
sales.[Added 5-9-1994]
SIGN — Any structure or part thereof or any device attached to, painted on
or represented on a building or other structure, upon which is displayed or
included any letter, work, model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, decoration,
device or representation used as or which is in the nature of an
§ 120-64 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-64
117:604
announcement, direction, advertisement or other attention-directing
device. A "sign" shall not include a similar structure or device located
within a building, except for illuminated "signs" within show windows. A
"sign" includes any billboard, but does not include the flag, pennant or
insignia of any nation or association of nations, or of any state, city or other
political unit, or of any political, charitable, educational, philanthropic,
civic, professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event.
SIGN, ADVERTISING or BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to
a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the same zoning lot.
SIGN, FLASHING — A moving or animated sign or any illuminated sign
on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and
constant in intensity or color at all times when in use. Any revolving
illuminated sign shall be considered a "flashing sign."
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign designed to give forth any artificial light
or designed to reflect light from one or more sources, natural or artificial.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS [Added 10-20-1980] —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES [Added 10-20-1980] —
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any finished
floor and the surface of the finished floor next above it, or if there be no
floor above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above
it.
STREET — Any road, avenue, lane, alley or other way which is an existing
public way or which is shown on an approved plat, or any private right-ofway
or easement approved by the Town Board.
STREET LINE — A line separating a lot from a street. In any case where
a future "street line" has been established or approved by the Town Board,
such future "street line" shall be considered as the "street line" for the
purposes of determining lot area and setback requirements.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members
of a building or other structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
Less than the completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
A.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
C.
§ 120-64 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-64
117:605
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having such location,
but not including a trailer.
TRAILER (MOBILE HOME) — A vehicle used for living or sleeping purposes
and standing on wheels or on rigid supports.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
YARD — That portion of a lot extending open and unobstructed from the
ground upward along a lot line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full length of the front lot line
between the side lot lines. The front yard depth of a lot located on a curve
shall be measured from the chord connecting the arc of the front lot line or
from the tangent of said arc, whichever is the lesser depth.
YARD, FRONT EQUIVALENT — That portion of a rear yard of a through lot
extending along a street line and from the street line for a depth equal to
a required front yard. Any "front yard equivalent" shall be subject to the
regulations of this chapter which apply to front yards.
YARD, REAR — On an interior lot, a yard extending the full length of the
rear lot line between the side lot lines. On a corner lot, a yard extending
along a rear lot line between an interior side lot line and an exterior side
yard.
YARD, REQUIRED — A yard having a depth or width set forth in the
applicable district regulations. Such width or depth shall be measured
perpendicular to lot lines.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard
to the rear yard, except that on a corner lot where the side lot line abuts a
street, the "side yard" shall extend from the front yard to the rear lot line.
A. EXTERIOR SIDE YARD — A "side yard" extending along a street line.
INTERIOR SIDE YARD — A "side yard" extending along a lot line of an
adjoining lot.
B.
§ 120-64 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-64
117:606
ARTICLE X
Nonresidential Design Standards and Guidelines
[Added 2-27-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
§ 120-65. Establishment of Town-wide standards and guidelines.
A. Purpose and intent.
(1) The purpose of these design standards and guidelines is to describe
the desired future development pattern, form, massing, site layout,
and architectural detailing for nonresidential and multifamily
development in the Town of West Seneca, regardless of the zoning
district in which it is to be located.
(2) The intent of applying these standards is to foster a combination of
appropriately scaled land uses and activities that support the vision
and policies contained in the Town's Comprehensive Plan for
increased walkability, and to improve the quality of our
nonresidential and multifamily architecture and site plans. In order
to accomplish this, the construction or alteration of all
nonresidential and multifamily developments within West Seneca
shall be in harmony with the objectives listed in the following
sections.
B. Applicability.
(1) This article shall apply to all nonresidential and multifamily
developments occurring within the Town of West Seneca. These
Town-wide nonresidential design standards and guidelines are to
be consulted and applied during the review of site plan applications
before the Planning Board for the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or expansion of nonresidential and multifamily
development in the Town.
(2) In the event that any of the terms of this article conflict with other
provisions within the Code of the Town of West Seneca, the
provisions of this article shall take precedence except as otherwise
provided or required by state or federal law.
C. Objectives. This article is designed to ensure nonresidential and
multifamily development within the Town of West Seneca achieves the
following:
(1) Creates lively, pedestrian-friendly, and attractive buildings, sites,
open spaces, and streetscapes where residents and visitors enjoy
walking, biking, and driving.
(2) Encourages the creation of dynamic public activity centers for the
benefit of residents and visitors alike.
§ 120-65 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-65
117:607
§ 120-66. Site planning.
(3) Develops office and industrial parks to resemble a campus-like
environment that incorporates open space and pedestrian
amenities where appropriate.
(4) Requires that future private development positively contributes to
the public realm and ensures compatibility with surrounding
developments so as not to detract from the overall streetscape.
(5) Utilizes good site planning techniques that provide visual interest
and accommodate multimodal travel such as varying building
massing, emphasizing street corners, highlighting points of entry,
and integrating multimodal site circulation and access between
uses.
(6) Encourages the development of buildings consistent with the goals
of the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED)
program.
(7) Ensures that new buildings and sites do not negatively impact
adjacent residential uses, respecting their existing scale and
character.
D. Site plan review required.
(1) In order to ensure that proposals for newly constructed or altered
developments, sites, and structures are consistent with the
regulations set forth in this article, it shall be required for said
property owners and/or their agents to apply for Planning Board
approval via the site plan review process (see Chapter 102).
(2) The Planning Board shall issue its decision based on the project
review criteria listed in § 102-12, as well as conformance with the
guidelines and standards set forth in this article.
(3) The Planning Board may request additional site plan application
materials as necessary to perform a complete review of the
proposed project with respect to these additional design standards
and guidelines.
(4) The Planning Board may waive required site plan application
materials should there be a unanimous decision that said materials
are unnecessary for review.
A. Intent and applicability. This section primarily addresses the
organization of a proposed project's site plan components. They are
intended to regulate the location of structures and site features such as
parking lots, open space, and service areas, as well as the organization
of circulation patterns for vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians in order to
best achieve the purpose and objectives of this article.
B. Projects with multiple buildings.
§ 120-65 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-66
117:608
(1) Projects with multiple buildings shall be sited with pedestrian
connections between structures, parking areas, and adjacent uses
in a manner consistent with Subsection E of this section.
(2) Multiple structures shall be placed in a campus-like fashion that
creates a well-organized, accessible, and functional site. The Town
encourages site layouts that create a unique sense of place,
including public and open space, and do not result in large parking
lots lacking landscaping or pedestrian accommodations.
(3) Projects with multiple structures are encouraged to attend a sketch
plan meeting with the Planning Board as described in Chapter 102
(Site Plan Review).
C. Pad sites and buildings.
(1) Pad sites, also known as outparcels, shall be designed and located
as follows to ensure that the traditional, "strip commercial" center
type developments are avoided along major corridors within the
Town and within multibuilding developments.
(2) The number, location, and design of independent pad sites shall
reinforce, rather than obscure, the identity and function of the
primary commercial development.
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, pad sites shall be clustered
together to define street edges and entry points or to enclose and
create usable places between buildings. The even dispersal of pad
sites in a widely-spaced pattern within the development, even if
along the street edge(s), is discouraged (see Figure 1).
§ 120-66 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-66
117:609
(4) Wherever practicable, spaces between adjoining pad site buildings
should be improved to provide small pockets (preferably heavily
landscaped) of customer parking, pedestrian connections, smallscale
project amenities, or focal points. Examples include but are
not limited to:
(a) A landscaped pedestrian walkway linking customer entrances
between two or more pad site buildings;
(b) A public seating or outdoor eating area;
(c) An area landscaped with a variety of plant materials; or
(d) Sculptures or fountains.
(5) All facades of a building located on a pad site shall be treated as a
primary facade to provide consistent and uninterrupted
architectural detailing and styling on all sides. The facade
containing the primary customer entrance may be oriented in a
variety of ways, including, but not limited to, toward the primary
access street, toward an internal "main street," framing a primary
entrance to the development or center, toward the side (especially
when that side faces another pad site building), or toward the
interior of the development.
§ 120-66 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-66
117:610
(6) Pad site entrances are appropriate locations to express individual
building character or identity. Customer entrances shall be
emphasized through incorporation of a building recess, projection,
canopy, or similar design element.
D. Freestanding kiosks and automated teller machine (ATM) structures.
(1) All kiosk-type buildings and structures shall be integrated with the
overall development, and shall be subject to the same guidelines as
all other buildings within the development.
(2) Freestanding kiosks and drive-up ATM structures shall not be
located along the primary access street frontage.
(3) Access to a freestanding kiosk or drive-up ATM structure shall not
be from the adjacent public streets. Access shall be from drives and
streets internal to the development.
(4) Freestanding kiosks and drive-up ATM structures shall comply with
the building design standards applicable to pad sites set forth in
Subsection C.
E. Pedestrian access and circulation. An on-site system of pedestrian
accommodations shall be designed to provide direct access and
connections between primary entrances, exits, sidewalks, walkways,
adjacent land uses, and adjacent public spaces where appropriate. The
following regulations shall also apply:
(1) Pedestrian access and circulation patterns shall be shielded and
separated from vehicular patterns where possible.
(2) Designated crosswalks shall be located between primary building
entrances and exits as well as parking facilities.
(3) Sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed along the entire
frontage length at a minimum width of five feet or consistent with
adjacent sidewalk widths, or wider at the discretion of the Planning
Board based on anticipated pedestrian volumes.
(4) Sidewalks and walkways shall be constructed to provide access
from principal building entrances to the sidewalk system.
(5) Where possible, sidewalks and walkways shall traverse parking lot
medians and islands to permit safe and efficient pedestrian travel
from parked vehicles to building entrances.
(6) Safe, convenient, and efficient pedestrian circulation patterns shall
be provided between structures in a multiple structure
development.
(7) Sidewalks, walkways, and/or plazas shall be provided with weather
protection (e.g., shade trees, awnings/canopies) and appropriate
§ 120-66 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-66
117:611
pedestrian amenities (e.g., street tree grates, outdoor seating,
trash cans, sidewalk displays, public art, etc.).
F. Bicycle accommodations.
(1) Bicycle circulation patterns shall be shielded and separated from
vehicular patterns where possible with the use of shoulders and/or
bicycle lanes.
(2) Bicycle parking shall be provided at 10% of the motorized vehicle
parking requirements but not less than two bicycle spaces and not
more than 20 bicycle spaces for any use.
(3) Designated bicycle parking facilities shall be provided at building
entrances. Additional bicycle accommodations, such as bicycle
lockers or shared bicycle services, are encouraged.
(4) Safe, convenient, and efficient bicycle circulation patterns shall be
provided between structures in a multiple-structure development.
G. Vehicular circulation.
(1) Vehicular circulation patterns shall be designed to minimize
potential conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians.
(2) Parking and vehicle circulation patterns shall be designed to
reduce speeds and increase pedestrian friendliness, efficiency, and
convenience.
(3) To the extent practicable, nonresidential and mixed-use sites shall
be designed to provide cross access and a unified circulation
pattern with adjacent sites. Techniques to achieve this include, but
are not limited to, shared driveways, shared access roads and cross
access easements.
(4) To the extent practicable, common or shared service and delivery
access shall be provided between adjacent parcels and/or
buildings.
(5) Access easements may be required so that pad sites or adjacent
parcels have adequate access if ownership patterns change.
(6) Drive-through facilities and associated drive lanes shall be located
in either the side yard or rear yard.
H. Public transit stops and access.
(1) Public transit stops shall be constructed to the standards set forth
by the Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority, on an easement
provided to the Town of West Seneca, with siting and design
requiring approval by the Planning Board.
§ 120-66 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-66
117:612
§ 120-67. Off-street parking design.
(2) Transit stops that are integrated into the development as a feature
of a primary structure or as part of an open space feature are
encouraged by the Town.
(3) In all instances, transit stops shall be accessible and integrated into
the pedestrian circulation system and must include uninterrupted
sidewalk and crosswalk access to principal building entrances.
(4) Adequate space for an immediate or eventual transit stop must be
allocated during the site plan review process if the principal
building entrance is greater than 800 feet from an existing transit
stop. Actual provision of such transit stop shall be coordinated with
the Niagara Frontier Transportation Authority.
A. Intent and applicability. This section is intended to address the location,
arrangement, orientation, design, and size of off-street parking spaces
and lots in an effort to best achieve the purpose and objectives of this
article. The following design regulations are to be applied in addition to
the off-street parking lot and space requirements for nonresidential and
multifamily developments as defined in Article IV of this chapter.
B. Location of parking facilities.
(1) Off-street parking may be located in any front, side, or rear yard, or
underground. Side yard parking shall be located a minimum of 10
feet behind the front facade.
(2) Front yard parking, including access to parking, shall not exceed
30% of the frontage of the lot on which it serves (see Figure 2).
§ 120-66 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-67
117:613
(3) For sites proposed with multiple structures, the use of shared,
central courtyard parking is encouraged.
(4) Front yard parking shall be prohibited on any lot fronting Union
Street.
(5) Corner lots shall be considered to have two front yards.
C. Arrangement of parking facilities.
(1) Parking lots shall be arranged so that long uninterrupted views
across large areas of parking are not visible from the primary
access road. In order to reduce the scale of parking areas, the total
amount of parking provided shall be broken up into parking blocks
containing not more than 40 spaces.
(2) Each parking block shall be separated from other parking blocks by
buildings, access drives with adjacent landscaped areas at least 10
feet wide, a landscaped median or berm at least 10 feet wide, or by
a pedestrian walkway or sidewalk within a landscaped median at
least 10 feet wide (see Figure 3104).
(3) Each parking block shall have consistent design angles for all
parking within the block.
104. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included in § 120-68 of this article.
§ 120-67 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-67
117:614
(4) Parking blocks should be oriented to buildings to allow pedestrian
movement down and not across rows (typically with parking drive
aisles perpendicular to customer entrances).
D. Orientation of parking facilities.
(1) Parking facilities shall be oriented so that drive aisles run
perpendicular to the adjacent plane of the building, where
applicable.
(2) Parking lots shall be designed and oriented to allow for cross lot
access and internal access management whenever possible.
E. Curbing and bump stops. Concrete or granite curbing around parking
areas shall be used to delineate vehicular and pedestrian zones and to
control drainage, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board.
Asphalt or wood curbing is not permitted.
F. Shared parking.
(1) Shared parking is encouraged to promote efficient use of land and
resources by allowing users to share off-street parking facilities for
uses located within close proximity to one another with different
peak parking demands or different operating hours (see Figure
3105).
(2) The Planning Board may approve shared use of parking facilities
located on the same property or on separate properties if, in the
opinion of the Planning Board:
(a) A convenient pedestrian connection between the properties
exists;
(b) The properties are within 500 feet of each other on the same
side of the street or within 250 feet of each other on opposite
sides of the street; and
(c) The availability of parking for all affected properties is
indicated by approved directional signs.
(3) When determining the number of off-street parking spaces
required for shared parking facilities, the following shall apply.
(a) Where the uses to be served by shared parking do not have
overlapping hours of operation, the property owner or owners
shall provide parking stalls equal to the greater of the
applicable individual parking requirements.
(b) Where the uses to be served by shared parking have
overlapping hours of operation, the property owner or owners
shall provide parking stalls equal to the total of the individual
105. Editor's Note: Figure 3 is included in § 120-68 of this article.
§ 120-67 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-67
117:615
§ 120-68. Landscaping and screening.
parking requirements. If the following criteria are met, that
total may be reduced by 15%:
[1] The parking areas share a property line;
[2] A vehicular connection between the lots exists;
[3] A convenient, visible pedestrian connection between the
lots exists; and
[4] The availability of parking for all affected properties is
indicated by approved directional signs.
A. Intent and applicability. Landscaping and screening shall be designed
as an integral part of every nonresidential and multifamily development
project as opposed to being merely located in leftover or unused
portions of a site. The following landscaping and screening regulations
are intended to visually tie the entire development together, help to
define and announce entryways and circulation patterns (both vehicular
and pedestrian), and, where appropriate, help buffer less intensive
adjacent land uses. These regulations shall help to minimize the
expansive appearance of parking lots, provide shaded areas for
pedestrians, and soften hard edges of buildings and parking lots in an
effort to achieve the purpose and objectives of this article.
B. Site landscaping.
(1) Site landscaping shall be required at the location of all entrances,
exits, and signage.
(2) Building setback areas along streets, accessways, or along private
drives shall be landscaped with a minimum of one tree for every 40
feet of linear frontage.
(3) Building setback areas shall include compact massings of
ornamental plant material, such as ornamental trees, flowering
shrubs, perennials, and ground covers, at a minimum of one plant
for every 10 feet of linear frontage.
(4) Landscaping shall observe the regulations set forth in § 120-33 of
the Town of West Seneca Code, Visibility at intersections.
(5) Plantings should decrease in size and increase in detail, color, and
variety near entryways into developments.
(6) Planting shall be limited to species endemic, indigenous, hardy, and
those known to be noninvasive to this area. Plants should be
consistent with the most current USDA Plant Hardiness Zone for
the Town of West Seneca (Zone 6a - Average Annual Extreme
Minimum Temperature of -10° F. to -5° F., accessed July 2016).
§ 120-67 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-68
117:616
C. Foundation landscaping.
(1) Building foundation landscaping shall be provided along the front
facade as well as any facades visible from the public right-of-way.
(2) At least one tree shall be provided for each 30 linear feet of the
facade.
(3) At least one shrub shall be provided for each five linear feet of the
facade.
(4) Foundation plantings shall consist of woody and/or herbaceous,
deciduous, and/or coniferous shrubs, trees, and groundcovers, and
shall not be limited to annual/perennial-type plant materials.
(5) In instances where outdoor seating is desired in the frontage of the
lot, foundation landscaping may be waived by the Planning Board,
or can be used to create a seating courtyard area.
(6) Plantings should decrease in size and increase in detail, color, and
variety near entryways into buildings.
D. Minimum plant size. Unless otherwise permitted by the Planning Board,
all trees and plant materials proposed shall meet the following
minimum size standards:
(1) Deciduous trees shall be at least 2 1/2 inches in caliper, unless
located in the side or rear yard, where they may be a minimum of
1 1/2 inches in caliper.
(2) Evergreen trees shall be five feet in height, unless located in the
side or rear yard, where they may be a minimum of four feet in
height.
(3) Deciduous shrubs shall be at least 24 inches in height, unless
located in the side or rear yard, where they may be a minimum of
15 inches in height.
(4) Evergreen shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height, unless
located in the side or rear yard, where they may be a minimum of
12 inches in height.
E. Fences and walls. When a development includes a fence or wall, the
following guidelines and standards shall apply. This section does not
apply to required retaining walls.
(1) The maximum height and setback for fences and walls shall comply
with the regulations set for the district in which they are located
(see § 120-39).
(2) A rear lot line and/or an interior side lot line that abuts a residential
use or district shall require additional screening. Screening may
include a dense, natural hedge reaching a height of five feet within
§ 120-68 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-68
117:617
three years or by a solid fence or masonry wall at least five feet in
height.
(3) No fence located in a front yard shall be more than 50% opaque,
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board.
(4) Walls and fences shall be constructed of high-quality materials,
such as decorative blocks, brick, stone, treated wood, vinyl, hardy
plank, and wrought iron. Prohibited materials include:
(a) Smooth-faced gray concrete block, smooth-faced painted or
stained concrete block, smooth-faced concrete panels;
(b) Unfinished wood;
(c) Chain link; and
(d) Corrugated metal siding.
(5) Breaks in the length of a fence shall be made to provide pedestrian
connections to the perimeter of a site or to adjacent development.
(6) The maximum length of continuous, unbroken, and uninterrupted
fence or wall plane shall be 50 feet. Breaks shall be provided
through the use of columns, landscaping pockets, transparent
sections, and/or a change to different materials.
(7) Fences and walls shall be set back from the front and side lot line to
allow a landscape setback area. Such setback area shall be
landscaped with a turf, shrubs, and/or trees, using a variety of
species to provide seasonal color and plant variety.
(8) Use of landscaping beyond the minimum required in these
standards is strongly encouraged to soften the visual impact of
fences and walls.
F. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) Parking lot medians shall be required between parking blocks
(maximum 40 parking spaces). Medians shall be a minimum of 10
feet in width, and shall be planted to provide visual buffering
between sections to a density and arrangement deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board.
(2) At least one landscaped island with a minimum width of five feet
and minimum size of 160 square feet shall be provided for every 20
parking spaces.
(3) Circulatory drive aisles and landscaped islands shall be installed
such that no more than 20 parking spaces in a single row, or 40 in a
double row, shall go uninterrupted.
(4) The primary landscaping materials used in parking lots shall be
trees, which provide shade or are capable of providing shade at
§ 120-68 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-68
117:618
maturity. Shrubbery, hedges and other planting materials may be
used to complement the tree landscaping, but shall not be the
sole means of landscaping. All parking lot landscaping shall be salt
tolerant. Effective use of earth berms and existing topography is
also encouraged as a component of the landscaping plan.
(5) One shade tree shall be planted for every 10 parking spaces. Trees
located in paved areas shall be provided with adequate tree pits to
permit proper watering.
(6) Landscaped berms shall be at least 10 feet wide, a maximum of
three feet high, and include a maximum slope of 3:1.
(7) Existing parking lots located along the front setback shall be
buffered and/or screened from view using landscaping, attractive
fencing consisting of natural materials that does not exceed four
feet in height, or a combination of landscaping and fencing.
§ 120-68 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-69
117:619
§ 120-69. Architectural guidelines and standards.
A. Intent and applicability. The following architectural guidelines and
standards are intended to address the exterior elements of
nonresidential and multifamily buildings and structures so as to define
the appearance of a building's roofs, windows, facade articulation, and
architectural detailing. These regulations for architectural elements
are intended to encourage new nonresidential and multifamily
developments to promote the desired character and identity of the area
in which they are located. Said character and identity shall relate to the
recommendations of the community development strategy contained in
the Town of West Seneca Comprehensive Plan, while also allowing for
flexibility of expression at the individual building level. New
construction, alterations, or renovations, including those incorporating
contemporary styles, should have a high level of architectural integrity
resulting in attractive, inviting, and visually interesting structures that
positively contribute to the streetscape and walkability of the
community as outlined in the purpose and objectives of this article.
B. Building form and massing.
(1) In instances where the front facade is greater than 50 feet in width,
appropriate delineations and treatments shall be used to break up
the appearance of a single facade (e.g., projecting entry or window
features, recessed elements, transparent storefronts, identifiable
retail spaces, and awning/entrance canopies), especially at ground
level.
(2) No facade shall exceed 50 feet in horizontal length without a
change in facade plane. Changes in facade planes shall be no less
than 1 1/2 feet in depth and no less than eight feet in length. Not
less than 25% of the building wall shall be varied in this way. The
intent of this standard is to avoid large, undifferentiated wall
surfaces. Acceptable substitutes may be granted at the discretion
of the Planning Board (see Figure 4).
§ 120-69 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-69
117:620
(3) Ground floor facades of two or more storied structures shall
provide areas of transparency of at least 60% (see Figure 8106).
(4) Ground floor facades of a single-story structure shall provide a
minimum transparency of 30% (see Figure 5).
(5) Ground floor transparency shall be measured between two feet and
10 feet above the adjacent sidewalk.
(6) The transparency of upper floor facade space may be reduced to
provide a visual transition from the ground floor to upper floor
uses. However, upper floor transparency shall not be less than 30%.
(7) Building facades facing a parking area shall be at least 30%
transparent between the height of two feet and 10 feet above the
parking area grade for no less than 30% of the horizontal length of
the facade.
106. Editor's Note: Figure 8 is included in § 120-70 of this article.
§ 120-69 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-69
117:621
C. Architectural detailing. All buildings shall exhibit tripartite design, or a
clearly defined base, midsection, and crown (see Figure 6). This can be
accomplished using a combination of architectural detailing, material,
textures, and colors. Said architectural detailing shall also comply with
the following:
(1) Foundation water table. Where appropriate, elements that add
detail and define the foundation of the building are encouraged.
(2) Roofs, cornices, eaves, overhangs, and parapets.
(a) Elements that define the roof and the upper quartile of the
facade shall incorporate design details that provide an added
level of articulation to the architectural expression of the
building.
(b) To the maximum extent practicable, all roof-mounted
mechanical equipment (e.g., HVAC systems, exhaust pipes, or
elevator housing) shall be screened from view or isolated so as
not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential
district within 150 feet of the subject lot, measured from a
point that is five feet above grade. Screening shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and
architectural detailing of the building.
(3) Windows.
(a) Windows shall be of a scale, proportion, and coverage
appropriate to the overall style of architecture of the building.
(b) First floor windows shall not be blocked in any manner that
restricts visual access of up to three feet into the structure
(e.g., furniture, signage, or other decorative elements may not
block windows. Passersby should be able to view up to three
feet into the window space).
(4) Doors and entryways.
(a) Doors and entryways shall be of a scale, proportion, and
coverage appropriate to the overall style of architecture of the
building.
(b) Commercial buildings shall have a transparent primary
entryway that will be considered as part of the overall
transparency requirement for the building frontage.
(c) Entryways shall be detailed and announced to the general
public through the use of decorative trim, moldings,
overhangs, and other defining architectural features such that
its purpose as the primary entrance is evident from the street.
The same treatment is encouraged for all secondary entryways
near parking locations.
§ 120-69 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-69
117:622
(5) High-quality materials.
(a) All exterior building walls and structures shall be constructed
or clad with durable, economically maintained materials that
retain their appearance over time, including, but not limited to,
painted wood; natural or synthetic stone; brick; stucco;
integrally colored, textured, or glazed concrete masonry units;
high-quality prestressed concrete systems; exterior insulation
finish systems (EIFS); or glass.
(b) Concrete finishes or precast concrete panels that are not
exposed aggregate, hammered, embossed, imprinted,
sandblasted, or covered with a cement-based acrylic coating
shall not be used as exterior building materials and shall be
prohibited on all exterior walls.
(c) All changes in building materials shall occur at inside corners.
D. Green infrastructure and building design.
§ 120-69 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-69
117:623
§ 120-70. Union Road Corridor design standards.
(1) Applicants are encouraged to consult the United States Green
Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) certification program for guiding principles and industry
best practices that may apply to their proposed development or
alteration.
(2) Alternative energy sources, such as solar panels or shingles, are
encouraged and should be incorporated into the design of the
building so as not to detract from the overall design.
(3) Solar energy systems shall be restricted to the roof of the structure
in which they are intended to serve.
(4) Developers and builders are encouraged to utilize roofing materials
that reflect sunlight (e.g., lighter colors) or incorporate vegetated
roofing on at least 50% of the roof area. Methods such as these
decrease heating and cooling needs on a building by reflecting
sunlight rather than absorbing it.
(5) The Planning Board may choose to waive applicable zoning district,
site plan, landscaping, parking, or architectural regulations for
development projects that incorporate green infrastructure or
building materials to their satisfaction. Waivers of any such
regulation of this chapter shall be proportional and related to the
anticipated benefit of the green infrastructure or materials.
E. Review assistance and referrals.
(1) The Town Planning Board reserves the right to consult with any
other board, commission, department, agency, and/or official it
deems advisable for the purposes of design review and
considerations.
(2) The Town may also engage the services of engineers, planners,
architects, or other professionals to aid in its review of
developments and design. The applicant shall reimburse all costs
incurred for such professional services to the Town.
A. Purpose and intent. The purpose of these additional design-based
criteria is to enhance and redefine the architectural character of the
Union Road Corridor within the Town of West Seneca. In addition to the
application of the Townwide nonresidential design guidelines and
standards, this section is intended to ensure future development and
redevelopment in and around the Union Road Corridor is compatible
and harmonious with the desired character as outlined in the Town of
West Seneca Comprehensive Plan. Projects subject to the requirements
of this section shall achieve the following objectives:
§ 120-69 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-70
117:624
(1) Encourage a pedestrian-oriented and human-scaled right-of-way,
public realm, and streetscape as well as promote safe pedestrian
movement, access, and circulation along Union Road.
(2) Develop and maintain a dense concentration of uses (commercial,
office, civic, cultural, and residential) that creates a vibrant, vital
mixed-use environment along Union Road that encourages
sociability and multimodal activity for residents.
(3) Promote the use of quality building materials and appropriately
scaled architectural features that positively impact the relationship
between private development and the public realm so as to
enhance the streetscape as an aesthetically pleasing and inviting
public space.
(4) Require the placement and design of buildings to respect the
traditional development pattern that is characterized by little-to-no
front or side setbacks, common walls between buildings, and
structures that are or appear to be at least two stories in height.
(5) Minimize the visual presence of off-street parking by requiring it
placed to the rear of the buildings and screened from view, and
utilize alleys and rear entrances to provide safe and convenient
access to rear yard parking and the rear of buildings.
(6) Reestablish Ebenezer and Gardenville as the cultural and civic
center of the Town and community life within West Seneca.
(7) Promote the vitality of the Town of West Seneca's Union Road
Corridor through the encouragement of redevelopment and
economic reinvestment that increases property values, protects
real estate investment, and attracts or enhances business within
the Town.
(8) Promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare by providing for consistent and coordinated
treatment of the properties along the Union Road Corridor.
B. Applicability.
(1) This section shall apply to all developments, sites, and structures,
except single-family structures, located along the Union Road
Corridor. This shall include, but is not limited to, all new builds,
reconstructions, modifications, additions, expansions, and changes
of exterior appearance to any existing building, structure, site, or
development in part or in whole.
(2) For the purposes of this article, the Union Road Corridor area is
defined as the parcels directly fronting Union Road from the
northern Town boundary to Cazenovia Creek, excluding the
Manufacturing District portion south of Gemcor Drive and north of
Route 400. The Union Road Corridor area shall also include the
§ 120-70 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-70
117:625
parcels directly fronting the following intersecting roadways along
Union Road:
(a) Clinton Street from Inter Drive (western boundary) to Weigand
Street (eastern boundary);
(b) Center Road from Washington Street (western boundary) to
Cathedral Drive (eastern boundary);
(c) Main Street from the West Seneca Police Department access
drive (western boundary) to Mill Road (eastern boundary); and
(d) Seneca Street from Highland Ave (western boundary) to Mill
Road (eastern boundary).
C. Site planning. The design guidelines and standards for site planning in
the Union Road Corridor area shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in § 120-66 of this article unless otherwise
addressed by this section.
D. Off-street parking design. In addition to the regulations set forth in
§ 120-67 of this article, the following off-street parking standards and
guidelines shall apply:
(1) No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
(2) Off-street parking may be located in the rear yard, side yard or
underground. Side yard parking shall be located a minimum of 10
feet behind the front facade.
(3) Parking areas are preferable to be accessed by alleys or rear access
drives.
(4) Parking areas shall be bounded by concrete or granite curbing to
delineate vehicular and pedestrian zones and to control drainage,
as needed.
(5) Alternate paving materials, such as permeable pavement, brick or
stone, and embossed asphalt, are encouraged.
E. Landscaping and screening. The design guidelines and standards for
landscaping and screening in the Union Road Corridor area shall be in
conformance with the regulations set forth in § 120-68 of this article in
addition to the following:
(1) All nonresidential and multifamily developments on lots that abut a
residential use to the side or rear shall provide additional
landscaping and screening to the Planning Board's satisfaction to
ensure an appropriate buffer is provided from vehicular parking
and/or traffic.
F. Union Road Corridor architectural standards.
§ 120-70 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-70
117:626
(1) Intent and applicability. These architectural standards shall be
applied to the Union Road Corridor area in addition to the
regulations of § 120-69. These additional guidelines and standards
are intended to ensure new development defines a unique Union
Road Corridor identity for the Town of West Seneca, while also
allowing for flexibility of expression at the individual building level.
New development or renovations, including those incorporating
contemporary styles, should have a high level of architectural
integrity resulting in attractive, inviting, and visually interesting
structures. New development and renovations shall not detract
from the desired pedestrian-scaled streetscape and walkability of
the corridor, and should respect the documented historic character
of Town of West Seneca where applicable. Should there be a
conflict between this section and § 120-69, the Union Road
Corridor area regulations shall take precedence.
(2) Building placement and orientation. Placement refers to how a
building is situated on the lot. Orientation refers to the location of a
building's main axis or front facade.
(a) The front facade of all structures shall be oriented to Union
Road.
(b) Buildings situated at corners shall be considered to have two
front facades or primary facades. A corner structure should
"wrap" the corner by continuing certain facade elements (such
as the cornice or horizontal accent bands) on all street
elevations (see Figure 7).
(c) Building orientation and main entrances should face Union
Road and should be easily identifiable and scaled to the size of
the street they are on.
§ 120-70 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-70
117:627
(d) The minimum front setback for lots within the Union Road
Corridor area shall be zero feet.
(e) The maximum front setback for lots within the Union Road
Corridor area shall be 20 feet.
(f) All other building and lot dimensional and bulk requirements
shall be in conformance with the applicable zoning district. The
Planning Board may provide relief from regulations listed
elsewhere in the Zoning Code for the Union Road Corridor
area that are found to be inconsistent with the purpose and
objectives of this article.
(3) Massing, proportion, and height. Massing refers to the volume and
shape of a building. Proportion is the relationship between a
building facade's width and its height.
(a) All new development shall be at least two stories in height so
as to achieve a strong visual "street edge." The Planning Board
may permit one-story structures, provided that a varied,
peaked roof or some other architectural element is included so
as to appear to exceed one story in height.
(b) All new development shall be of a similar massing and
proportion to those of adjacent and nearby structures unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board.
(c) Buildings which are "squat" in proportion or which have very
strong horizontal elements that dominate the facade are
discouraged.
(4) Roof design. Roof design refers to the form and architectural style
of the roof and how it presents itself to the street.
(a) Longer buildings should provide fluctuations in the roofline
which break up the long run of facade and which attract
attention to key places such as entryways.
(b) Air-handling equipment, antennas, satellite dishes and other
mechanical equipment should be placed in such a manner as
not to be visible from the street.
(c) Flat roofs shall slope to the back of the building to provide
proper drainage, and shall include an ornamental cornice.
(d) Peaked or gable roofs are encouraged to include overhangs
and ornamental brackets.
(5) Facade composition and fenestration. Facade composition refers to
the arrangement of facade elements in a recognizable and
consistent composition. Fenestration refers to the depth, spacing,
and rhythm of openings on a facade.
§ 120-70 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-70
117:628
(a) All facade elements.
[1] The use of depth is encouraged to highlight facade
openings such as windows to create a three-dimensional
relief that produces shadows. Windows should not be
mounted flush to the exterior of the facade (see Figure 8).
[2] Pairs of window shutters may be used if determined to be
typical of the style of building, but should be used
consistently and should appear to actually cover the entire
window opening when closed. Shutters should not be
mounted flush to the exterior of the facade, but hung as if
they were functioning on a hinge.
[3] Storefront construction should be recessed enough at the
point of entry to allow the door to swing out without
obstructing the sidewalk.
(b) First floor (see Figure 8).
[1] The lower floor levels of a facade should provide the
highest amount of facade opening and articulation. The
ground floor should be very open and inviting to the
pedestrian, and employ the strongest use of depth in the
facade.
[2] Display windows shall not be covered up, removed, or
downsized. The use of opaque or heavily tinted glass is not
permitted. If screening is necessary, interior blinds or
curtains are encouraged.
[3] Awning or transom windows are encouraged at the street
level.
[4] All entrances into upper floors shall be located to afford
direct access from the sidewalk.
[5] Corner buildings may have two separate entry points or a
single entry point at the corner (see Figure 7).
(c) Upper floors (see Figure 8).
[1] Upper-floor openings shall be residential in size,
proportion, and character and provide a reduced
transparency than that of the first floor.
[2] Upper-floor windows shall be double-hung with
ornamental elements such as a flat stone lintel or
hoodmolds.
[3] The spacing of upper-floor openings shall match that of the
major storefront elements on the first floor.
§ 120-70 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-70
117:629
[4] Lowered ceilings should have a soffit at each window that
allows retention of the full window height.
(6) Building materials and textures.
(a) The use of stucco, plastic panels, sheet metal, clear-coated
aluminum, concrete block, or smooth concrete is prohibited.
(b) The use of modern and/or nontraditional materials or textures
may be permitted with Planning Board approval.
(c) All wooden materials shall be finished using either stain or
paint in order to protect them from the elements.
(d) All metal materials shall be finished and colored to match the
design of adjacent structures if deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board.
(e) All materials traditionally left unpainted, especially masonry
elements, shall remain unpainted unless otherwise approved
by the Planning Board.
(7) Additional regulations.
(a) Street level residential occupancies of multistory, mixed-use
structures or structures originally designed for commercial
purposes along Union Road shall be prohibited.
(b) Any signs, awnings, and storefronts fronting the Union Road
Corridor area shall be oriented and scaled to the pedestrian
zone so as not to negatively impact the visual character of the
street.
§ 120-70 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-70
117:630
(c) Existing historical architectural elements and features of
buildings identified by the Planning Board shall be retained to
the greatest extent practicable, unless otherwise permitted by
the Planning Board.
(d) Existing historical architectural elements and features of
buildings identified by the Planning Board that are in need of
repair or replacement shall be done so in kind by either
reusing original materials or duplicating the design and
materials of the original as closely as possible, unless
otherwise permitted by the Planning Board.
(e) In the event that historical architectural elements or features
identified by the Planning Board have previously been removed
or altered from original buildings, subsequent efforts to repair
or replace these elements should be done in such a way to
return the building to its original historic specifications as
closely as possible.
G. Demolition considerations.
(1) Intent and applicability. The intent of this section is not to prohibit
the demolition of structures along the designated Union Road
Corridor, but to preserve existing structures that significantly
contribute to the desired character or historical significance of the
district. This section includes the expectation that owners will
assume the role of caretakers for district structures, with
responsibility for maintaining and protecting district buildings.
Furthermore, this section shall have no limitation on the Town's
ability to take any demolition action necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(2) Demolition approval. The demolition of any structure within the
designated Union Road Corridor is considered an unlisted action
under SEQR. Site plan approval of a proposed redevelopment plan
for the property must be obtained from the Planning Board prior to
the issuance of a demolition permit. The Planning Board shall grant
the demolition and issue a demolition permit when the applicant
submits suitable evidence that one or more of the following
conditions exists:
(a) The structure contains no features of architectural and
historical significance contributing to the character of the
district within which it is located.
(b) The reasonable economic use for the structure as it exists or as
it might be preserved is of such minimal level, and the reuse
value of the property without the structure is of such level, that
there exists no feasible and prudent alternative to demolition.
§ 120-70 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-70
117:631
(c) Deterioration has progressed to the point where it is not
economically feasible to preserve and reuse the structure
consistent with the standards of this article.
(d) The proposed redevelopment is consistent with the purpose
and objectives of this article.
(3) Historical significance. The Planning Board will also consider the
structure's architectural character, historical significance, and
physical condition, and whether prohibiting demolition will deny
the owner of economically viable use of his/her land. Principal
structures will be afforded more protection than accessory
buildings.
(4) Safety hazards. The Town Board may grant relief from this
provision if the structure is deemed to be an immediate and
irreparable safety hazard by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(5) Demolition without permit. Property owners who demolish
buildings without obtaining approval of a demolition permit shall
be required to rebuild the structure to its original historical
specifications if deemed appropriate after consideration by the
Planning Board. All expenses incurred as a result of said demolition
and rebuild requirements shall be the responsibility of the property
owner.
H. Union Road sign regulations.
(1) Purpose and intent. The purpose of these sign regulations is to
allow for adequate identification of the location or occupant for a
parcel of land while protecting public health, safety and general
welfare. All signs and signing systems within the Union Road
Corridor area are subject to the regulations of Chapter 120 as well
as this section. These additional regulations serve to:
(a) Ensure right to free speech as protected under the
Constitution;
(b) Protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate, and protect the physical appearance of the
community;
(c) Provide businesses with effective means of identification while
reducing visual clutter through the prevention of excessive and
confusing sign displays;
(d) Encourage signs that respect the character and architecture of
the building, site, and district in which they are displayed;
(e) Reduce traffic conflicts or hazards by minimizing visual
distractions or obstacles in or visible from the public rights-ofway;
§ 120-70 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-70
117:632
§ 120-71. Definitions.
(f) Minimize the adverse effect of signs on nearby public and
private property;
(g) Avoid personal injury and property damage from unsafe or
confusing signs; and
(h) Establish a clear and impartial process for those seeking to
install signs.
(2) Traffic safety.
(a) No sign shall be erected at or near any intersection of any
streets, or alleys, or any railway and any street, in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision.
(b) No sign shall be of a shape or color that may be confused with
any authorized traffic control device.
(c) No rotating beam, beacon, or flashing illumination resembling
an emergency light shall be used in connection with any sign
display.
(3) Visibility at intersections. No sign shall interfere with the visibility
of intersections as defined in § 120-33 of this chapter.
(4) Prohibited signs. The following signs shall be prohibited:
(a) Signs that contain words or pictures of an obscene or
pornographic nature;
(b) Signs that emit audible sounds, odor, or visible matter;
(c) Signs that interfere with official traffic lights or traffic control
devices;
(d) Flashing, rotating, or revolving signs/lights, except barber
poles or holiday decorations that do not violate Subsection
H(4)(b) or (c) above;
(e) Signs with unshielded lighting devices or reflectors placed to
outline or provide the background of a sign;
(f) Signs with mirrors;
(g) Signs placed on a curb, sidewalk, hydrant, utility pole, trees or
other objects located on or in any street or within the public
right-of-way;
(h) Signs, banners, or pennants mounted on or extending above
the roof of any building or structure; and
(i) Signs that are defined as "pedestal signs."
§ 120-70 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-71
117:633
A. Word usage and interpretation. Except where specifically defined in
Chapter 120, all words used in this article shall carry their customary
meanings. Words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense, and the plural includes the singular, unless the natural
construction of the term indicates otherwise.
(1) The term "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, individual, or any other
entity.
(2) The term "shall" is mandatory and directory.
(3) The term "may" is permissive.
(4) The term "lot" includes the words "plot," "parcel," "tract," or "site."
(5) The term "building" includes the word "structure."
(6) The terms "premises" or "property" include a lot and all buildings
or structures thereon.
(7) The phrases "to erect," "to construct" and "to build" a building or
structure each have the same meaning and also include "to
excavate" for a building and "to relocate" a building by moving it
from one location to another.
(8) Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured
horizontally along the ground.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following words and
terms shall be defined as listed.
A:
APPROVAL — A favorable decision to an application that indicates
acceptance and indicates that the terms of the application are
satisfactory; includes both approval and approval with conditions.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — Any portion of the outer surface of a
structure, including the kind, color and texture of the building material,
the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, walls, fences,
awnings, canopies, screens, sculptures, decoration, roof shape and
materials, and other fixtures appurtenant to a structure; also referred
to as "architectural detail."
AWNING — A permanent overhanging shelter which projects from the
face of a building.
B:
BERM — A man-made earthen mound (usually from two to six feet in
height) designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable
views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes.
BLOCK — The length of a street between two intersections.
§ 120-71 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-71
117:634
BUFFER — A unit of land, together with a specified type and amount of
planting and/or fencing thereon, which may be required to eliminate or
minimize conflicts between land uses. Also referred to as "screening."
BULK — The size and scale of buildings and nonbuilding uses and
the physical relationship of their size and scale in relation to the lot
on which they are located. Bulk requirements include building height,
building footprint, and lot coverage.
C:
CALIPER — A horticultural method of measuring the diameter of
nursery stock For trees less than four inches in diameter, the
measurement should be taken at six inches above ground level. For
trees greater than four inches in diameter up to and including 12
inches, the caliper measurement must be taken at 12 inches above the
ground level. For trees greater than 12 inches in diameter, the trunk is
measured at breast height (diameter at breast height or DBH), which is
4.5 feet above the ground.
CHARACTER — The atmosphere or physical environment that is
created by the combination of land use and buildings within an area.
"Character" is established and influenced by land use types and
intensity and traffic generation, and also by the location, size and
design of structures as well as the interrelationship of all these
features.
COMPATIBLE —
CONIFEROUS — A plant with foliage that persists and remains green
year-round. Also known as "evergreen."
CORNICE — Any horizontal decorative molding that crowns a building,
such as the top edge of a facade or over an external door or window.
COURT — An unoccupied open space other than a yard. An "outer
court" is one which extends to the front, side or rear yards; an "inner
court" is any other court.
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the
design and/or appearance between two or more attributes of a
structure;
(1)
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the
design and/or appearance between two or more structures;
(2)
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the
design and/or appearance between two or more attributes of a
neighborhood; or
(3)
Having a pleasing or congruent arrangement of elements in the use
or function between two or more attributes of a neighborhood or
area.
(4)
§ 120-71 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-71
117:635
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary usually marking the edge of a
roadway or paved area.
CURB LEVEL — The established elevation of the street grade at the
point that is opposite the center of the wall nearest to and facing the
street line. Where a building is on a corner lot, the "curb level" is
the average of the mean levels of the curb on the two intersecting
streets. Where no such grade has been established, the Superintendent
of Public Works shall establish the curb level for the purposes of this
chapter.
D:
DECIDUOUS — A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
DESIGN REVIEW/DESIGN CONTROL — The comprehensive evaluation
of a development and its impact on neighboring properties and the
community as a whole, from the standpoint of site and landscape
design, architecture, materials, colors, lighting, and signs, in
accordance with a set of adopted criteria and standards.
DESIGN STANDARDS — A set of requirements that pertain to the
architectural appearance of a building or improvement that governs
the alteration, construction, demolition, or relocation of a building or
improvement.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made changes to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, excluding normal maintenance of farm roads and
agricultural practices.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES — A building or use which by design
of physical facilities a product is sold to, or a service performed for,
customers while they are in or near their motor vehicles, including
but not limited to fast-food restaurants, drive-up bank tellers, filmprocessing
service booths, etc.
DRIVEWAY — A roadway providing a means of access from a street
to a property or off-street parking area. Also may be referred to as an
"accessway."
E:
EASEMENT — Any authorization by a property owner for the use by
another, for a specified purpose, of any designated portion of a lot.
EAVE — The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a
building.
F:
FRONTAGE — The extent of a building or a lot abutting a public street
or right-of-way as defined herein.
G:
§ 120-71 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-71
117:636
GRADE, EXISTING — The surface of the ground or pavement at a
stated location as it exists before disturbance in preparation for a
project regulated by this Zoning Code.
GRADE, STREET — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts. If there is no officially established grade, the existing
grade of the street shall be taken as the street grade.
Note: H, I, J, and K do not apply.
L:
LANDSCAPING — The use of natural plant materials, including, but not
limited to, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. Landscaping also involves
the placement, preservation and maintenance of said plant materials
in conjunction with associated improvements such as fences, walls,
lighting, earth mounding and structures (principal or accessory).
LOT — Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory
buildings, together with such open spaces as are required, having not
less than the minimum area, width and depth required for a lot in the
district in which such land is situated and having frontage on a street
or other means of access as may be determined by the Planning Board
to be adequate as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a
building on such land.
LOT FRONTAGE — The distance measured across the width of the lot
at the front lot line or the proposed building front line.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the junction of and fronting on two or
more intersecting streets. All corner lots shall be deemed to have two
front yards, two side yards and no rear yard.
Note: M does not apply.
N:
NONRESIDENTIAL USE — All uses of land and buildings except singlefamily
and two-family dwellings.
O:
OPEN SPACE — That portion of a lot that is open, unobstructed and
unoccupied from the ground upward and includes permeable walkways
not used by vehicles, landscaping, uncovered patios, and uncovered
recreation facilities. Recreation buildings may be included as part of a
common open space.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, corporation, or company holding title to the property.
P:
PARAPET WALL — That portion of a building wall that rises above the
level of the roof.
§ 120-71 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-71
117:637
PARKING AREA OR LOT — An off-street area containing one or more
parking spaces, with passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto.
PARKING FACILITY — Includes all required off-street parking spaces,
loading areas, stacking spaces, aisles, driveways and landscaping as
required in this chapter.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space used for the temporary location
of one licensed motor vehicle, not including access driveways.
PAVING — Ground surface covered with materials including but not
limited to cobblestones, clay-fired bricks, concrete precast paver units,
poured concrete with or without decorative surface materials, blacktop,
or other asphaltic or rubber mixture which may include sand or gravel
as an ingredient and which creates a hard surface. A graded natural
surface or one covered with rolled stone or overlaid with loose gravel is
not considered a paved surface.
PEDESTRIAN-ORIENTED — Refers to a pedestrian-friendly policy
providing clear, comfortable pedestrian access to residential and
nonresidential areas and transit stops through the combination of land
design practices, including compact development, mixed-use
development, traffic-calming, pedestrian- and public transitorientation,
designated pedestrian circulation systems and amenities,
and a mix of housing types.
PROFESSIONAL — An individual or agency authorized to practice his/
her/its discipline as defined by applicable New York State laws, such as
an engineer, architect, or landscape architect.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Individuals or organizations that provide
specialized services, including, but not limited to, medical
practitioners, attorneys, architects, engineers, photographers, brokers,
and other similar services. This classification excludes hospitals, banks,
and savings and loan associations.
PROPERTY LINE — A line bounding a lot. Also known as a "lot line."
Note: Q does not apply.
R:
RESIDENTIAL USE — Includes single-family and two-family dwellings.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The boundary of a road, street, highway, or
expressway owned and maintained by any federal, state, or local
municipal entity.
ROOFLINE — In the case of a flat roof, the uppermost line of the roof
of a building; in the case of a pitched roof, the lower edge of the eave;
or in the case of an extended facade or parapet, the uppermost height
of said facade or parapet, provided that the facade or parapet extends
around the entire perimeter of the building at the same elevation.
S:
§ 120-71 WEST SENECA CODE § 120-71
117:638
SETBACK — The least required horizontal distance between a property
line and any structure on the lot measured at the shortest point,
including terraces, porches, or any covered projection thereof, but
excluding steps.
SETBACK, FRONT — The setback to the front lot line.
SETBACK, REAR — The setback to the rear lot line.
SETBACK, SIDE — The setback to any property line other than a street
or rear lot line.
SETBACK, STREET — The setback to the street or front lot line. On
corner lots, both yards bordering the street shall be considered as
street setbacks. Such street setback shall be measured from the public
right-of-way.
SITE — A lot or group of contiguous lots not divided by any alley, street,
other right-of-way or the Town limit that is proposed for development
in accord with the provisions of this Zoning Code, and is in a single
ownership or has multiple owners, all of whom join in an application for
development.
Note: T does not apply.
U:
USE — The specific purpose for which land, buildings or structures are
designed, intended, arranged, used or maintained.
Note: V does not apply.
W:
WALKWAY — A passage or path designated for pedestrian activity or
walking.
WHEEL STOP — An object, often made of concrete, which is placed at
the front of a parking space to prevent vehicles from pulling too far into
the space and striking the wall, landscape, or other objects that may be
on the other side of the space.
Note: X, Y, and Z do not apply.
§ 120-71 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § 120-71
117:639
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-26-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
2-9-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
4-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 115
5-10-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
8-9-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
9-20-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
9-20-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-20-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 115
12-20-2004 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
1-10-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
2-14-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
4-18-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
4-18-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
8-8-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
10-17-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
11-14-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
§ 120-71 WEST SENECA CODE § DL-1
117:640
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-12-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-12-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
2-13-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
2-13-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
3-13-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
5-22-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
5-22-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
5-22-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
7-24-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
7-24-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
8-2-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
8-14-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2006
8-14-2006 Sex offender
residency
Ch. 99
9-18-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
11-6-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
11-6-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
2-2006
11-20-2006 Electrical inspections
amendment
Ch. 65
L.L. No.
1-2007
Not adopted
L.L. No.
2-2007
3-12-2007 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 75
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § DL-1
117:641
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
3-2007
3-26-2007 Building Code
administration and
enforcement
Ch. 55
L.L. No.
4-2007
4-23-2007 Site plan review Ch. 102
4-23-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
5-7-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
5-2007
5-14-2007 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 101
L.L. No.
6-2007
5-14-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 120
5-14-2007 Planning Board and
Zoning Board of
Appeals: mandatory
training for members
of Planning Board and
Zoning Board of
Appeals
Ch. 28, Art. II
5-14-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
5-14-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
7-2007
6-11-2007 Illicit discharges,
activities and
connections to storm
sewers
Ch. 78B
L.L. No.
8-2007
6-11-2007 Stormwater
management and
erosion and sediment
control
Chs. 102; 102A; 103
10-15-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
11-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 115
12-17-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-17-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
§ DL-1 WEST SENECA CODE § DL-1
117:642
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-17-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2008
3-31-2008 Cold War veterans tax
exemption
Superseded by L.L.
No. 9-2017
3-31-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
3-31-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
6-9-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
6-9-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
2-2008
10-20-2008 Noise Ch. 82
L.L. No.
3-2008
11-3-2008 Dumping Ch. 63
L.L. No.
4-2008
12-1-2008 Environmental quality
review repealer
Ch. 67 (reference
only)
12-1-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
1-5-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
2-2-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
3-2-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
3-16-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
4-6-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2009
4-20-2009 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 102
L.L. No.
2-2009
6-15-2009 Site plan review
amendment
Ch. 102
6-15-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
3-2009
7-13-2009 Receiver of Taxes and
Assessments
Ch. 32
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § DL-1
117:643
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-27-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
4-2009
12-7-2009 Code of Ethics Ch. 13
L.L. No.
5-2009
11-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 115
11-16-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-7-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-7-2009 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
1-11-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
2-8-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
3-1-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
7-19-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2010
8-30-2010 Adoption of
retirement incentive
program
NCM
L.L. No.
2-2010
8-30-2010 Adoption of
retirement incentive
program
NCM
10-4-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
10-4-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
10-4-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
11-1-2010 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
3-2010
12-20-2010 Dogs amendment Ch. 62
5-9-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
§ DL-1 WEST SENECA CODE § DL-1
117:644
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
5-9-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
5-9-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
6-6-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
6-6-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2011
6-20-2011 Recreation
Commission
Ch. 11
9-12-2011 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
2-2011
11-28-2011 Sewers amendment Ch. 97
L.L. No.
3-2011
11-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 120
L.L. No.
4-2011
11-28-2011 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 75
L.L. No.
5-2011
11-28-2011 Building Code
administration and
enforcement
amendment
Ch. 55
L.L. No.
6-2011
11-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 120
L.L. No.
7-2011
11-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 120
L.L. No.
8-2011
11-28-2011 Plumbing amendment Ch. 90
L.L. No.
9-2011
11-28-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 92
L.L. No.
10-2011
11-28-2011 Smoke detectors
amendment
Ch. 100
L.L. No.
11-2011
11-28-2011 Snowplowing Ch. 100A
L.L. No.
12-2011
12-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 115
L.L. No.
13-2011
12-19-2011 Smoking Ch. 101A
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § DL-1
117:645
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2012
2-27-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 97
L.L. No.
2-2012
3-26-2012 Building Code
administration and
enforcement
amendment
Ch. 55
L.L. No.
3-2012
6-11-2012 Personnel policies:
drug-free workplace
amendment;
background checks
Ch. 25, Arts. IV and
V
6-25-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
6-25-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
9-10-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
10-15-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
10-29-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-17-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-17-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2013
2-4-2013 Stormwater
management and
erosion and sediment
control amendment
Ch. 102A
L.L. No.
2-2013
2-4-2013 Peddlers, solicitors
and canvassers
amendment
Ch. 87
L.L. No.
3-2013
4-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 115
L.L. No.
4-2013
5-13-2013 Firearms amendment Ch. 74
5-13-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
5-2013
8-5-2013 Architectural
Commission
Ch. 12
§ DL-1 WEST SENECA CODE § DL-1
117:646
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
8-26-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
9-30-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
12-16-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
1-13-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2014
2-10-2014 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 101
L.L. No.
2-2014
2-10-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 92
L.L. No.
3-2014
4-21-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
4-2014
4-21-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
open containers
amendment
Ch. 47, Art. I
L.L. No.
5-2014
4-21-2014 Peddlers, solicitors
and canvassers
amendment
Ch. 87
L.L. No.
6-2014
5-12-2014 Temporary
moratorium
NCM
8-11-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
7-2014
7-14-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
5-12-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
8-2014
9-8-2014 Brush, grass and
weeds amendment
Ch. 54
L.L. No.
9-2014
9-8-2014 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 75
L.L. No.
10-2014
9-8-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 1201
L.L. No.
11-2014
9-22-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
12-2014
10-6-2014 Tax levy limit override
2015
NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § DL-1
117:647
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
13-2014
11-3-2014 Development plan
review fees
Ch. 60
L.L. No.
14-2014
12-15-2014 Access to public
records
Ch. 33, Art. III
L.L. No.
1-2015
12-29-2014 Electrical inspections
amendment
Ch. 65
L.L. No.
2-2015
1-26-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
3-2015
3-9-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
4-2015
3-9-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
5-2015
6-1-2015 Tree conservation
amendment
Ch. 110
L.L. No.
6-2015
6-1-2015 Personnel policies:
drug-free workplace
amendment;
background checks
and physicals
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. IV; Ch.
25, Art. V
L.L. No.
7-2015
6-29-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
7-20-2015 Procurement policy Superseded by L.L.
No. 5-2016
L.L. No.
8-2015
7-27-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
9-2015
8-24-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
10-2015
10-26-2015 Tax levy limit override
2016
NCM
L.L. No.
11-2015
11-9-2015 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 103
L.L. No.
12-2015
11-9-2015 Unsafe buildings
amendment
Ch. 57
L.L. No.
13-2015
11-9-2015 Peddling, soliciting,
transient business,
and mobile food
vending amendment
Ch. 87
L.L. No.
14-2015
11-9-2015 Electrical licensing Ch. 66
§ DL-1 WEST SENECA CODE § DL-1
117:648
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
1-2016
1-25-2016 Brush, grass and
weeds amendment
Ch. 54
L.L. No.
2-2016
1-25-2016 Fire Prevention
amendment
Ch. 75
L.L. No.
3-2016
1-25-2016 Plumbing amendment Ch. 90
L.L. No.
4-2016
1-25-2016 Electrical licensing
amendment
Ch. 66
L.L. No.
5-2016
2-29-2016 Purchasing:
procurement and
purchasing policy
Ch. 30, Art. I
L.L. No.
6-2016
2-29-2016 Industrial and
Commercial Incentive
Board
Ch. 18
L.L. No.
7-2016
5-9-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
8-2016
5-9-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
9-2016
6-20-2016 Peddling, soliciting,
transient business,
and mobile food
vending amendment
Ch. 87
L.L. No.
10-2016
6-20-2016 Property
maintenance:
sidewalk maintenance
Ch. 92, Part 2
L.L. No.
11-2016
6-20-2016 Budget: limitation of
net operating
expenditures
Ch. 5, Art. I
L.L. No.
12-2016
8-22-2016 Purchasing:
responsible bidder
requirements for
public works
contracts
Ch. 30, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-2017
2-27-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 120
L.L. No.
2-2017
2-27-2017 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
3-2017
3-27-2017 Taxation: Business
Investment
Exemption
Ch. 109, Art. II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § DL-1
117:649
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
4-2017
8-7-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 120
L.L. No.
5-2017
9-18-2017 Rental Property:
Absentee Landlords
and Criminal Activity
Ch. 95
L.L. No.
6-2017
9-18-2017 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
7-2017
9-18-2017 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
8-2017
10-16-2017 Tax Levy Limit
Override 2018
NCM
L.L. No.
9-2017
10-16-2017 Taxation: Cold War
Veterans Exemption
Ch. 109, Art. VIA
L.L. No.
10-2017
11-13-2017 Smoking on Town
Property
Ch. 101A, Art. II
L.L. No.
11-2017
11-27-2017 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
1-2018
1-29-2018 Vacant and
Abandoned
Residential Real
Property: Point-of-
Sale Inspections
Ch. 58, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2018
1-29-2018 Flood Damage
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 77
L.L. No.
3-2018
4-9-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
4-2018
10-22-2018 Dogs Amendment Ch. 62
L.L. No.
5-2018
11-19-2018 Tax Levy Limit
Override 2019
NCM
L.L. No.
1-2019
1-28-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 120 (table)
L.L. No.
2-2019
5-6-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 77
§ DL-1 WEST SENECA CODE § DL-1
117:650
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
L.L. No.
3-2019
7-15-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
Ch. 120
(table)
1
L.L. No.
4-2019
10-21-2019 Tax Levy Limit
Override
NCM 1
L.L. No.
5-2019
12-16-2019 Ethics, Code of
Amendment
Ch. 13 2
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, OFF-ROAD § DL-1
117:651