PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-2-1993 as L.L. No. 1-1993]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with Subdivision 3 of § 20 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law, the local laws, ordinances and certain resolutions of the Village of
Yorkville shall be known collectively as the "Code of the Village of Yorkville,"
hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made in any of the
local laws, ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code of the Village
of Yorkville" to any other local law, ordinance or resolution appearing in
said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title,
chapter number, Article number or section number appearing in the Code
as if such local law, ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to
so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of local laws, ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to
the enactment of the Code by this local law are intended as a continuation
of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments,
and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption
of the prior local law, ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Yorkville, and it is the
intention of said Board that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former local laws and ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All local laws and ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
Village of Yorkville in force on the date of the adoption of this local law
and not contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of
this local law.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of local laws and ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this local law
shall not affect the following classes of local laws, ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal.
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Village of Yorkville prior to the effective date
of this local law or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of
this local law or of any local law, ordinance or resolution included in this
Code now or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
local law in violation of any legislative provision of the Village of
Yorkville or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this local law,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Village of Yorkville.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Village of Yorkville.
E. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Yorkville providing for the
laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or
other public place within the Village of Yorkville or any portion thereof.
F. Any local law or ordinance of the Village of Yorkville appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Village of Yorkville or other instruments or evidence of the village's
indebtedness.
G. Local laws or ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or
transfer of property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any local law or ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Bingo ordinance of 3-18-1958.
M. Any legislation adopted subsequent to March 3, 1991.
§ 1-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Yorkville and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this local law; and, if
this local law shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Village
Clerk of the Village of Yorkville by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village
of Yorkville, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said
Village Clerk to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this local law, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the local laws, ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code
of the Village of Yorkville" or any new local laws or resolutions, when
enacted or adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of
Trustees to be a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this local law
shall affect the status of any local law, ordinance or resolution contained
herein, and such local laws, ordinances or resolutions may be amended,
deleted or changed from time to time as the Board of Trustees deems
desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code of the Village of Yorkville required to be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk for use by the public. All changes
in said Code and all local laws and resolutions adopted by the Board of
Trustees subsequent to the enactment of this local law in such form as to
indicate the intention of said Board to be a part of said Code shall, when
finally enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of
copies of such changes, local laws or resolutions until such changes, local
laws or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Village Clerk of the Village
of Yorkville upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Board of
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
Trustees,1 which Board may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-10. Penalties for offenses against Code provisions.
Except where specifically provided elsewhere, any person who shall commit
an offense against any provision of the Code of the Village of Yorkville shall,
upon conviction thereof be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not exceeding $250 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 1-11. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Village Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of the
Village of Yorkville or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Village of Yorkville to be
misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this local law
shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term of not more than
15 days, or both.
§ 1-12. Changes in previously adopted legislation.
A. In compiling and preparing the local laws, ordinances and resolutions
for publication as the Code of the Village of Yorkville, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such local laws, ordinances and resolutions have
been made, except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition,
certain grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes
were made in one or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the local laws, ordinances and resolutions had been
previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this local law.
(Chapter and section number references are to the local laws,
ordinances and resolutions as they have been renumbered and appear
in the Code.)2
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. A140, Fees.
2. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-12B, the following provisions were amended or added: Ch.
3; Ch. 23; Ch. 40; Ch. 52; Ch. 67; Ch. 75; Ch. 82; Ch. 89; Ch. 94; Ch. 98; Ch. 107; Ch. 111;
Ch. 115, Art. V; Ch. 121, Art. I; §§ 12-5K; 12-6; 17-5; 32-1; 38-2; 38-3; 38-7; 49-1; 49-8;
58-4; 58-5; 58-6; 58-7; 63-4; 70-8; 115-1; 115-2; 115-4; 115-5; 118-1; 118-4; 118-7A(2), E
and F; 118-8F(1); 118-9A, E and F; 118-10A(1)(a); 118-16G(2); 135-25C(2)(c) and 135-33.
A complete description of each change may be found in L.L. No. 1-1993, on file in the
office of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-9 YORKVILLE CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this local law are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Village of Yorkville, such local law to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this local law
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-14, inclusive.
§ 1-14. When effective.
This local law shall take effect immediately upon filing with the Secretary of
State of the State of New York.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
Chapter 3
APPEARANCE TICKETS
§ 3-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to authorize public servants of the Village of
Yorkville to issue and serve appearance tickets in connection with violations
of state statutes or local laws, ordinances or rules and regulations of the
village which the public servants are authorized or required to enforce.3
§ 3-2. Persons authorized to issue.4
The following public servants of the Village of Yorkville are hereby
authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets with respect to violations
of state statutes or local laws, ordinances or rules or regulations of the
Village of Yorkville that such public servants are, respectively, required or
authorized to enforce:
§ 3-3. Method of service.
An appearance ticket other than for a parking violation shall be served
personally.
Chapter 5
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 121.
§ 5-1. Legislative intent.
The intent of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Yorkville is to implement
§ 1402, Subdivision 3, of the Real Property Tax Law providing for the
voluntary termination of the village's status as an assessing unit, as
provided in the Village Law and the Real Property Tax Law. It is also the
intent of this chapter to abolish the position of Assessor and to terminate
any and all responsibility, as provided by law, for the review of the
assessments of real property located within the Village of Yorkville.
A. Members of the Police Department: all provisions of this Code.
3. Editor's Note: See § 10, Subdivision 4(a), of the Municipal Home Rule Law and §§ 150.10
and 150.20 of the Criminal Procedure Law.
4. Editor's Note: For authority to issue appearance tickets for violations of the New York
State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code, see § 382 of the Executive Law. For
authority of dog control officers to issue appearance tickets, see § 114 of the Agriculture
and Markets Law and § 58-4 of Ch. 58, Dogs and Other Animals.
§ 1-14 YORKVILLE CODE § 5-2
3:8
§ 5-2. Cessation of assessments by village.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, the Village of Yorkville shall
cease to be an assessing unit.
§ 5-3. Position of Assessor abolished.
The position of Assessor in the Village of Yorkville is hereby abolished.
§ 5-4. Board of Assessment Review abolished.
The Board of Assessment Review in the Village of Yorkville is hereby
abolished.
§ 5-5. Town assessment roll used for levy of taxes.
On or after the effective date of this chapter, taxes in the Village of Yorkville
shall be levied on a copy of the applicable part of the assessment roll in the
Town of Whitestown, with the taxable status date of such town controlling
for village purposes.
Chapter 9
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 12.
§ 9-1. Conferral of statutory benefits.
The benefits of § 18 of the Public Officers Law shall be benefits which are
conferred upon officers and employees of the Village of Yorkville, as such
officers and employees are defined by § 18 of the Public Officers Law.
§ 9-2. Liability for costs.
The Village of Yorkville shall be liable for all costs incurred under this
chapter.
§ 9-3. Insurance.
The Village of Yorkville is hereby authorized and empowered to purchase a
suitable policy or policies of insurance from any insurance company created
by or under the laws of this state or authorized by law to transact business
in this state against any liability imposed by the provisions of § 18 of the
Public Officers Law and the enactment of this chapter.
Chapter 11
§ 5-2 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 9-3
9:9
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
§ 11-1. Line of succession for continuity of government in event of
disaster.
Pursuant to § 27 of the Executive Law of the State of New York, the
following line of succession is hereby established for continuity in
government when, in the event of a disaster and the emergency conditions
caused thereby, the Mayor is unable to discharge his or her duties:
§ 11-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this plan is to cite the authority, formulate procedures
and provide guidance for coordinated action in rendering assistance to the
citizens within the Village of Yorkville in the event of a disaster.
§ 11-3. Authority; findings.
§ 11-4. Mayor to have responsibility.
The Village Mayor shall have the primary responsibility to see that
everything possible is done to prepare for any disaster and to provide for
the safety and security of the community during a disaster.
A. Mayor.
B. Deputy Mayor.
C. Village Trustees, by seniority.
D. Police Chief.
E. Fire Chief.
F. Public Works Superintendent.
G. Codes Enforcement Officer.
H. Village Clerk.
I. Village Treasurer.
A. Disaster planning is based on the New York State Defense Emergency
Act, the regulations and orders of the State Defense Council and the
State Civil Defense Commission; the Emergency Plan for the Natural
Disasters of the State of New York; and the Nation Plan for Natural
Disaster Mobilization.
B. The Village of Yorkville recognizes that planning and preparatory
actions are required before an emergency. Emergency preparedness
allows the Village of Yorkville to prepare and react to emergency
situations to save life and property if the village is threatened or hit by a
disaster and major emergency.
§ 9-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 11-5
11:10
§ 11-5. Designation of emergency operations center.
The Emergency Operations Center (EOC) for the village will be in Police
Department, Yorkville, New York. Once the Mayor or his or her successor in
line the line of succession has declared that an emergency exists, the EOC
will be staffed on a twenty-four-hour basis until the declared emergency
subsides. The EOC will forward all warnings, directives, information, etc.,
to various local departments as appropriate. This will be done through the
use of department representatives, telephones located in the EOC, radios
in the police, fire, public works and other departments, and in the offices
of cooperating agencies. Each member assigned to the EOC will be familiar
with this plan, particularly as it relates to the section pertaining to each
responsible person's service duties.
§ 11-6. Essential emergency operations records.
The Mayor and the Village Clerk, functioning at the EOC, are responsible
for the maintenance and availability of records, documents, plans and other
materials required to discharge their and others' functions during an
emergency.
§ 11-7. Procedure for mobilization.
A. The Mayor and other designated personnel will assemble as soon as
possible at the EOC upon notification of the existence of an emergency.
B. To cope with the effects of an emergency, appropriate steps will be
taken at the EOC to mobilize fully the available personnel, resources,
facilities, supplies and materials in the village according to the
guidelines set forth in this plan.
(1) The Mayor, or his or her successor in the line of succession, is
responsible for notification and declaration of an emergency or
disaster.
(2) Each department head in the village is responsible for assuring
maximum effectiveness and utilization of all personnel and
equipment of the department to accomplish the village's
responsibilities. Each department head will retain control of the
assigned department and implement orders received from the EOC.
(3) The village should seek the cooperation and aid of any or all
surrounding communities in the event of an emergency or disaster.
Arrangements for mutual aid should be made prior to any
emergency or disaster.
(4) The village should contact the Oneida County Emergency
Management Office (EMO) regarding any major emergency or
disaster situation. Emergency management assistance should be
requested when local or mutual aid resources are exhausted. All
requests for county EMO assistance of any nature by any
department will be approved by Mayor and will be made to the
§ 11-5 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS § 11-7
11:11
§ 11-8. Responsibilities.
County EMO Director by direct phone contact or by the emergency
management radio network.
(5) Military assistance requests will be made by the Mayor to the chief
executive officer of Oneida County who will forward the request to
the Oneida County EMO, which will forward it to the State Natural
Disaster Commission.
(6) The American Red Cross is recognized as the agency responsible
for mass care to persons immediately following a disaster. Local
Red Cross chapters can extend natural disaster relief assistance to
individuals and families and the Red Cross can assume
administrative and financial responsibility in providing such
assistance. American National Red Cross has been assigned this
responsibility by the Congress of the United States.
A. The responsibilities and functions listed below recognize only basic
duties. Each of the position descriptions may be altered or expanded to
suit the needs of the individual city or village. One person may fill one
or more of the below-listed descriptions.
(1) The Mayor of the village is responsible for the conduct of disaster
operations within the village.
(a) The Mayor shall use any and all facilities, equipment, supplies,
personnel and other resources of the village in such a manner
as may be necessary or appropriate to cope with the disaster.
(b) The Mayor shall direct the activities of all agencies within the
village against the effects of emergency in conformance with
the approved plans for the rescue and relief of the people, the
recovery and the rehabilitation of the community. The Mayor
will utilize services of the EOC and its staff for implementation
of necessary measures to achieve emergency operations.
(2) The Village Board, as the elected body of the people, shall take all
appropriate steps to prepare for any disaster or emergency.
(3) The Village Clerk is responsible for the maintenance and
availability of essential records, documents and other materials,
required during the emergency.
(4) The Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC), appointed by
and under direction of the Mayor, directs the implementation of the
comprehensive plan for the EOC, the emergency operations of the
EOC, prepares estimates of the situation, advises the Mayor of
operational priorities and recommends requests for assistance
from the County EMO.
§ 11-7 YORKVILLE CODE § 11-8
11:12
(5) The Fire Chief will be responsible for the direction of all action to
contain and extinguish fires resulting from emergencies and the
removal of trapped and injured persons from damaged buildings
and flooded areas. The local Fire Chief may call upon the Oneida
County Fire Coordinator or the County EMO, under mutual aid, for
advice and/or assistance concerning fire-related emergencies,
relief operations and coordination of emergency shelter and
feeding operations.
(6) The Police Chief will direct all action to direct traffic, maintain
order, prevent looting and help alleviate panic; direct injured to
medical installations; and assist handicapped persons by obtaining
transportation and directing them to the nearest emergency relief
center. The Police Chief may call upon the Oneida County Sheriff's
Department and/or the New York State Police for advice and/or
assistance.
(7) The Superintendent of Public Works is responsible for the
maintenance of streets and bridges and all official trucks, cars and
equipment. The Superintendent will direct action to check, restore
and maintain essential public facilities and services, such as
streets, bridges, public buildings and other vital community
services, calling upon all public works and engineering services of
Oneida County for such assistance. The Superintendent will work
in conjunction with the local electric and gas utility, the local
telephone company, the local water and sewer board and with any
other local utility in the restoration of the various essential
services.
(8) The Codes Enforcement Officer of the village will be responsible for
safety inspection of damaged homes and businesses before
evacuees are allowed to reoccupy such buildings.
(9) The Public Information Officer, under supervision of the Mayor,
directs local dissemination of emergency information, the issuance
of news reports to the public and notifies the County EMO on the
status and development of emergency measures, using all media of
public communication.
(10) The Communications Officer supervises, directs, arranges and
restores communications for all emergency purposes using
available communications means and methods. Maximum use of all
available forms of communications will be planned by all
departments to aid the communications staff in carrying out their
duties.
(11) The Medical Officer directs all action to render health and medical
services to the community. The officer or staff should alert hospitals
and ambulances in the area regarding anticipated medical needs.
(12) The Supply Officer carries out measures necessary to the
emergency handling of all local resources.
§ 11-8 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS § 11-8
11:13
Chapter 12
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 9.
§ 12-1. Legislative intent.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 806 of the General Municipal Law, the Village
Board of Yorkville, New York, recognizes that there are rules of ethical
conduct for public officers and employees which must be observed if a high
degree of moral conduct is to be obtained and if public confidence is to be
maintained in our unit of local government.
§ 12-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Code of Ethics of the Village of
Yorkville, New York."
§ 12-3. Definitions.
When used in this Code of Ethics and unless otherwise expressly stated
or unless the context otherwise requires, the words "chief fiscal officer,"
"contract," "interest," "municipality," "municipal officer or employee" and
"Treasurer" shall have the meanings and definitions as set forth under
Article 18, § 800, of the General Municipal Law of the State of New York or
any amendments thereto.
§ 12-4. Conflicts of interest.
(13) The Manpower Officer directs the assignment of personnel to the
various emergency services as requested.
(14) The Transportation Officer carries out measures necessary to the
utilization of all transportation modes for support and rescue
operations.
(15) The School Representative directs the action related to care for
school students in school during an emergency situation.
B. Additional responsibilities and functions. All department heads and/or
those responsible for carrying out parts of the emergency operations
for the village shall have their responsibilities and functions listed
within this plan. List below any additional responsibilities and
functions.5
5. Editor's Note: No additional responsibilities were listed in the plan attached to L.L. No.
2-1994.
§ 11-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 12-4
12:14
§ 12-5. Standards of conduct.
A. Except as provided in § 802 of the General Municipal Law:
(1) No officer or employee shall have an interest in any contract with
the municipality of which he is an officer or employee, individually
or as a member of a board, who has the power or duty to:
(a) Negotiate, prepare, authorize or approve the contract or
authorize or approve payment thereunder;
(b) Audit bills or claims under the contract; or
(c) Appoint an officer or employee who has any of the powers or
duties set forth above.
(2) No chief fiscal officer, Treasurer or his deputy or employee shall
have an interest in a bank or trust company designated as a
depository, paying agent, registration agent or for investment of
funds of the municipality of which he is an officer or employee.
B. The provisions of this section shall in no event be construed to preclude
the payment of lawful compensation and necessary expenses of any
municipal officer or employee in one or more positions of public
employment, the holding of which is not prohibited by law.
A. No officer or employee should accept other employment which will
impair his independence or judgment in the exercise of his official
duties.
B. No officer or employee should accept employment or engage in any
business or professional activity which will require him to disclose
confidential information which he has gained by reason of his official
position or authority.
C. No officer or employee should disclose confidential information
acquired by him in the course of his official duties or use such
information to further his personal interests.
D. No officer or employee should use or attempt to use his official position
to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or others.
E. No officer or employee should engage in any transaction as a
representative or agent of the Board of Trustees with any business
entity in which he has a direct or indirect financial interest that might
reasonably tend to conflict with the proper discharge of his official
duties.
F. An officer or employee should not by his conduct give reasonable basis
for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or
unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of his official duties or that he
is affected by the kinship, rank, position or influence of any party or
person.
§ 12-4 ETHICS, CODE OF § 12-5
12:15
G. An officer or employee should abstain from making personal
investments in enterprises which he has reason to believe may be
directly involved in decisions to be made by him or which will otherwise
create substantial conflict between his duty in the public interest and
his private interest.
H. An officer or employee should endeavor to pursue a course of conduct
which will not raise suspicion among the public that he is likely to be
engaged in acts that are in violation of his trust.
I. No officer or employee shall represent a corporation in business
dealings with the Board of Trustees in which the officer or employee
has a substantial portion of the stock of the corporation.
J. If any officer or employee shall have a financial interest, direct or
indirect, having a value of $10,000 or more in any activity which is
subject to the jurisdiction of a regulatory agency, he should file with the
Secretary of State a written statement that he has such a financial
interest in such activity, which statement shall be open to public
inspection.
K. No officer or employee shall directly or indirectly solicit any gift or
accept or receive any gift having a value of $75 or more, whether in the
form of money, service, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, thing or
promise or in any other form, under circumstances in which it could
reasonably be inferred that the gift was intended to influence him or
could reasonably be expected to influence him in the performance of his
official duties or was intended as a reward for any official action on his
part.6
L. No officer or employee shall receive or enter into any agreement,
express or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in
relation to any matter before any municipal agency of which he is an
officer, member or employee or of any municipal agency over which he
has jurisdiction or to which he has the power to appoint any member,
officer or employee.
M. No officer or employee shall receive or enter into any agreement,
express or implied, for compensation for services to be rendered in
relation to any matter before any agency of his municipality whereby
his compensation is to be dependent or contingent upon any action by
such agency with respect to such matter, provided that this subsection
shall not prohibit the fixing at any time of fees based upon the
reasonable value of the services rendered.
N. No officer or employee shall become engaged in private employment
which shall be in conflict with his official duties.
O. No officer or employee shall negotiate for future employment with any
person, partnership or corporation, which person, partnership or
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 12-5 YORKVILLE CODE § 12-5
12:16
§ 12-6. Board of Ethics.7
§ 12-7. Penalties for offenses.
In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any
person who shall knowingly and intentionally violate any of the provisions of
this code may be fined, suspended or removed from office or employment,
as the case may be, in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 15
INVESTMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 12. Purchasing — See Ch. 25.
corporation shall have any business or contract pending before the
Board of Trustees.
P. No officer or employee shall hold investments which are in conflict with
his official duties.
A. There is hereby created and established a Board of Ethics consisting of
three members, to be appointed by the Board of Trustees as needed and
to serve without compensation. Of the members first appointed to the
Board, one shall hold office for a term ending at the end of the current
official year, one for a term ending at the end of the next official year
and the third for a term ending at the end of the next succeeding official
year. Their successors shall be appointed for three-year terms.
B. The members of the Board of Ethics shall elect a Chairman annually.
C. One member of the Board of Ethics shall be an elected or appointed
officer or employee of the Village of Yorkville. The other two members
shall not otherwise be officers or employees of such municipality.
D. The Board of Ethics shall render advisory opinions only to officers or
employees of the Village of Yorkville with respect to this Code of Ethics
and the provisions of Article 18 of the General Municipal Law. Such
advisory opinions shall be rendered pursuant to the written request of
any such officer or employee, under such rules and regulations as the
Board may prescribe, and shall have the advice of counsel employed by
the Board or, if none, the Village Attorney.
7. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 12-5 INVESTMENT POLICY § 15-1
15:17
§ 15-1. Scope.
This investment policy applies to all moneys and other financial resources
available for investment on its own behalf or on behalf of any other entity or
individual.
§ 15-2. Objectives.
The primary objectives of the local government's investment activities, in
priority order, are:
§ 15-3. Delegation of authority.
The governing board's responsibility for administration of the investment
program is delegated to the Treasurer, who shall establish written
procedures for the operation of the investment program consistent with
these investment guidelines. Such procedures shall include an adequate
internal control structure to provide a satisfactory level of accountability
based on a data base or records incorporating description and amounts of
investments, transaction dates and other relevant information and regulate
the activities or subordinate employees.
§ 15-4. Prudence.
A. To conform with all applicable federal, state and other legal
requirements (legal);
B. To adequately safeguard principal (safety);
C. To provide sufficient liquidity to meet all operating requirements
(liquidity); and
D. To obtain a reasonable rate of return (yield).
A. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly
as custodians of the public trust and shall avoid any transaction that
might impair public confidence in the Village of Yorkville to govern
effectively.
B. Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under
circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion
and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not
for speculation, but for investment, considering the safety of the
principal as well as the probable income to be derived.
C. All participants involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with property execution of
the investment program or which could impair their ability to make
impartial investment decisions.
§ 15-1 YORKVILLE CODE § 15-5
15:18
§ 15-5. Diversification.
It is the policy of the Village of Yorkville to diversify its deposits and
investments by financial institution, by investment instrument and by
maturity scheduling.
§ 15-6. Internal controls.
§ 15-7. Designation of depositaries.
The banks and trust companies authorized for the deposit of moneys up to
the following maximum amount are as follows:
Depository Name Maximum Amount
Key Bank $500,000.00
Fleet Rank $500,000.00
Marine Midland $500,000.00
§ 15-8. Collateralizing of deposits.
In accordance with the provisions of General Municipal Law, § 10, all
deposits of the Village of Yorkville, including certificates of deposit and
special time deposits, in excess of the amount insured under the provisions
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act shall be secured:
A. It is the policy of the Village of Yorkville for all moneys collected by any
officer or employee of the government to transfer those funds to the
Treasurer within 10 days of deposit or within the time period specified
in law, whichever is shorter.
B. The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control to provide reasonable, but absolute, assurance that
deposits and investments are safeguarded against loss from
unauthorized use or disposition and that transactions are executed in
accordance with management's authorization and recorded properly
and are managed in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
A. By a pledge of eligible securities with an aggregate market value, or
provided by General Municipal Law, § 10, equal to the aggregate
amount of deposits from the categories designated in Appendix A to the
policy.
B. By an eligible irrevocable letter of credit issued by a qualified bank
other than the bank with the deposits in favor of the government for a
term not to exceed 90 days with an aggregate value equal to 140% of
the aggregate amount of deposits and the agreed-upon interest, if any.
A qualified bank is one whose commercial paper and other unsecured
short-term debt obligations are rated in one of the three highest rating
categories by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating
§ 15-5 INVESTMENT POLICY § 15-8
15:19
§ 15-9. Safekeeping and collateralization.
§ 15-10. Permitted investment.
organization or by a bank that is in compliance with applicable federal
minimum risk-based capital requirements.
C. By an eligible surety bond payable to the government for an amount at
least equal to 100% of the aggregate amount of deposits and the
agreed-upon interest, if any, executed by an insurance company
authorized to do business in New York State, whose claims-paying
ability is rated in the highest rating category by at least two nationally
recognized statistical rating organizations.
A. Eligible securities used for collateralizing deposits shall be held by (the
depositary and/or a third party) bank or trust company subject to
security and custodial agreements.
B. The security agreement shall provide that eligible securities are being
pledged to secure local government deposits together with agreed-upon
interest, if any, and any costs or expenses arising out of the collection of
such deposits upon default. It shall also provide the conditions under
which the securities may be sold, presented for payment, substituted or
released and the events which will enable the local government to
exercise its rights against the pledged securities. In the event that the
securities are not registered or inscribed in the named of the local
government, such securities shall be delivered in a form suitable for
transfer or with an assignment in blank to the Village of Yorkville or its
custodial bank.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company or agent of the custodian for the local government will
be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will not, in any circumstances, be
commingled with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or
other liabilities. The agreement should also describe that the custodian
shall confirm the receipt, substitution or release of the securities. The
agreement shall provide for the frequency of revaluation of eligible
securities and for the substitution of securities when a change in the
rating of a security may cause ineligibility. Such agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a
perfected interest in the securities.
A. As authorized by General Municipal Law, the Village of Yorkville
authorizes the Treasurer to invest moneys not required for immediate
expenditure for terms not to exceed its projected cash flow needs in the
following types of investments:
(1) Special time deposit account.
(2) Certificates of deposit.
§ 15-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 15-10
15:20
§ 15-11. Authorized financial institutions and dealers.
The Village of Yorkville shall maintain a list of financial institutions and
dealers approved for investment purposes and establish appropriate limits
to the amount of investments which can be made with each financial
institution or dealer. All financial institutions with which the local
government conducts business must be creditworthy. Banks shall provide
their most recent Consolidated Report of Condition (Call Report) at the
request of the Village of Yorkville. Security dealers not affiliated with a
bank shall be required to be classified as reporting dealers affiliated with
the New York Federal Reserve Bank, as primary dealers. The Treasurer is
responsible for evaluation the financial position and maintaining a listing of
proposed depositories, trading partners and custodians. Such listing shall
be evaluated at least annually.
§ 15-12. Purchase of investments.
(3) Obligations of the United States of America.
(4) Obligations guaranteed by agencies of the United States of
America where the payment of principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States of America.
(5) Obligations of the State of New York.
B. All investment obligations shall be payable or redeemable at the option
of the Village of Yorkville within such times as the proceeds will be
needed to meet expenditures for purposes for which the moneys were
provided and, in the case of obligations purchased with the proceeds of
bonds or notes, shall be payable or redeemable at the option of the
Village of Yorkville within two years of the date of purchase.
A. The Treasurer is authorized to contract for the purchase of investment:
(1) Directly, including through a repurchase agreement, from an
authorized trading partner.
(2) By participation in a cooperative investment program with another
authorized governmental entity pursuant to Article 5G of the
General Municipal Law where such program meets all the
requirements set forth in the Office of the State Comptroller
Opinion No. 88-46, and the specific program has been authorized
by the governing board.
(3) By utilizing an ongoing investment program with an authorized
tracking partner pursuant to a contract authorized by the
governing board.
B. All purchased obligations, unless registered or inscribed in the name of
the local government, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held
in the custody of a bank or trust company. Such obligations shall be
purchased, sold or presented for redemption or payment by such bank
§ 15-10 INVESTMENT POLICY § 15-12
15:21
§ 15-13. Repurchase agreements.
Repurchase agreements are authorized subject to the following restrictions:
Chapter 17
LOCAL LAWS, ADOPTION OF
§ 17-1. Public hearing required; time and contents of notice.
No local law shall be adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Yorkville until a public hearing has been held thereon in its final form before
such Board of Trustees not less than three nor more than 15 days after
public notice has been given of the time and place of the holding of such
public hearing. Such notice shall be given by the Village Clerk by causing
the same to be published once in the official newspaper of the Village.
Such notice shall contain the title of the proposed local law and a brief
explanatory statement thereof.
or trust company only in accordance with prior written authorization
from the officer authorized to make the investment. All such
transactions shall be confirmed in writing to the Village of Yorkville by
the bank or trust company shall be held pursuant to a written custodial
agreement as described in General Municipal Law, § 10.
C. The custodial agreement shall provide that securities held by the bank
or trust company as agent of and custodian for the local government
will be kept separate and apart from the general assets of the custodial
bank or trust company and will, in any circumstances, be commingled
with or become part of the backing for any other deposit or other
liabilities. The agreement shall describe how the custodian shall
confirm the receipt and release of the securities. Such agreement shall
include all provisions necessary to provide the local government a
perfected interest in the securities.
A. All repurchase agreements must be entered into subject to a Master
Repurchase Agreement.
B. Trading partners are limited to banks or trust companies authorized to
do business in New York State and primary reporting dealers.
C. Obligations shall be limited to obligations of the United States of
America and obligations of agencies of the United States of America
where principal and interest are guaranteed by the United States of
America.
D. No substitution of securities will be allowed.
E. The custodian shall be a party other than the trading partner.
§ 15-12 YORKVILLE CODE § 17-2
15:22
§ 17-2. Posting of copies of proposed local law.
The Village Clerk shall cause to be printed or otherwise reproduced copies
of such proposed local law and shall, not later than the day such notice
is published, post one such copy, together with the notice of hearing, in a
conspicuous place in the Village Board room and shall also make copies of
such proposed local law available at the Clerk's office for inspection by and
distribution to any interested person during scheduled hours.
§ 17-3. Posting and publication after adoption. [Amended 2-6-2007
by L.L. No. 1-2007]
The Village Clerk shall forthwith, upon the adoption of a local law by the
Board of Trustees, post a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in the Village
Board room and shall, within 20 days after such adoption, cause a notice of
the enactment to be published in the official newspaper of the Village.
§ 17-4. Filing of proof of publication and posting.
Proof of publication of the notice of public hearing required and proof of
posting and publication required by this chapter and set forth herein shall
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 17-5. Numbering of local laws. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Each local law shall be numbered consecutively, beginning with No. 1 for
each calendar year. When a local law is finally adopted and certified, copies
thereof, as required by § 27 of the Municipal Home Rule Law, are filed in
the office of the Village Clerk and the Secretary of State. The Village Clerk
shall accordingly assign to such local law an appropriate number.
Chapter 20
MEETINGS
§ 17-2 MEETINGS § 17-5
20:23

ARTICLE I
Recording of Board Meetings
[Adopted 10-1-1991]
§ 20-1. Use of cameras or other recording devices prohibited.
No one shall be allowed to record any meeting of the Yorkville Village Board
by using cameras, video or other equipment, either video or audio.
§ 20-2. Removal of equipment.
Anyone bringing such equipment to the Village Board Room shall be barred
from the room until such time as they have removed all such equipment.
§ 20-1 MEETINGS § 20-2
20:25

ARTICLE II
Notice for Special Meetings
[Adopted 4-7-19988 ]
§ 20-3. Notice requirements.
A. When a special meeting is called by the Mayor:
(1) He or the Clerk shall notify each Board member in person or by
telephone advising each member of the date, time and location of
the special meeting.
(2) The Clerk shall issue a Notice of Special Meeting, one copy of
which shall be posted on the outside front door of the Board Room
entrance and another on the bulletin board near the inside Board
Room entrance in the truck room.
B. In the event that there is sufficient advance notice of the special
meeting being called:
(1) A notice may be mailed to each Board member; and
(2) A copy of the notice shall be mailed to the media.
8. Editor's Note: The requirements for notice of special meetings are adopted annually at the
reorganizational meeting in substantially this same form.
§ 20-3 MEETINGS § 20-3
20:27
Chapter 23
PLANNING BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 29.
§ 23-1. Appointment; terms of members. [Amended 2-27-1995 by
L.L. No. 1-1995]
A Planning Board of seven members shall be appointed for the Village
of Yorkville, Oneida County, New York. Members of said Board shall be
appointed for terms of five years, in accordance with § 7-718 of the Village
Law.
§ 23-2. Powers and duties.
Said Board shall have and exercise the powers and duties prescribed by the
Village Law and the Subdivision Regulations of the Village of Yorkville.9
Chapter 25
PURCHASING
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 118, Subdivision of Land.
§ 20-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 23-2
23:28
ARTICLE I
Procurement Policy
[Adopted 12-11-1991]
§ 25-1. Review of purchases; exemptions from competitive bidding
requirements.
§ 25-2. Documentation of determination.
The decision that a purchase is not subject to competitive bidding will
be documented in writing by the individual making the purchase. This
documentation may include written or verbal quotes from vendors, a memo
from the purchaser indicating how the decision was arrived at, a copy
of the contract indicating the source which makes the item or service
exempt, a memo from the purchaser detailing the circumstances which
led to an emergency purchase or any other written documentation that is
appropriate.
§ 25-3. Purchases at lowest price required.
All goods and services will be secured by use of written requests for
proposals, written quotations, verbal quotations or any other method that
assures that goods will be purchased at the lowest price and that favoritism
will be avoided, except in the following circumstances: purchase contracts
over $10,000 and public works contracts over $20,000; goods purchased
from agencies for the blind or severely handicapped pursuant to § 175-b
of the State Finance Law; goods purchased from correctional institutions
A. Every purchase to be made must be initially reviewed to determine
whether it is a purchase contract or public works contract. Once that
determination is made, a good faith effort will be made to determine
whether it is known or can reasonably be expected that the aggregate
amount to be spent on the item of supply or service is not subject to
competitive bidding, taking into account past purchases and the
aggregate amount to be spent in a year.
B. The following items are not subject to competitive bidding pursuant to
§ 103 of the General Municipal Law: purchase contracts under $10,000
and public works contracts under $20,000; emergency purchases;
certain municipal hospital purchases; goods purchased from agencies
for the blind or severely handicapped; goods purchased from
correctional institutions; purchases under state and county contracts;
and surplus and secondhand purchases from another governmental
entity.
C. It shall be the policy that goods and services which are not required by
law to be bid may be procured by obtaining proposals or quotes, as
referenced in § 25-4, Methods of purchase, not to exceed the bid limits
of $10,000 for purchase contracts and $20,000 for public works
contracts. [Added 4-1-1996]
§ 25-1 PURCHASING § 25-3
25:29
pursuant to § 186 of the Correction Law; purchases under state contracts
pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 3, of the General Municipal Law; or
purchases pursuant to § 25-6 of this Article.
§ 25-4. Methods of purchase.
§ 25-5. Required documentation.
§ 25-6. Exceptions.
Pursuant to General Municipal Law § 104-b, Subdivision 2f, the
procurement policy may contain circumstances when, or types of
procurements for which, in the sole discretion of the governing body, the
solicitation of alternative proposals or quotations will not be in the best
interest of the municipality. In the following circumstances, it may not be in
A. The following methods of purchase will be used when required by this
policy in order to achieve the highest savings:
Estimated
Amount of
Purchase
Contract Method
$250 to $2,999 2 verbal quotations
$3,000 to $9,999 2 written/fax quotations or written request for
proposals
Estimated
Amount of Public
Works Contract Method
$250 to $2,999 2 verbal quotations
$3,000 to $4,999 2 written/fax quotations
$5,000 to $19,999 3 written/fax quotations or written request for
proposals
B. A good faith effort shall be made to obtain the required number of
proposals or quotations. If the purchaser is unable to obtain the
required number of proposals or quotations, the purchaser will
document the attempt made at obtaining the proposals. In no event
shall the failure to obtain the proposals be a bar to the procurement.
A. Documentation is required of each action taken in connection with each
procurement.
B. Documentation and an explanation is required whenever a contract is
awarded to other than the lowest responsible offeror. This
documentation will include an explanation of how the award will
achieve savings or how the offeror was not responsible. A
determination that the offeror is not responsible shall be made by the
purchaser and may not be challenged under any circumstances.
§ 25-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 25-6
25:30
the best interests of the Village of Yorkville to solicit quotations or document
the basis for not accepting the lowest bid:
§ 25-7. Effective date; annual review.
This policy shall go into effect January 1, 1992, and will be reviewed
annually.
A. Professional services or services requiring special or technical skill,
training or expertise. The individual or company must be chosen based
on accountability, reliability, responsibility, skill, education and training,
judgment, integrity and moral worth. These qualifications are not
necessarily found in the individual or company that offers the lowest
price, and the nature of these services are such that they do not readily
lend themselves to competitive procedures. In determining whether a
service fits into this category, the Village of Yorkville Board of Trustees
shall take into consideration the following guidelines: whether the
services are subject to state licensing or testing requirements; whether
substantial formal education or training is a necessary prerequisite to
the performance of the services; and whether the services require a
personal relationship between the individual and municipal officials.
Professional or technical services shall include but not be limited to the
following: services of an attorney; services of a physician; technical
services of an engineer engaged to prepare plans, maps and estimates;
securing insurance coverage and/or services of an insurance broker;
services of a certified public accountant; investment management
services; printing services involving extensive writing, editing or art
work; management of municipally owned property; and computer
software or programming services for customized programs or services
involved in substantial modification and customizing of prepackaged
software.
B. Emergency purchases pursuant to § 103, Subdivision 4, of the General
Municipal Law. Due to the nature of this exception, these goods or
services must be purchased immediately, and a delay in order to seek
alternate proposals may threaten the life, health, safety or welfare of
the residents. This section does not preclude alternate proposals if time
permits.
C. Purchases of surplus and secondhand goods from any source. If
alternate proposals are required, the Village of Yorkville is precluded
from purchasing surplus and secondhand goods at auctions or through
specific advertised sources where the best prices are usually obtained.
It is also difficult to try to compare prices of used goods and a lower
price may indicate an older product.
D. Goods or services under $250. The time and documentation required to
purchase through this policy may be more costly than the item itself
and would therefore not be in the best interests of the taxpayer. In
addition, it is not likely that such de minimis contracts would be
awarded based on favoritism.
§ 25-6 PURCHASING § 25-7
25:31

ARTICLE II
Advance Approval of Claims
[Adopted 4-1-1996]
§ 25-8. Authorization of payment; liability.
The Board of Trustees authorizes payment in advance of audit of claims for
public utility services, postage, freight and express charges, and all such
claims shall be presented at the next regular meeting for audit, and the
claimant and officer incurring or approving the same shall be jointly and
severally liable for any amount disallowed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 25-8 PURCHASING § 25-8
25:33
Chapter 29
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 32
TERMS OF OFFICE
§ 32-1. Terms of Mayor and Trustees.10
The term of office of the Mayor and the Trustees shall be four years, as
provided by § 43 of the Village Law,11 and village elections shall be held
biennially in the odd-numbered years.
Chapter 34
VILLAGE JUSTICE
§ 34-1. Establishment of office.
Pursuant to the authority granted by § 3-301 of the Village Law, the office of
Village Justice is hereby established for the Village of Yorkville.
§ 34-2. Salary.
The salary of such office is hereby fixed at $6,000 per annum.
§ 34-3. Election; term.
The first Village Justice of the Village of Yorkville shall be elected at the
next general Village election to be held for the term of four official years
provided in § 3-302 of the Village Law.
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 38
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 82.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
11.Editor's Note: Current provisions may be found in § 3-302, Subdivision 5, of the Village
Law.
§ 25-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 38-1
29:34
§ 38-1. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the Village of Yorkville, New York, as an exercise of
its police power, to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the village by enacting this chapter to limit and control the use
and possession of open containers containing alcoholic beverages and the
disposal of beverage containers on or in public lands of the village and to
prevent public disorder and littering.
§ 38-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of the chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular use.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Includes beer, wine and liquor and all other
alcoholic beverages as more specifically defined by the New York State
Alcoholic Beverage Control Law.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle suitable for or
used to hold any liquid.
INTENT TO CONSUME12 — Includes any of the following:
PUBLIC LAND — Any highway, street, park, public sidewalk, cemetery,
playground, public parking area, public school ground or other public place
of any nature within the limits of the village.
VILLAGE — The Village of Yorkville.
§ 38-3. Public consumption and possession prohibited.13
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage on any public lands in
the village or carry, transport or have in his or her possession any open
container of an alcoholic beverage on or in any public land in the village
with intent to consume said alcoholic beverage on public land in the village.
§ 38-4. Disposal of containers.
No person shall place, deposit, leave, abandon, break, smash or destroy
any container in, on or upon any public land within the limits of the village
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
C. Possession with alcohol on the breath of the possessor.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any
public lands.
D.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 38-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 38-4
38:35
except in a waste receptacle placed on said public land for the purpose of
depositing or discarding therein waste material.
§ 38-5. Presumptive evidence.
Any open container containing an alcoholic beverage found in or on any
vehicle on the public land of the village shall constitute presumptive
evidence that the same is in the possession of the owner and/or driver and
of the occupants of said vehicle and in violation of this chapter.
§ 38-6. Exceptions.
So much of the foregoing provisions hereof as prohibit the carrying,
transporting or possessing of alcoholic beverages in an open container shall
not apply to a specific alcoholic beverage in the case of a public event or
gathering at which special permission has been granted by the village for
the purveying or dispensing and consumption of that specified alcoholic
beverage.
§ 38-7. Penalties for offenses.14
An offense against any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation,
punishable as provided in § 1-10 of Chapter 1, General Provisions.
Chapter 40
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 52.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 63.
Games of chance — See Ch. 73.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 40-1. Legislative intent.
The Village of Yorkville recognizes that the use and ownership of
amusement devices must be adequately controlled so as to prevent public
disorder, nuisance, loitering and other acts detrimental to the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the village and in particular to protect the
adolescents of the village against the evils associated with gambling, and
this chapter is intended to provide such control and regulation.
§ 40-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 38-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 40-2
40:36
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any coin-controlled amusement device of any
description and, particularly but not by way of limitation, the type
commonly known as "bagatelle," baseball," "football," "iron claw," "pinball"
and "video amusement games," including jukeboxes and video jukeboxes.
MINITHEATER, PROJECTION BOOTH OR OTHER DEVICE DISPLAYING
FILMS OR VIDEOS — A theater, booth, machine, device or other
contrivance which presents material in the form of live shows, films,
videotapes, slides or pictures, viewed from an individual enclosure, for
which a fee is charged.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, a partnership, company,
corporation, association, society or any other legal entity and any officer,
agent, servant or employee of the foregoing in charge of the premises
hereinafter mentioned.
§ 40-3. Applicability.
This chapter, however, shall include any parcel of land, building, structure,
vehicle or any other place where an amusement device may be kept,
maintained, exhibited, used or operated.
§ 40-4. Illegal use or purpose prohibited.
No licensed device under this chapter shall be operated or devoted or
permitted by the licensee, holder of a license or any person in responsible
charge of such premises to be operated or devoted for or to any use or
purpose prohibited by law.
§ 40-5. License required.
No person shall keep, maintain, use or exhibit or permit to be kept,
maintained, exhibited, used or operated in or upon any premises in his
possession or under his control within the village a manually or
mechanically operated amusement device used or designed in whole or
in part for the amusement, entertainment or recreation of the public or
a minitheater, projection booth or other device displaying films or videos
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Village Clerk, as provided
in this chapter.
§ 40-6. Application for license.
A. A verified application, in duplicate, shall be made by any person
desiring a license required by this chapter to the Village Clerk for such
license, upon blanks to be furnished by him or her, giving the name and
address of the manufacturer of the device; the manufacturer's number,
if any; a complete detailed description of the device, including all the
mechanical features thereof; the method of its operation; the location
by street and number where the device is sought to be licensed; the
nature and use of the premises upon which the device is proposed to be
kept, maintained, exhibited or operated; the number of such devices
§ 40-2 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 40-6
40:37
§ 40-7. Issuance of license.
The Village Clerk is hereby authorized, in his or her discretion, to issue the
license required by this chapter upon the terms and conditions prescribed
in this chapter.
§ 40-8. Investigation of applicant.
The application for a license under this chapter shall be referred by the
Village Clerk to the Chief of Police for his investigation and recommendation
as to approval or disapproval, and he shall forward his recommendation
in writing to the Village Clerk. No such license shall be issued without
approval of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall cause such
inquiries, inspections and investigations to be made as he deems necessary
to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, including but not limited
to the device sought to be licensed or which shall be licensed, the premises
upon which such device is proposed to be or shall be located and the
moral character of the applicant or any person in responsible charge of
such premises. In order that the intent and purpose of this chapter shall be
carried out, the control and regulation of such devices shall be under the
supervision of the Police Department, and members of the Department may
at any and all times, when such premises are open, visit the same and make
an inspection thereof.
§ 40-9. Fees.
Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, the Village Clerk
shall collect the license fees prescribed by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.15
§ 40-10. Tag required.
A license shall be procured under this chapter for each device. A tag
hearing the same number as the license and the year of issuance shall
be obtained from the Village Clerk and securely attached to each licensed
device so that it shall be and at all times remain conspicuous. No
amusement device shall be kept, exhibited, used or operated in the village
until and unless such tag shall have been so attached thereto.
already licensed and sought to be licensed upon the same premises;
information on similar establishments in the village; and such further
information as the Village Clerk may require.
B. The application shall also contain a complete statement indicating
whether or not any previous application has been made hereunder and
whether any license has been received, refuted, suspended or revoked,
with the circumstances thereof.
15.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 40-6 YORKVILLE CODE § 40-11
40:38
§ 40-11. Expiration of license.
Each tag and license issued under this chapter shall expire July 31, unless
sooner revoked by the Village Clerk.
§ 40-12. Transfer of license or tag.
No license or tag issued under this chapter shall be transferred from one
device to another or from one premises to another.
§ 40-13. Revocation of license.
Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Village Clerk,
and any tag issued under such license may be recalled and destroyed for
any of the following:
§ 40-14. Procedure for revocation.
A. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any
governmental officer, agency or department governing or applicable to
the maintenance or conduct of the premises upon which such device is
located.
C. The violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation governing or
applicable to the maintenance, possession, use of or operation of the
licensed device.
D. Upon the conviction of the licensee, holder of a license or any person in
responsible charge of said premises of a crime.
E. Upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police, in writing, stating the
reasons thereof.
F. Otherwise, for cause.
A. If the Village Clerk determines that the license granted under this
chapter should be revoked and any tag issued under such license
should be recalled and destroyed, the Village Clerk, within five days of
the determination, must notify the licensee, in writing, of the reasons
for the determination, specifying that the license will be revoked within
15 days of the date of the notice. The licensee, within five days of the
date of the notice of revocation from the Village Clerk, must, in writing,
request a hearing before the hearing panel to determine the
appropriateness of the Village Clerk's determination and notice of
revocation.
B. The hearing panel, consisting of three members of the Village Board of
Trustees, must, within five days of the receipt of the licensee's demand
for a hearing, conduct a hearing to determine whether the licensee's
license should be revoked and any decal recalled. The determination by
the hearing panel must be a majority decision. The technical rules of
§ 40-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 40-14
40:39
§ 40-15. Penalties for offenses.
§ 40-16. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to licenses issued prior to its adoption. Any
machines installed or license issued subsequent to the adoption hereof shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 46
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 49.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
70.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 118.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 46-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter provides for the administration and enforcement of the New
York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code (the Uniform Code),
the State Energy Conservation Construction Code (the Energy Code), the
Oneida County Sanitation Code and the Village of Yorkville Zoning Law in
the Village of Yorkville. This chapter is adopted pursuant to § 10 of the
Municipal Home Rule Law. Except as otherwise provided in the Uniform
evidence will not apply to the hearing before the hearing panel. The
hearing should be recorded by means of a tape recorder.
C. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing panel will deliberate and
render a decision on the record.
D. The determination by the hearing panel will be final.
A. Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
B. Each day's maintenance, exhibition or use of any manually or
mechanically operated amusement device in violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
C. Any person maintaining, operating or in responsible charge of premises
upon which a manually or mechanically operated amusement device is
kept, exhibited or used, to which device a fictitious tag purporting to be
issued by the Village Clerk or a counterfeit of said decal is attached, or
any person attaching such tag to an amusement device, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a penalty as prescribed above.
§ 40-14 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-1
40:40
Code, other state law or other section of this chapter and the Village of
Yorkville Zoning Law,16 all buildings, structures and premises, regardless of
use or occupancy, are subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 46-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 46-4 of this chapter.
The term "building permit" shall also include a building permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A
certificate issued pursuant to § 46-7B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER/ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code
Enforcement Officer appointed pursuant to § 46-3B of this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL — The Code Enforcement Officer and
all Inspectors.
COMPLIANCE ORDER — An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 46-15A of this chapter.
ENERGY CODE — The State Energy Conservation Construction Code, as
currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to time.
INSPECTOR — Inspector appointed pursuant to § 46-3D of this chapter.
OPERATING PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 46-10 of this chapter.
The term "operating permit" shall also include an operating permit which is
renewed, amended or extended pursuant to any provision of this chapter.
PERMIT HOLDER — The person to whom a building permit has been issued.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited-liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, business trust, estate, trust, association or
any other legal or commercial entity of any kind or description.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued pursuant to § 46-6 of this chapter.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued pursuant to § 46-7D of
this chapter.
UNIFORM CODE — The New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code as currently in effect and as hereafter amended from time to
time.
VILLAGE — The Village of Yorkville.
§ 46-3. Code Enforcement Officer and Inspectors.
A. The office of Enforcement Officer (Codes) is hereby created. The
Enforcement Officer shall administer and enforce all the provisions of
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Zoning.
§ 46-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-3
40:41
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the Village of Yorkville Zoning
Law and this chapter. The Enforcement Officer shall have the following
powers and duties.
(1) To receive, review and approve or disapprove applications for
building permits, certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, and the plans, specifications and
construction documents submitted with such applications.
(2) Upon approval of such applications, to issue building permits,
certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates and operating
permits, and to include in building permits, certificates of
occupancy, temporary certificates and operating permits such
terms and conditions as the Enforcement Officer may determine to
be appropriate.
(3) To conduct construction inspections, inspections to be made prior
to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, temporary certificates
and operating permits, firesafety (as conducted and approved by
the Fire Safety Inspector) and property maintenance inspections,
inspections incidental to the investigation of complaints, and all
other inspections required or permitted under any provision of this
chapter.
(4) To issue stop-work orders.
(5) To review and investigate complaints.
(6) To issue orders pursuant to § 46-15A (Enforcement; penalties for
offenses) of this chapter.
(7) To maintain records.
(8) To collect fees as set by the Board of Trustees, Village of Yorkville.
(9) To pursue administrative enforcement actions and proceedings.
(10) In consultation with this Village's attorney, to pursue such legal
actions and proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the County Sanitation Code and
this chapter, or to abate or correct conditions not in compliance
with the aforementioned codes and local law.
(11) To exercise all other powers and fulfill all other duties conferred
upon the enforcement by this chapter.
B. The Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Village Board of
Trustees. The Enforcement Officer shall possess background
experience related to building construction and shall, within the time
prescribed by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training,
advanced in-service training and other training as the State of New
York shall require for enforcement personnel, and the Enforcement
§ 46-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-3
40:42
§ 46-4. Building permits.
Officer shall obtain certification from the State Administrator pursuant
to the Executive Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. In the event that the Enforcement Officer is unable to serve as such for
any reason, an individual shall be appointed by the Mayor to serve as
Acting Enforcement Officer. The Acting Enforcement Officer shall,
during the term of his or her appointment, exercise all powers and fulfill
all duties conferred upon the Enforcement Officer by this chapter.
D. One or more Inspectors may be appointed by the Village Board of
Trustees to act under the supervision and direction of the Enforcement
Officer and to assist the Enforcement Officer in the exercise of the
powers and fulfillment of the duties conferred upon the Enforcement
Officer by this chapter. Each Inspector shall, within the time prescribed
by law, obtain such basic training, in-service training, advanced inservice
training and other training as the State of New York shall
require for enforcement personnel, and each Inspector shall obtain
certification from the State Administrator pursuant to the Executive
Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
E. The compensation for the Enforcement Officer and Inspectors shall be
fixed each budget year by the Board of Trustees of this Village.
A. Building permits required. Except as otherwise provided, a building
permit shall be required for any work which must conform to the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code and this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the construction, enlargement, alteration, improvement,
removal, relocation or demolition of any building or structure, or any
portion thereof, and the installation of a solid-fuel-burning heating
appliance, chimney or flue in any dwelling unit. No person shall
commence any work for which a building permit is required without
first having obtained a building permit from the Enforcement Officer.
B. Exemptions. No building permit shall be required for work in any of the
following categories:
(1) Construction or installation of one-story detached structures which
are used for tool and storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses,
provided the gross floor area does not exceed 100 square feet and
that height and minimum yard dimensions are as specified in the
Village of Yorkville Zoning Law.
(2) Installation of swings and other playground equipment associated
with a one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family
dwellings.
(3) Installation of partitions or movable cases less than five feet nine
inches in height.
(4) Painting, wallpapering, tiling, carpeting or similar finish work.
§ 46-3 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-4
40:43
(5) Installation of listed portable electrical, plumbing, heating,
ventilation or cooling equipment or appliances.
(6) Replacement of any equipment, provided the replacement does not
alter the equipment's listing or render it inconsistent with the
equipment's original specifications.
(7) Repairs, provided that such repairs do not involve:
(a) The removal or cutting away of a load-bearing wall, partition,
or portion thereof, or of any structural beam or load-bearing
component;
(b) The removal or change of any required means of egress or the
rearrangement of parts of a structure in a manner which
affects egress;
(c) The enlargement, alteration, replacement or relocation of any
building system; or
(d) The removal from service of all or part of a fire protection
system for any period of time.
(8) Installation of swimming pools associated with one- or two-family
dwellings or multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) where
such pools are designed for a water depth of less than 24 inches
and are installed entirely aboveground.
(9) Construction of retaining walls unless such walls support a
surcharge or impound Class I, II or IIIA liquids.
(10) Construction of temporary motion picture, television and theater
stage sets and scenery.
(11) Installation of window awnings supported by an exterior wall of a
one- or two-family dwelling or multiple single-family dwellings
(townhouses).
C. Exemption not deemed authorization to perform noncompliant work.
The exemption from the requirement to obtain a building permit for
work in any category set forth in Subsection B of this section shall not
be deemed an authorization for work to be performed in violation of the
Uniform Code, Energy Code, Village Zoning Law or this chapter.
D. Applications for building permits. Applications for a building permit
shall be made, in writing, on a form provided by the Enforcement
Officer. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property
where the work is to be performed or an authorized agent of the owner.
The application shall include such information as the Enforcement
Officer deems sufficient to permit a determination by the Enforcement
Officer that the intended work complies with all applicable
requirements of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, Village Zoning Law
§ 46-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-4
40:44
and this chapter. The application shall, at a minimum, be accompanied
by the following information and documentation.
(1) A description of the proposed work.
(2) The Tax Map number and/or the street address of the premises
where the work is to be performed.
(3) The occupancy classification of any affected building or structure.
(4) Where applicable, a statement of special inspections prepared in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code.
(5) At least two sets of construction documents (drawings and/or
specifications) which define the scope of the proposed work are
prepared by a New York registered architect or licensed
professional engineer where so required by the Education Law,
indicate with sufficient clarity and detail the nature and extent of
the work proposed, substantiate the proposed work will comply
with the Uniform Code, Energy Code and this chapter and, where
applicable, include a site plan that shows any existing and
proposed buildings and structures on the site, the location of any
existing or proposed well or septic system, the location of the
intended work and the distances between the buildings and
structures and the lot lines.
E. Construction documents. Construction documents will not be accepted
as part of an application for a building permit unless they satisfy the
requirements set forth in Subsection D(5) of this section. Construction
documents which are accepted as part of the application for a building
permit shall be marked as accepted by the Enforcement Officer in
writing or by stamp. One set of the accepted construction documents
shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at the work site so as to be
available for use by the enforcement personnel. However, the return of
a set of accepted construction documents to the applicant shall not be
construed as authorization to commence work, nor as an indication that
a building permit will be issued. Work shall not be commenced until and
unless a building permit is issued.
F. Issuance of building permits. An application for a building permit shall
be examined to ascertain whether the proposed work is in compliance
with the applicable requirements of the Uniform Code, Energy Code
and this chapter. The Enforcement Officer shall issue a building permit
if the proposed work is in compliance with the applicable requirements
of the aforementioned codes and law.
G. Building permits to be displayed. Building permits shall be visibly
displayed at the work site and shall remain visible until the authorized
work has been completed.
H. Work to be in accordance with construction documents. All work shall
be performed in accordance with the construction documents which
§ 46-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-4
40:45
§ 46-5. Construction inspections.
were submitted with and accepted as part of the application for the
building permit. The building permit shall contain such a directive. The
permit holder shall immediately notify the Enforcement Officer of any
change occurring during the course of the work. The building permit
shall contain such a directive. If the Enforcement Officer determines
that such change warrants a new or amended building permit, such
change shall not be made until and unless a new or amended building
permit reflecting such change is issued.
I. Time limits. Building permits shall become invalid unless the authorized
work is commenced within six months following the date of issuance.
Building permits shall expire 12 months after the date of issuance. A
building permit which has expired pursuant to this section may be
renewed upon application by the permit holder, payment of the
applicable fee and approval of the application by the Enforcement
Officer.
J. Revocation or suspension of building permits. If the Enforcement
Officer determines that a building permit was issued in error because of
incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or that the work for
which a building permit was issued violates the Uniform Code, Energy
Code or this chapter, the Enforcement Officer shall revoke the building
permit or suspend the building permit until such time as the permit
holder demonstrates that all work then completed is in compliance with
all applicable provisions of the aforementioned codes and law and all
work then proposed to be performed shall be in compliance with all
applicable provisions of the subject codes and local law.
K. Fee. The fee must be paid upon application for a building permit,
amended building permit or for the renewal of a building permit. The
fee schedule is attached as Schedule A,17 which may be amended from
time to time by the Village Board of Trustees.
A. Work to remain accessible and exposed. Work shall remain accessible
and exposed until inspected and accepted by the Enforcement Officer
or by an Inspector authorized by the Enforcement Officer. The permit
holder shall notify the Enforcement Officer when any element of work
described under Subsection B (below) is ready for inspection.
B. Elements of work to be inspected. The following elements of the
construction process shall be inspected, where applicable:
(1) Work site prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(2) Footing and foundation.
(3) Preparation for concrete slab.
17.Editor's Note: See § 46-16, Fees.
§ 46-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-5
40:46
§ 46-6. Stop-work orders.
(4) Framing.
(5) Building systems, including underground and rough-in.
(6) Fire-resistant construction and/or penetrations.
(7) Solid-fuel-burning heating appliances, chimneys, flues or gas vents.
(8) Energy Code compliance.
(9) Final inspection after all work authorized by the building permit
has been completed.
C. Inspection results. After inspection, the work or a portion thereof shall
be noted as satisfactory as completed, or the permit holder shall be
notified as to where the work fails to comply with the Uniform Code,
Energy Code or this chapter. Work not in compliance with any
applicable provision of the aforementioned codes or law shall remain
exposed until such work shall be brought into compliance with the
applicable provisions of the codes and local law, reinspected and found
satisfactory as completed.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Schedule A18 of this chapter must be paid prior to
or at the time of each inspection performed pursuant to this section.
A. Authority to issue. The Enforcement Officer is authorized to issue stopwork
orders pursuant to this section. The Enforcement Officer shall
issue stop-work orders to halt:
(1) Any work that is determined by the Enforcement Officer to be
contrary to any applicable provision of the Uniform Code, Energy
Code or this chapter, without regard to whether such work is or is
not work for which a building permit is required, and without
regard to whether a building permit has or has not been issued for
such work.
(2) Any work that is being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner
in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer, without regard to
whether such work is or is not work for which a building permit is
required, and without regard to whether a building permit has or
has not be issued for such work.
(3) Any work for which a building permit is required which is being
performed without the required building permit, or under a
building permit that has become invalid, has expired or has been
suspended or revoked.
B. Content of stop-work orders. Stop-work orders shall:
18.Editor's Note: See § 46-16, Fees.
§ 46-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-6
40:47
§ 46-7. Certificates of occupancy.
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Be dated and signed by the Enforcement Officer;
(3) State the reason or reasons for issuance; and
(4) If applicable, state the conditions which must be satisfied before
work will be permitted to resume.
C. Service of stop-work orders. The Enforcement Officer shall cause the
stop-work order, or a copy thereof, to be served on the owner of the
affected property (and, if the owner is not the permit holder, on the
permit holder) personally or by certified mail. The Enforcement Officer
shall be permitted, but not required, to cause the stop-work order, or a
copy thereof, to be served on any builder, architect, tenant, contractor,
subcontractor, construction superintendent or their agents, or any
other person taking part or assisting in work affected by the stop-work
order, personally or by certified mail; provided, however, that failure to
serve any person mentioned in this subsection shall not affect the
efficacy of the stop-work order.
D. Effect of stop-work order. Upon the issuance of a stop-work order, the
owner of the affected property, the permit holder and any other person
performing, taking part in or assisting in the work shall immediately
cease all work which is the subject of the stop-work order.
E. Remedy not exclusive. The issuance of a stop-work order shall not be
the exclusive remedy available to address any event described in this
section, and the authority to issue a stop-work order shall be in addition
to, and not in substitution for or limitation of, the right and authority to
pursue any other remedy or impose any other penalty under § 46-15 of
this chapter or under any other applicable local or state law or laws.
Any such remedy or penalty may be pursued at any time, whether prior
to, at the time of or after the issuance of a stop-work order.
A. Certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance required. A
certificate of occupancy shall be required for any work which is the
subject of a building permit and for all structures, buildings or portions
thereof which are converted from one use or occupancy classification or
subclassification to another. Permission to use or occupy a building or
structure, or portion thereof, for which a building permit was previously
issued shall be granted only by issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
B. Issuance of certificates of occupancy/certificates of compliance. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate of occupancy if the
work which was the subject of the building permit was completed in
accordance with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy
Code and the Village Zoning Law, and this chapter, and, if applicable,
that the structure, building or portion thereof was converted from one
use or occupancy classification or subclassification to another complies
§ 46-6 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-7
40:48
with all applicable provision of the aforementioned codes and law.
The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building, structure or work prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In addition, where
applicable, the following documents, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of the Uniform Code by such person or persons as may be
designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer,
at the expense of the applicant for the certificate of occupancy, shall be
provided to the Code Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
(1) A written statement of structural observations and/or a final report
of special inspections.
(2) Flood hazard certifications.
C. Contents of certificates of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall
contain the following information:
(1) The building permit number, if any.
(2) The date of issuance of the building permit, if any.
(3) The name, address and Tax Map number of the property.
(4) In the event the certificate of occupancy is not applicable to an
entire structure, a description of that portion of the structure for
which the certificate of occupancy is issued.
(5) The use and occupancy classification of the structure.
(6) The type of construction of the structure.
(7) The assembly occupant load of the structure, if any.
(8) If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, a notation as to
whether the sprinkler system is required.
(9) Any special conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the building permit.
(10) The signature of the Enforcement Officer issuing the certificate of
occupancy and the date of issuance.
D. Temporary certificate. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
permitted to issue a temporary certificate allowing the temporary
occupancy of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, prior to
completion of the work which is the subject of a building permit.
However, in no event shall the Code Enforcement Officer issue a
temporary certificate unless the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the building or structure, or the portion thereof covered by the
temporary certificate, may be occupied safely, that any fire- and smokedetecting
or fire protection equipment which has been installed is
operational and that all required means of egress from the building or
§ 46-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-7
40:49
§ 46-8. Notification of fire or explosion.
The Chief or Assistant Chief of the Fire Department providing fire-fighting
service for a property within the Village of Yorkville shall promptly notify
the Enforcement Officer of any fire or explosion involving any structural
damage, fuel-burning appliance, chimney or gas vent.
§ 46-9. Unsafe buildings, structure and equipment.
structure have been provided. The Code Enforcement Officer may
include in a temporary certificate such terms and conditions as he
or she deems necessary or appropriate to ensure safety or to further
the purposes and intent of the Uniform Code. A temporary certificate
shall be effective for a period of time, not to exceed six months, which
shall be determined by the Enforcement Officer and specified in the
temporary certificate. During the specified period of effectiveness of
the temporary certificate, the permit holder shall undertake to bring
the building or structure into full compliance with all applicable
provisions of the Uniform Code, Energy Code, the Village Zoning Law
and this chapter.
E. Revocation or suspension of certificates. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that a certificate of occupancy or a temporary
certificate was issued in error because of incorrect, inaccurate or
incomplete information, and if the relevant deficiencies are not
corrected to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer within
such period of time as shall be specified by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke or suspend such
certificate.
F. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Schedule A19 of this chapter must be paid at the
time of submission of an application for a certificate of occupancy or for
temporary certificate.
A. When a building, structure or equipment is found to be unsafe or when
a building or structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found
unlawful, such building or structure shall be condemned pursuant to
the provisions of the Uniform Code, the Village of Yorkville Zoning Law
and this chapter.
(1) Unsafe building or structure. An unsafe building or structure is one
that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety
of the public or the occupants of the building or structure by not
providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the
event of fire, or because such building or structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally
unsafe, or such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that
partial or complete collapse is possible.
19.Editor's Note: See § 46-16, Fees.
§ 46-7 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-9
40:50
(2) Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or
within the building or structure which is in such disrepair or
condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property
or safety or the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
(3) Building or structure unfit for human occupancy. A building or
structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever such building or
structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the
building or structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is
unsanitary, vermin- or rat-infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or
heating facilities or other essential equipment required by the
Uniform Code, or because the location of the building or structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building or structure or
to the public.
(4) Unlawful building or structure. An unlawful structure is one found
in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted
under the Uniform Code, or was erected, altered or occupied
contrary to law.
B. The Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for carrying out the
obligations and duties set forth as follows:
(1) Inspection. No person, firm or corporation or association who or
which is the owner of a building or structure in the Village of
Yorkville shall cause, suffer, allow or permit said building or
structure to become dangerous or unsafe to the public. In the event
that any building or structure now is or hereafter becomes
dangerous or unsafe to the public, from any cause whatsoever, said
owner or occupant shall repair or remove said building or
structure. In the event of the failure of the owner of any such
building or structure to repair or remove same, the Enforcement
Officer shall make a complete inspection and report the condition
to the Village Board of Trustees. Notice shall thereafter be served
on the owner or, if jointly owned, one of the owners, executors,
legal representatives, agents, lessees or any other person having a
vested or contingent interest in the building or structure. The
notice shall contain a description of the premises, a statement of
the particulars in which the building or structure is unsafe or
dangerous and an order requiring the building or structure to be
made safe and secure or removed. The notice shall also provide for
the time within which the person served shall commence and
complete the securing or removal of the building or structure. In
the event of the neglect or refusal of the person so served with said
notice to comply with same, a survey of the premises shall be made
by an independent building inspector and architect, named by the
Village Board of Trustees, and a particular builder, engineer or
architect appointed by the person so notified as indicated above,
§ 46-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-9
40:51
and in the event of the refusal or neglect of the person so notified
to appoint such persons, the two appointed by the Village shall
make the inspection and submit the report to the Enforcement
Officer and the Village Board of Trustees. In the event that this
report further provides that the building or structure constitutes
an unsafe condition to the public, the Village Attorney will be
directed to petition the Supreme Court for an order determining
the building or structure to be a public nuisance and directing that
it shall be repaired and secured or proper demolition procedures
be taken.
(2) Posting of survey report. A signed copy of the report rendered by
the Inspectors appointed by the Village Board of Trustee shall be
posted on the building or structure.
(3) Costs of notice. All costs and expenses incurred by the Village in
connection with any and all of the proceedings indicated to include
the cost of demolishing and removal of the building or structure
shall be assessed against the owner or owners of the building,
structure and land on which the building or structure is located.
(4) Cost of removal. If such owner, owners or person served shall fail to
pay the costs and expenses incurred by the Village within 10 days
after being notified of the costs thereof by certified mail, the Village
Clerk shall file, immediately preceding the time for preparing the
annual assessment roll, a certificate of such actual costs and
expenses with a statement as to the property upon which such cost
and expense were incurred. The building(s) or structure(s) or other
obstructions removed with the Village of Yorkville Assessor, who
shall in the preparation of the next assessment roll of general
Village taxes assess such amount upon such property, and the same
shall be levied, collected and enforced in the same manner, by the
same proceedings, at the same time, under the same penalties, and
having the same lien upon the property assessed as the general
Village tax and as a part thereof.
(5) Reporting unsafe buildings. Any report received by the Code
Enforcement Officer, Village Board of Trustees or any elected or
appointed official of a suspected unsafe building or structure will
be immediately inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer and
other Inspectors as deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement
Officer. A report of findings along with recommendations will be
submitted to the Village Board as soon as possible after inspection.
(6) Imminent danger. When there is imminent danger of failure of
collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when
any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is
endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes
or vapors or defective or dangerous equipment the occupants shall
§ 46-9 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-9
40:52
§ 46-10. Operating permits.
vacate the premises forthwith. There shall be posted at each
entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This
structure is unsafe and its occupancy has been prohibited by the
Code Enforcement Officer." It shall be unlawful for any person
to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the
structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.
(7) Emergency provisions. In cases of great emergency, where the
delay of proceedings, as therein provided, would result in probable
loss of life or property, the Mayor shall have the power to direct the
Code Enforcement Officer to proceed at once to take such action as
is needed to guard the safety of persons and property.
A. Operation permits required. Operating permits shall be required for
conducting the activities or using the categories of buildings listed
below:
(1) Manufacturing, storing or handling hazardous materials in
quantities exceeding those listed in Tables 2703.1.1(1), 2703.1.1(3)
or 2703.1.1(4) in the publication entitled "Fire Code of New York
State" and incorporated by reference in 19 NYCRR 1225.1.
(2) Hazardous processes and activities, including, but not limited to,
commercial and industrial operations which produce combustible
dust as a by-product, fruit and crop ripening, and waste handling.
(3) Use of pyrotechnic devices in assembly occupancies.
(4) Buildings containing one or more areas of public assembly with an
occupant load of 100 persons or more.
(5) Buildings whose use or occupancy classification may pose a
substantial potential hazard to public safety, as determined by
resolution adopted by the Board of Trustees of this Village.
Note: Any person who proposes to undertake any activity or to
operate any type of building listed in Subsection A shall be
required to obtain an operating permit prior to commencing such
activity or operation.
B. Applications for operating permits. An application for an operating
permit shall be in writing on a form provided by or otherwise
acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer. Such application shall
include such information as the Enforcement Officer deems sufficient to
permit a determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that
quantities, materials and activities conform to the requirements of the
Uniform Code. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that tests or
reports are necessary to verify conformance, such tests or reports shall
be performed or provided by such person or persons as may be
§ 46-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-10
40:53
§ 46-11. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections.
designated by or otherwise acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer,
at the expense of the applicant.
C. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer or an Inspector authorized
by the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the subject premises
prior to the issuance of an operating permit.
D. Multiple activities. In any circumstance in which more than one activity
listed in Subsection A above is to be conducted at a location, the Code
Enforcement Officer may require a separate operating permit for each
such activity, or the Code Enforcement Officer may, in his or her
discretion, issue a single operating permit to apply to all such activities.
E. Duration of operating permits. Operating permits shall remain in effect
until reissued, renewed, revoked or suspended.
F. Revocation or suspension of operating permits. If the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that any activity or building for which
an operating permit was issued does not comply with any applicable
provision of the Uniform Code, such operating permit shall be revoked
or suspended.
G. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the provision set
forth in Schedule A20 of this chapter must be paid at the time of
submission of an application for an operating permit, for an amended
operating permit or for reissue or renewal of an operating permit.
A. Inspections required. Firesafety and property maintenance inspections
of buildings and structures shall be performed by the Enforcement
Officer and/or Fire Safety Inspector at the following intervals:
(1) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures which contain an area of public assembly shall be
performed at least once every 12 months.
(2) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of buildings or
structures being occupied as dormitories shall be performed at
least once every 12 months.
(3) Firesafety and property maintenance inspections of all multiple
dwellings not included in Subsection A(1) and (2) above, and all
nonresidential buildings, structures, uses and occupancies not
included in Subsection A(1) and (2) above, shall be performed at
least once every 24 to 36 months.
B. Inspections permitted. In addition to the inspections required by
Subsection A, firesafety and property maintenance inspection of any
building, structure, use or occupancy, or of any dwelling unit, may be
20.Editor's Note: See § 46-16, Fees.
§ 46-10 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-11
40:54
performed by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Safety
Inspector or any Inspector designated by the Code Enforcement Officer
and/or Fire Safety Inspector at any time upon:
(1) The request of the owner of the property to be inspected or an
authorized agent of such owner.
(2) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a written statement
alleging that conditions or activities failing to comply with the
Uniform Code, Energy Code, the Village of Yorkville Zoning Law or
this chapter exist.
(3) Receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of any other information,
reasonably believed by the Code Enforcement Officer to be reliable,
giving rise to reasonable cause to believe that conditions or
activities failing to comply with the Uniform Code, Energy Code,
the Village of Yorkville Zoning Law or this chapter exist.
Note: Provided, however, that nothing in § 46-11 shall be
construed as permitting an inspection under any circumstances
under which a court order or warrant permitting such inspection
is required, unless such court order or warrant shall have been
obtained.
C. Office of Fire Prevention and Control inspections. Nothing in this
section or in any other provision of this chapter shall supersede, limit or
impair the powers, duties and responsibilities of the New York State
Office of Fire Prevention and Control ("OFPC") and the New York State
Fire Administrator under Executive Law § 156-e and Education Law
§ 807-b. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection to the
contrary:
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Safety Inspector shall
not perform firesafety and property maintenance inspection of a
building or structure which contains an area of public assembly if
OFPC performs firesafety and property maintenance inspections of
such building or structure at least once every 12 months.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Safety Inspector shall
not perform firesafety and property maintenance inspections of a
building or structure occupied as a dormitory if OFPC performs
firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such building or
structure at least once every 12 months.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Safety Inspector shall
not perform firesafety and property maintenance inspections of a
multiple dwelling not included in Subsection A(1) and (2) if OFPC
performs firesafety and property maintenance inspections of such
multiple dwelling at intervals not exceeding 36 months.
(4) The Code Enforcement Officer and/or Fire Safety Inspector shall
not perform firesafety and property maintenance inspections on a
§ 46-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-11
40:55
§ 46-12. Complaints.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall review and investigate complaints
which allege or assert the existence of conditions or activities that fail to
comply with the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, this chapter or any other
local law or regulation adopted for administration and enforcement of the
Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the Village of Yorkville Zoning Law or
this chapter. The process for responding to a complaint shall include such
of the following steps as the Code Enforcement Officer may deem to be
appropriate:
§ 46-13. Recordkeeping.
nonresidential building, structure, use or occupancy not included
in this section if OFPC performs firesafety and property
maintenance inspections of such nonresidential building, structure,
use or occupancy at intervals not exceeding 36 months.
D. Fee. The fee specified in or determined in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Schedule A21 of this chapter must be paid prior to
or at the time each inspection is performed pursuant to this section. The
fee does not apply to inspections performed by OFPC.
A. Performing an inspection of the conditions and/or activities alleged to
be in violation and documenting the results of such inspection.
B. If a violation is found to exist, providing the owner of the affected
property and any other person who may be responsible for the violation
with notice of the violation and opportunity to abate, correct or cure the
violation, or otherwise proceeding in the manner described under
violations of this chapter.
C. If appropriate, issuing a stop-work order.
D. If a violation which was found to exist is abated or corrected,
performing an inspection to ensure that the violation has been abated
or corrected, preparing a final written report reflecting such abatement
or correction, and filing such report with the complaint.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep permanent official records of
all transactions and activities conducted by the Code Enforcement
Officer of other appointed enforcement personnel or Inspectors,
including records of:
(1) All applications received, reviewed and approved or denied.
(2) All plans, specifications and construction documents approved.
21.Editor's Note: See § 46-16, Fees.
§ 46-11 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-13
40:56
§ 46-14. Program review and reporting.
§ 46-15. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
(3) All building permits, certificates of occupancy and/or certificates of
completion, temporary certificates, stop-work orders, and
operating permits issued.
(4) All inspections and tests performed.
(5) All statements and reports issued.
(6) All complaints received.
(7) All investigations conducted.
(8) All other features and activities specified in or contemplated by and
set forth in this chapter.
(9) All fees charged and collected.
B. All such records shall be public records open for public inspection
during normal business hours. All plans and records pertaining to
buildings or structures, or appurtenances thereto, shall be retained for
at least the minimum time period so required by state law and
regulation.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall monthly submit to the Yorkville
Village Board of Trustees a written report and summary of all business
conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer, including a summary of all
transactions and activities described in § 46-13 (Recordkeeping) of this
chapter and report and summary of all appeals or litigation pending or
concluded.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall annually submit to the Secretary of
State, on behalf of this Village, on a form prescribed by the Secretary of
State, a report of the activities of this Village relative to administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon request of the New York
State Department of State, provide to the New York State Department
of State, from the records and related materials this Village is required
to maintain, excepts, summaries, tabulations, statistics and other
information and accounts of the activities of the Village in connection
with administration and enforcement of the Uniform Code.
A. Compliance orders.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to order, in writing, the
remedying of any condition or activity found to exist in, on or about
any building, structure or premises in violation of the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, the Village of Yorkville Zoning Law or this
chapter. Upon finding that any such condition or activity exists, the
§ 46-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-15
40:57
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written notice for
compliance. The order shall:
(a) Be dated and signed by the Code Enforcement Officer;
(b) Specify the condition or activity that violates the Uniform
Code, the Energy Code, or this chapter;
(c) Specify the provision or provisions of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, the Village Zoning Law or this chapter which is/
are violated by the specified condition or activity;
(d) Specify the period of time which the Code Enforcement Officer
deems to be reasonably necessary for achieving compliance;
(e) Direct that compliance be achieved within the specified period
of time; and
(f) State that an action or proceeding to compel compliance may
be instituted if compliance is not achieved within the specified
period of time.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the order, or a copy
thereof, to be served on the owner of the affected property
personally or by certified mail (return receipt). The Code
Enforcement Officer shall be permitted, but not required, to cause
the order, or a copy thereof, served on any building, architect,
tenant, contractor, subcontractor, construction superintendent or
their agents, or any other person taking part or assisting in work
being performed at the affected property, personally or by certified
mail (return receipt); provided, however, that the failure to serve
any person mentioned in this subsection shall not affect the efficacy
of the order, as specified in Village of Yorkville local law.
B. Appearance tickets. The Code Enforcement Officer or any Inspector
appointed by the Village of Yorkville Board of Trustees is authorized to
issue appearance tickets for any violation of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, the Village Zoning Law or this chapter so designated by
Village of Yorkville local law.
C. Civil penalties. In addition to those penalties prescribed by state law,
any person who violates any provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy
Code, the Village Zoning Law or this chapter, or any term or condition
of any building permit, certificate of occupancy/certificate of
compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work order, operating permit or
other notice or order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant
to any provision of this chapter, shall be liable to a civil penalty of not
more than $200 for each day or part thereof during which such violation
continues. The civil penalties provided by this section shall be
recoverable in an action instituted in the name of this Village.
§ 46-15 YORKVILLE CODE § 46-15
40:58
§ 46-16. Fees.
A fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the Board of Trustees,
Village of Yorkville. Such fee schedule may thereafter be amended from
time to time by like resolution. The fees set forth in, or determined in
accordance with, such fee schedule or amended fee schedule shall be
charged and collected for the submission of application, the issuance of
building permits, amended building permits, renewed building permits,
certificates of occupancy and/or certificates of compliance, temporary
certificates, operating permits, firesafety and property maintenance
D. Injunctive relief. An action or proceeding may be instituted in the name
of this Village, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to prevent, restrain,
enjoin, correct or abate any violation of, or to enforce, any provision of
the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the Village Zoning Law or this
chapter, or any term or condition of any building permit, certificate of
occupancy/certificate of compliance, temporary certificate, stop-work
order, operating order, compliance order or other notice or order issued
by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to any provision of this
chapter. In particular, but not by way of limitation, where the
construction or use of a building or structure is in violation of any
provision of the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the Village Zoning
Law or this chapter, or any stop-work order, compliance order or other
order obtained under the Uniform Code, the Energy Code, the Village
Zoning Law or this chapter, an action or proceeding may be commenced
in the name of this Village, in the Supreme Court or in any other court
having the requisite jurisdiction, to obtain an order directing the
removal of the building or structure or an abatement of the condition in
violation of such provisions. No action or proceeding described in this
subsection shall be commenced without the appropriate authorization
from the Mayor of this Village.
E. Remedies not exclusive. No remedy or penalty specified in this section
shall be the exclusive remedy or remedy available to address any
violation described in this section, and each remedy or penalty specified
in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution for or
limitation of, the other remedies or penalties specified in this section, in
§ 46-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in any other section of this
chapter, or in any other applicable law. Any remedy or penalty specified
in this section may be pursued at any time, whether prior to,
simultaneously with or after the pursuit of any other remedy or penalty
specified in this section, in § 46-6 (Stop-work orders) of this chapter, in
any other section of this chapter, or in any other applicable law. In
particular, but not by way of limitation, each remedy and penalty
specified in this section shall be in addition to, and not in substitution
for or limitation of, the penalties specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law, and any remedy or penalty specified in this section
may be pursued at any time, whether prior to, simultaneously with or
after the pursuit of any penalty specified in Subdivision (2) of § 382 of
the Executive Law.
§ 46-15 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 46-16
40:59
inspections, and other action of the Enforcement Officer and Inspectors
described in or contemplated by this chapter.
§ 46-17. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Board of Trustees of this Village may, by resolution, authorize the
Mayor of this Village to enter into an agreement, in the name of this Village,
with other governments to carry out the terms of this chapter, provided that
such agreement does not violate any provision of the Uniform Code, the
Energy Code, Part 1203 of Title 19 of the NYCRR, or any other applicable
law.
Chapter 49
(RESERVED)
Chapter 52
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 40.
Public entertainment — See Ch. 63.
Games of chance — See Ch. 73.
Parades — See Ch. 89.
§ 52-1. Conduct prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, no circus, street fair, carnival or other form
of similar entertainment shall be run or operated on any land within the
corporate limits of the Village of Yorkville, New York.
§ 52-2. Exceptions; permit required.
Church groups, veterans' organizations and similar nonprofit agencies shall
be authorized to conduct a bazaar or similar exhibition for such number
of days or performances and under such conditions and restrictions as the
Board of Trustees deem advisable and subject to the issuance of a permit
therefor by the Board of Trustees.
Chapter 58
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
§ 46-16 YORKVILLE CODE § 52-2
52:60
ARTICLE I
Control of Dogs
[Adopted 2-24-1976 by L.L. No. 1-1976]
§ 58-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the residents of the Village of Yorkville, including the
protection and preservation of the property of the residents and inhabitants
of the Village of Yorkville and of their peace and good order, by adopting
and enforcing certain regulations and restrictions on the privileges of the
owners and harborers of dogs and by imposing restrictions upon the
keeping and running at large of dogs within the Village of Yorkville.
§ 58-2. Restrictions on dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person harboring any dog in the
Village of Yorkville to permit or allow such dog, whether or not tagged or
licensed:
§ 58-3. Dogs in heat.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person harboring any female dog to
permit such dog to run at large when in heat, and such dog shall be confined
to the premises of such person during such period.
§ 58-4. Enforcement officials. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
A dog warden or other proper authority designated by the Town Board of
the Town of Whitestown, Oneida County, New York, as provided by § 114 of
the Agriculture and Markets Law and other applicable laws and provisions,
A. To run at large, unless said dog is restrained by an adequate collar and
leash or unless accompanied by its owner or a responsible person able
to control the animal. For the purposes of this article, a dog or dogs
hunting in company with a hunter or hunters shall be considered as
accompanied by its owner.
B. To engage in habitual loud howling or barking or to conduct itself in
such manner so as to habitually annoy any person other than the owner
or person harboring such dog.
C. To cause damage or destruction to property or to commit a nuisance
upon the premises of a person other than the owner or person
harboring such a dog.
D. To chase or otherwise harass any person in such a manner as
reasonably to cause intimidation or to put such person in reasonable
apprehension of bodily harm or injury.
E. To habitually chase or bark at motor vehicles.
§ 58-1 CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES § 58-4
52:61
may enforce the provisions of this article and issue an appearance ticket
pursuant to § 114 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and may also
investigate and report to a Town Justice any dangerous dog as described in
§ 121 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and see that the order or orders
of the Town Justice in such case are carried out.
§ 58-5. Complaints; summonses. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
§ 58-6. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Any person who violates this article or knowingly permits the violation
of this article or any of the provisions thereof shall be deemed to have
committed a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $10 for the first
offense, $25 for the second offense and $50 for the third offense, with a
maximum fine of not more than $100.
§ 58-7. Seizure of unleashed dogs. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
In addition thereto, the seizure of unleashed dogs shall be as provided for
in § 118 of the Agriculture and Markets Law and all provisions thereof.
A. Any person who observes a dog causing damage or destruction to
property of a person other than its owner or committing a nuisance
upon the premises of a person other than its owner or in violation of any
provisions of §§ 58-2 and 58-3 may file a signed complaint, under oath,
with a Town Justice of the Town of Whitestown specifying the
objectionable conduct of the dog, the date thereof, the damage caused
or other violation, a description of the dog and the residence, if known,
of the owner or other person harboring said dog.
B. Upon receipt by the Town Justice of any complaint against the conduct
of any particular dog, the Town Justice may summon the alleged owner
or other person harboring said dog to appear in person before him. If
the summons is disregarded, the Justice may permit the filing of an
information and issue a warrant for the arrest of such person.
§ 58-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 58-7
52:62
ARTICLE II
Dogs in Parks
[Adopted 5-19-1981 by L.L. No. 1-1981]
§ 58-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to promote a clean environment in the
Village parks and on other Village property by prohibiting the presence of
dogs.
§ 58-9. Dogs prohibited in parks.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of or any person harboring any dog in
the Village of Yorkville to permit or allow such dog, whether or not tagged
or licensed and whether or not attended or unattended, to enter into any
public park in the Village of Yorkville either owned or operated by said
Village.
§ 58-10. Nuisances by dogs.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any dog to permit
such animal to urinate or deposit dung on any public property, alley or other
public place or on any premises other than those of the owner or person
in control of such dog. In the event that the owner of any dog is a minor
and said dog is harbored on the property of said minor's parent or parents,
guardian or guardians or any other relative, said parent, guardian or other
relative shall be responsible and be liable for fines and other penalties
hereinafter provided.
§ 58-11. Penalties for offenses.
Any person who violates this article or knowingly permits the violation
of this article or any of the provisions thereof shall be deemed to have
committed a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $10 for the first
offense, $25 for the second offense and $50 for the third offense, with a
maximum penalty of not more than $100.
§ 58-12. Interpretation of provisions.
This article is in addition to all the provisions of Article I of this chapter
pertaining to the restraint of dogs in the Village of Yorkville and is not to be
construed to invalidate any section or provision thereof and does not revoke
any part of said Article I.
§ 58-8 CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES § 58-12
52:63

ARTICLE III
Definitions
[Adopted 1-4-2011 by L.L. No. 2-2011]
§ 58-13. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person or persons appointed by the
Town Board of the Town of Whitestown to the position of Animal Control
Officer. An Animal Control Officer shall have all the powers of a constable
or other peace officer in the execution of the provisions of this chapter
or Article 7 of the Agricultural and Markets Law of the State of New
York. These powers shall include service of any process, the service of an
appearance ticket and the service of any other order or process, as provided
under Article 7 or this chapter.
AT LARGE — Any dog shall be deemed at large when it is off the property of
its owner and not under restraint.
DOG — Any dog, both male and female, whether such female dog is spayed
or male dog is neutered.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OWNER — Any person who is the licensed owner or last licensed owner of
a dog, or any person who harbors a dog for more than one day, shall be
considered the owner. If the owner of a dog is a minor, the owner of the dog
shall be deemed to be the parent or guardian for the purpose of this chapter.
RESTRAINT — A dog is under restraint when it is controlled by a leash not
to exceed 10 feet in length, or is within a vehicle being driven or parked on
a street, or is within the property limits of its owner or keeper, or is upon
the premises of another with the written consent of such other person.
§ 58-13 CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES § 58-13
52:65
Chapter 63
ENTERTAINMENT, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 38.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 40.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 52.
Games of chance — See Ch. 73.
Parades — See Ch. 89.
§ 63-1. Purpose.
It is hereby declared the policy of the Village of Yorkville, State of New York,
that, in order to preserve public peace and good order and to safeguard
the health, safety, welfare and morals within the incorporated area of the
Village of Yorkville, it is necessary to regulate and control the operation
and conduct of places of public assembly conducted as cabarets, bars
or lounges, dance halls, discotheques or the like so as to fix certain
responsibilities and duties of persons owning, operating or controlling such
establishments.
§ 63-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAR AND/OR LOUNGE — Any place of public assembly in which the
business of directly or indirectly selling and/or serving drink to the public
is conducted and in which any musical entertainment, singing, dancing
in a designated area or other form of amusement is also permitted, and
shall include such a room, place or space which provides incidental musical
entertainment by mechanical devices, with or without dancing.
CABARET — Any place of public assembly in which the business of directly
or indirectly selling or serving food, drink or alcoholic beverages to the
public is conducted and in which any musical entertainment, singing,
dancing in a designated area or other form of amusement is also permitted,
and shall include such a room, place or space which provides incidental
musical entertainment by mechanical devices, with or without dancing.
DANCE HALL — Any place of public assembly in which dancing is carried
on and to which the public may gain admittance either with or without the
payment of a fee.
DISCOTHEQUE AND THE LIKE — Any place of public assembly in which
the business of directly or indirectly selling and/or serving food, drinks
and/or alcoholic beverages to the public is conducted in which dancing is
carried on by any musical entertainment and to which the public may gain
admission either with or without the payment of a fee.
§ 58-13 YORKVILLE CODE § 63-2
63:66
PERSON — An individual, partnership, club, association, corporation,
society or any other organized group of persons, and shall include officers,
directors, stockholders and trustees of a club, corporation, association or
society.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — Any room, place or space which is
occupied or arranged to be occupied for recreational, amusement, social,
sports or similar purposes or any building, shed or enclosure, whether
indoor or outdoor, coming within the occupancy and other similar
classifications of this section, as determined by the officer charged with the
enforcement of this section. For the purposes of interpretation, the term
"public assembly," where used in this chapter, shall include the term "public
assembly" or "assembly" as may be used in other codes, laws, ordinances,
rules or regulations as may be applicable in the Village of Yorkville.
VILLAGE OF YORKVILLE — The incorporated area in the Village of
Yorkville, in the County of Oneida, State of New York.
§ 63-3. Clothing requirements for employees in places of public
assembly.
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting, maintaining or operating
a cabaret, bar and/or lounge, dance hall or discotheque establishment or
any other place of public assembly within the Village of Yorkville to suffer
or permit any waitress, barmaid, entertainer or other person who comes in
contact with or appears before or is likely to come in contact with or appear
before patrons with breasts uncovered in such a manner that the portion
of the breast below the top of the areola is not covered with a fully opaque
covering or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered or
draped as to appear uncovered or to appear in any scene, sketch, act or
entertainment with breasts or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so
thinly draped as to appear uncovered. Reference to breasts in this section
refers to females only. Reference to the lower part of the torso refers to both
males and females.
§ 63-4. Penalties for offenses.22
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in § 1-10 of Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each
day's continued violation shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 66
FIRE, ACCIDENT AND POLICE SCENES
§ 66-1. Prohibited acts.
A. No tow truck, wrecker, platform truck or similar vehicle, its operator or
other personnel from the truck or the truck's firm shall be allowed
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 63-2 FIRE, ACCIDENT AND POLICE SCENES § 66-1
66:67
§ 66-2. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not to exceed $150 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 67
FIREARMS
§ 67-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
No person shall, otherwise than in self-denfense or in the discharge of
official duty, discharge any firearm, gun, rifle, pistol, air gun, pellet gun, BB
gun, slingshot, crossbow, bow and arrow or other weapon in the Village of
Yorkville.
§ 67-2. Penalties for offenses.
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided by § 1-10 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions.
within 50 feet of the scene as determined by the police officer in charge
or the fire officer in charge.
B. No person not a member of the Village of Yorkville Police Department or
Fire Department or an ambulance service shall be allowed within 50
feet of the scene as determined by the police officer in charge or the fire
officer in charge.
C. No vehicle shall be parked within 50 feet of the scene as determined by
the police officer in charge or the fire officer in charge. Further, any
vehicle deemed to be obstructing the performance of the personnel
involved will be removed immediately upon the order of the police
officer in charge or the fire officer in charge.
D. At motor vehicle accidents, there will be no solicitation or offer of
services on the scene. If the owner(s) of the vehicle(s) involved has no
preference or is unable to state a preference, the police officer in
charge will summon towing services after the fire officer in charge has
determined that the vehicle(s) may be moved.
§ 66-1 YORKVILLE CODE § 67-2
67:68
Chapter 70
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction and fire
prevention — See Ch. 46.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 118.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 67-2 FIREARMS § 67-2
67:69

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization and Purpose
§ 70-1. Findings.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Yorkville finds that the potential
and/or actual damages from flooding and erosion may be a problem to the
residents of the Village of Yorkville and that such damages may include
destruction or loss of private and public housing, damage to public facilities,
both publicly and privately owned, and injury to and loss of human life. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
and objectives hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.
§ 70-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 70-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
A. Regulate uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damages;
E. Regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and
F. Qualify for and maintain participation in the National Flood Insurance
Program.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
§ 70-1 FIREARMS § 70-3
67:71
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Provide that developers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 70-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-3
67:72
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 70-4. Word usage and definitions.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone
on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one-percent
or greater annual chance of flooding to an average annual depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as Zone A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-30, A99, V, VO, VE, or V1-V30. It is also commonly
referred to as the "base floodplain" or "one-hundred-year floodplain."
For purposes of this chapter, the term "special flood hazard area
(SFHA)" is synonymous in meaning with the phrase "area of special
flood hazard."
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CELLAR — Has the same meaning as "basement."
CRAWL SPACE — An enclosed area beneath the lowest elevated floor,
18 inches or more in height, which is used to service the underside
of the lowest elevated floor. The elevation of the floor of this enclosed
area, which may be of soil, gravel, concrete or other material, must
be equal to or above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. The enclosed
crawl space area shall be properly vented to allow for the equalization
of hydrostatic forces which would be experienced during periods of
flooding.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
§ 70-4 FIREARMS § 70-4
67:73
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case
of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, or D, to
have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones
V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH,
B, C, X, or D, an elevated building also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the
case of Zones V1-V30, VE, or V, an elevated building also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even
though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls that
meet the federal standards.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY — The federal
agency that administers the National Flood Insurance Program.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM) — An official map
of the community published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as part of a riverine community's Flood Insurance Study. The
FBFM delineates a regulatory floodway along water courses studied in
detail in the Flood Insurance Study.
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of the flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been
designated as Zone A but no flood elevations are provided.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
§ 70-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-4
67:74
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding").
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — Has the same meaning as "regulatory floodway."
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, and ship repair
facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacturing,
sales, or service facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in Subsection (1)(a) above.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior or
(a)
(4)
§ 70-4 FIREARMS § 70-4
67:75
LOCAL ADMINISTRATOR — The person appointed by the community
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. This person is
often the Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, or employee of
an engineering department.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map are referenced.
MOBILE HOME — Has the same meaning as "manufactured home."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by the community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structure.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD — Has the same
meaning as "base flood."
PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND — At least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure, excluding land value, is above ground.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(2)
Not designed primarily for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(3)
§ 70-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-4
67:76
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height as determined by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a Flood Insurance Study or
by other agencies as provided in § 70-13B of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date of permit issuance for new
construction and substantial improvements to existing structures,
provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement is within 180
days after the date of issuance. The actual start of construction means
the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including
a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing,
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or
walkways, or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations,
or the erection of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory
buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. The term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 70-4 FIREARMS § 70-4
67:77
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction or use in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.
§ 70-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-4
67:78
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 70-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Yorkville, Oneida County.
§ 70-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 70-7. Interpretation and conflict with other laws.
§ 70-8. Penalties for offenses.
No structure in an area of special flood hazard shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered and no land shall be
excavated or filled without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and any other applicable regulations. Any infraction of the provisions of
this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
infractions of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions of the permit, shall constitute a violation. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined no more than $250 or imprisoned for not
more than 15 days or both. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Yorkville, Community
Number 360568, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Numbers 36065C0731F,
36065C0732F, whose effective date is, September 27, 2013, and
any subsequent revisions to these map panels that do not affect
areas under our community's jurisdiction.
(2) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Oneida County, New York, All Jurisdictions" dated September 27,
2013.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and/or maps are on file at 30
Sixth Street, Yorkville, New York 13495, Oneida County.
A. This chapter includes all revisions to the National Flood Insurance
Program through October 27, 1997 and shall supersede all previous
laws adopted for the purpose of flood damage prevention.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety, and welfare. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 70-5 FIREARMS § 70-8
67:79
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of
Yorkville from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent
or remedy an infraction. Any structure found not compliant with the
requirements of this chapter for which the developer and/or owner has
not applied for and received an approved variance under Article VI will
be declared noncompliant and notification sent to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
§ 70-9. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Yorkville, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 70-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-9
67:80
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 70-10. Designation of local administrator.
The Codes Officer is hereby appointed local administrator to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying floodplain development
permits in accordance with its provisions.
§ 70-11. Floodplain development permit.
§ 70-12. Application for permit.
The applicant shall provide the following information as appropriate.
Additional information may be required on the permit application form.
A. Purpose. A floodplain development permit is hereby established for all
construction and other development to be undertaken in areas of
special flood hazard in this community for the purpose of protecting its
citizens from increased flood hazards and insuring that new
development is constructed in a manner that minimizes its exposure to
flooding. It shall be unlawful to undertake any development in an area
of special flood hazard, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
enumerated in § 70-6, without a valid floodplain development permit.
Application for a permit shall be made on forms furnished by the local
administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the
foregoing.
B. All applications for a floodplain development permit shall be
accompanied by an application fee of $500. In addition, the applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village of Yorkville for any
additional costs necessary for review, inspection and approval of this
project. The local administrator may require a deposit of no more than
$500 to cover these additional costs.
A. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement or cellar) of any new or substantially improved
structure to be located in Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, or Zone A if base
flood elevation data are available. Upon completion of the lowest floor,
the permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
elevation, certified by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
B. The proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new
or substantially improved nonresidential structure will be floodproofed.
Upon completion of the floodproofed portion of the structure, the
permittee shall submit to the local administrator the as-built
floodproofed elevation, certified by a professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 70-10 FIREARMS § 70-12
67:81
§ 70-13. Duties and responsibilities of local administrator.
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following.
C. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
utility floodproofing will meet the criteria in § 70-15C, Utilities.
D. A certificate from a licensed professional engineer or architect that any
nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 70-17, Standards for nonresidential structures.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. Computations by a
licensed professional engineer must be submitted that demonstrate
that the altered or relocated segment will provide equal or greater
conveyance than the original stream segment. The applicant must
submit any maps, computations or other material required by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to revise the
documents enumerated in § 70-6, when notified by the local
administrator, and must pay any fees or other costs assessed by FEMA
for this purpose. The applicant must also provide assurances that the
conveyance capacity of the altered or relocated stream segment will be
maintained.
F. A technical analysis, by a licensed professional engineer, if required by
the local administrator, which shows whether proposed development to
be located in an area of special flood hazard may result in physical
damage to any other property.
G. In Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available from other
sources, base flood elevation data shall be provided by the permit
applicant for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments
(including proposals for manufactured home and recreational vehicle
parks and subdivisions) that are greater than either 50 lots or five
acres.
A. Permit application review. The local administrator shall conduct the
following permit application review before issuing a floodplain
development permit:
(1) Review all applications for completeness, particularly with the
requirements of § 70-12, Application for permit, and for compliance
with the provisions and standards of this law.
(2) Review subdivision and other proposed new development,
including manufactured home parks to determine whether
proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is located in an area of special flood hazard,
all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
applicable standards of Article V, Construction Standards and, in
particular, § 70-14A, Subdivision proposals.
§ 70-12 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-13
67:82
(3) Determine whether any proposed development in an area of special
flood hazard may result in physical damage to any other property
(e.g., stream bank erosion and increased flood velocities). The local
administrator may require the applicant to submit additional
technical analyses and data necessary to complete the
determination. If the proposed development may result in physical
damage to any other property or fails to meet the requirements of
Article V, Construction Standards, no permit shall be issued. The
applicant may revise the application to include measures that
mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects and resubmit the
application.
(4) Determine that all necessary permits have been received from
those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
state or federal law.
B. Use of other flood data.
(1) When the Federal Emergency Management Agency has designated
areas of special flood hazard on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate map (FIRM) but has neither produced water surface elevation
data (these areas are designated Zone A or V on the FIRM) nor
identified a floodway, the local administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data
developed pursuant to § 70-12G, as criteria for requiring that new
construction, substantial improvements or other proposed
development meet the requirements of this law.
(2) When base flood elevation data are not available, the local
administrator may use flood information from any other
authoritative source, such as historical data, to establish flood
elevations within the areas of special flood hazard, for the purposes
of this law.
C. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notification to adjacent communities and the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation prior to permitting any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submittal of evidence
of such notification to the Regional Administrator, Region II,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(2) Determine that the permit holder has provided for maintenance
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Construction stage.
(1) In Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, upon placement of the lowest floor or
completion of floodproofing of a new or substantially improved
§ 70-13 FIREARMS § 70-13
67:83
structure, obtain from the permit holder a certification of the asbuilt
elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation, in
relation to mean sea level. The certificate shall be prepared by
or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. For manufactured
homes, the permit holder shall submit the certificate of elevation
upon placement of the structure on the site. A certificate of
elevation must also be submitted for a recreational vehicle if it
remains on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer (unless it is
fully licensed and ready for highway use).
(2) Any further work undertaken prior to submission and approval of
the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review all data submitted. Deficiencies detected
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project unless
immediately corrected.
E. Inspections. The local administrator and/or the developer's engineer or
architect shall make periodic inspections at appropriate times
throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance
with permit conditions and enable said inspector to certify, if requested,
that the development is in compliance with the requirements of the
floodplain development permit and/or any variance provisions.
F. Stop-work orders.
(1) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found ongoing without a
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 70-8 of this chapter.
(2) The local administrator shall issue, or cause to be issued, a stopwork
order for any floodplain development found noncompliant
with the provisions of this law and/or the conditions of the
development permit. Disregard of a stop-work order shall subject
the violator to the penalties described in § 70-8 of this chapter.
G. Certificate of compliance.
(1) In areas of special flood hazard, as determined by documents
enumerated in § 70-6, it shall be unlawful to occupy or to permit the
use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part
thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate
of compliance has been issued by the local administrator stating
that the building or land conforms to the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the local
administrator upon satisfactory completion of all development in
areas of special flood hazard.
§ 70-13 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-13
67:84
(3) Issuance of the certificate shall be based upon the inspections
conducted as prescribed in § 70-13E, Inspections, and/or any
certified elevations, hydraulic data, floodproofing, anchoring
requirements or encroachment analyses which may have been
required as a condition of the approved permit.
H. Information to be retained. The local administrator shall retain and
make available for inspection, copies of the following:
(1) Floodplain development permits and certificates of compliance;
(2) Certifications of as-built lowest floor elevations of structures,
required pursuant to § 70-13D(1) and (2), and whether or not the
structures contain a basement;
(3) Floodproofing certificates required pursuant to § 70-13D(1), and
whether or not the structures contain a basement;
(4) Variances issued pursuant to Article VI, Variance Procedures; and,
(5) Notices required under § 70-13C, Alteration of watercourses.
§ 70-13 FIREARMS § 70-13
67:85

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards
§ 70-14. General standards.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 70-6.
A. Subdivision proposals. The following standards apply to all new
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in areas of
special flood hazard (including proposals for manufactured home and
recreational vehicle parks and subdivisions):
(1) Proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems shall be located and constructed so as to minimize
flood damage; and,
(3) Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
B. Encroachments.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30 and AE, on streams without a regulatory
floodway, no new construction, substantial improvements or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted unless:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
location; or
(b) The Village of Yorkville agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)for a conditional
FIRM revision, FEMA approval is received and the applicant
provides all necessary data, analyses and mapping and
reimburses the Village of Yorkville for all fees and other costs
in relation to the application. The applicant must also provide
all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the Village of
Yorkville for all costs related to the final map revision.
(2) On streams with a regulatory floodway, as shown on the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
adopted in § 70-6, no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development in the floodway (including fill) shall be
permitted unless:
§ 70-14 FIREARMS § 70-14
67:87
§ 70-15. Standards for all structures.
The following standards apply to new development, including new and
substantially improved structures, in the areas of special flood hazard
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map designated in § 70-6.
(a) A technical evaluation by a licensed professional engineer
shows that such an encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood; or
(b) The Village of Yorkville agrees to apply to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision, FEMA approval is received and
the applicant provides all necessary data, analyses and
mapping and reimburses the Village of Yorkville for all fees and
other costs in relation to the application. The applicant must
also provide all data, analyses and mapping and reimburse the
Village of Yorkville for all costs related to the final map
revisions.
A. Anchoring. New structures and substantial improvement to structures
in areas of special flood hazard shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement during the base flood. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(2) New construction and substantial improvements to structures shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Enclosed areas.
(a) For enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a structure within
Zones A1-A30, AE or AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new and substantially improved
structures shall have fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are useable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding, designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
§ 70-14 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-15
67:88
§ 70-16. Standards for residential structures.
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding; and
[2] The bottom of all such openings no higher than one foot
above the lowest adjacent finished grade.
(b) Openings may be equipped with louvers, valves, screens or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. Enclosed areas subgrade on all
sides are considered basements and are not permitted.
C. Utilities.
(1) New and replacement electrical equipment, heating, ventilating,
air conditioning, plumbing connections, and other service
equipment shall be located at least two feet above the base flood
elevation or be designed to prevent water from entering and
accumulating within the components during a flood and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses. Electrical wiring
and outlets, switches, junction boxes and panels shall be elevated
or designed to prevent water from entering and accumulating
within the components unless they conform to the appropriate
provisions of the electrical part of the Building Code of New York
State or the Residential Code of New York State for location of such
items in wet locations;
(2) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(3) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters. Sanitary sewer
and storm drainage systems for buildings that have openings below
the base flood elevation shall be provided with automatic backflow
valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in
each discharge line passing through a building's exterior wall; and
(4) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. Elevation. The following standards apply to new and substantially
improved residential structures located in areas of special flood hazard,
in addition to the requirements in § 70-14A, Subdivision proposals,
§ 70-14B, Encroachments, and § 70-15, Standards for all structures.
(1) Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above two feet above the base flood elevation.
§ 70-15 FIREARMS § 70-16
67:89
§ 70-17. Standards for nonresidential structures.
The following standards apply to new and substantially improved
commercial, industrial and other nonresidential structures located in areas
of special flood hazard, in addition to the requirements in § 70-14A,
Subdivision proposals, and § 70-14B, Encroachments, and § 70-15,
Standards for all structures.
(2) Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available,
new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least three feet above
the highest adjacent grade.
(3) Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent wade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map enumerated in § 70-6, (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified).
B. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
A. Within Zones A1-A30, AE and AH, and also Zone A if base flood
elevation data are available, new construction and substantial
improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or
above two feet above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that the structure is watertight below two feet
above the base flood elevation, including attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. All structural components located below the base
flood level must be capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
B. Within Zone AO, new construction and substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as two feet above the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified), or
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing
standard specified in § 70-17A(2).
C. If the structure is to be floodproofed, a licensed professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
§ 70-16 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-17
67:90
§ 70-18. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
The following standards in addition to the standards in § 70-14, General
standards, and § 70-15, Standards for all structures, apply, as indicated, in
areas of special flood hazard to manufactured homes and to recreational
vehicles which are located in areas of special flood hazard.
specifications, and plans for construction. A floodproofing certificate
or other certification shall be provided to the local administrator that
certifies the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
§ 70-17A(2), including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure is to be floodproofed.
D. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths are required to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures on
slopes.
E. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, the
lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
A. Recreational vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-A30, AE and
AH shall either:
(a) Be on site fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in § 70-18B, C
and D.
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels
or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions.
B. A manufactured home that is placed or substantially improved in Zones
A1-A30, AE and AH shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor is elevated to or above two feet above the base
flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
C. Within Zone A, when no base flood elevation data are available, new
and substantially improved manufactured homes shall be elevated such
that the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than 36 inches in height above grade and are securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse
or lateral movement.
§ 70-17 FIREARMS § 70-18
67:91
D. Within Zone AO, the floor shall be elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as two feet above the depth number specified on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map enumerated in § 70-6 (at least two feet if
no depth number is specified).
§ 70-18 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-18
67:92
ARTICLE VI
Variance Procedure
§ 70-19. Appeals Board.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the Village of Yorkville
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal such decision to the Supreme Court pursuant to Article 78 of the
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The costs to local governments and the dangers associated with
conducting search and rescue operations during periods of
flooding;
§ 70-19 FIREARMS § 70-19
67:93
§ 70-20. Conditions for variances.
(11) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(12) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including search and rescue operations,
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 70-19D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this chapter.
F. The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
including technical information and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in § 70-19D(1)
through (12) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon determination that:
(1) The proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure; and
(2) The variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
C. Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the
conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria of Subsections A, D, E and F of this section are met;
and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threat to public safety.
D. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 70-19 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-20
67:94
F. Variances shall only be issued upon receiving written justification of:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
G. Notification.
(1) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted for a building with the
lowest floor below the base flood elevation shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the
base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property.
(2) Such notification shall be maintained with the record of all variance
actions as required in § 70-13H of this chapter.
§ 70-20 FIREARMS § 70-20
67:95
Chapter 73
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 40. Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 52.
§ 70-20 YORKVILLE CODE § 70-20
73:96
ARTICLE I
Conduct
[Adopted 4-4-1989 as L.L. No. 1-1989]
§ 73-1. Purpose.
This Article, pursuant to § 187 of the General Municipal Law and also
pursuant to Article 9, Permissive Referendum, of the Village Law, shall
authorize and regulate the conduct of games of chance in the Village of
Yorkville.
§ 73-2. Licensing and enforcement agency.
The village hereby authorizes the Town of Whitestown to be the licensing
agency and enforcement agency for the village.
§ 73-3. Sunday sales.
Sunday sales shall be permitted except on Easter Sunday. No sales shall be
allowed on Christmas Day or New Year's Eve.
§ 73-1 GAMES OF CHANCE § 73-3
73:97
Chapter 74
GARAGE SALES
§ 74-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic
sale," "rummage sale," "flea market sale" or any other casual sale of
tangible personal property which is promoted by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale and takes place outside
the confines of a retail store.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations. For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter relating to
licensing, "person" shall include family or household groups.
§ 74-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the Village
of Yorkville without first filing with the Village Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Village Clerk a license to do
so, to be known as a "garage sale license". Such license must be obtained
no less than seven days before the proposed garage sale.
§ 74-3. Term and display of license.
§ 74-4. Required licensing information.
The information to be filed with the Village Clerk pursuant to this chapter
shall be as follows:
A. Such license shall be issued to one person not more than twice within a
twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for more than
seven consecutive calendar days.
B. Each license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout
the entire period of the licensed sale.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, no more than two
garage sales may be held at any one location or lot within any twelvemonth
period.
A. Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
§ 73-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 74-4
74:98
§ 74-5. Source of merchandise offered for sale.
The merchandise offered for sale shall be only used, unwanted items of
personal property acquired for normal use by the licensee. No new or used
merchandise from other sources shall be offered for sale. This section shall
not be interpreted to preclude neighbors from conducting group sales or
relatives from pooling their resources. However, in either case, the names
of all persons participating shall be included in the license.
§ 74-6. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
sunset.
§ 74-7. Advertising and signs.
B. Name of the owner of the property on which said sale is to be conducted
and the written consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the
owner.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. Date(s) on which the sale is to be conducted.
E. Date(s) and nature of past garage sales conducted by the applicant in
the Village of Yorkville for a period of one year prior to application for
the garage sale license.
F. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any local, state or federal agency.
G. Sworn statement or affirmation by the applicant that the information
therein is complete and true and known to him to be so.
A. One sign not greater in size than three by three (3 x 3) feet may be
installed on the property where the sale is being conducted. The sign
must contain the name and address of the person conducting the sale.
The sign shall be displayed only during the sale and shall be removed
within 24 hours after the completion of the sale. This includes any signs
erected on cooperating adjacent properties.
B. A deposit of $25 shall be made for the posting of signs off the premises
where the sale is to be conducted, said deposit to be refunded if all
signs have been removed within 72 hours of the expiration of the
license.
C. Signs posted within the Village of Yorkville and advertising garage sales
to be conducted outside the Village of Yorkville shall be subject to a
permit and a deposit of $25, said deposit to be refunded if all signs have
been removed within 72 hours after the ending date of the garage sale.
The deposit shall be forfeited if the signs have not been removed within
72 hours after the ending date of the garage sale.
§ 74-4 GARAGE SALES § 74-8
74:99
§ 74-8. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 74-9. Enforcement; responsibility for good order.
§ 74-10. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale items of personal property,
which items do not exceed three in number.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communication media which publishes or broadcasts in good faith
without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or
without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
E. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by Ch. 135, Zoning, of the Village of Yorkville or under the
protection of the nonconforming use provisions thereof,23 or any other
sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale
would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise
prohibited.
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the Village of Yorkville to
investigate any violations of this chapter brought to its attention by
complaint or arising during performance of its normal duties.
B. The person to whom this license is issued, and the owner of the
premises in the case of a license issued to a tenant of the premises on
which the sale or activity is conducted, shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall
permit loud or boisterous conduct on the said premises or permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the
area of such premises. All such persons shall obey the orders of the
Police Department and/or Fire Department of the Village of Yorkville in
order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare and shall contact
the appropriate authorities should there be a breakdown of order.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Art. V, Nonconforming Buildings or Uses.
§ 74-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 74-10
74:100
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not to exceed $150 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 10 days, or by both such fine or imprisonment.
The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute, for each day the offense is continued, a separate and distinct
offense hereunder.
Chapter 75
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND RECYCLABLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 82. Property maintenance — See Ch. 98.
§ 75-1. Authorized collection agent.
The Village Board of Trustees shall designate an authorized agent to pick up
and collect garbage, trash and recyclables. Such agent shall be responsible
for the distribution of garbage bags on behalf of the village. The cost of the
bag to the consumer shall be negotiated by and agreed upon by the agent
and the Village Board.
§ 75-2. General provisions.
A. Garbage may be placed for collection only in authorized garbage bags.
Garbage may not be placed at the roadside for collection except in
authorized garbage bags, and garbage may not be collected at the
roadside except by the village-authorized agent.
B. Recyclable material will be collected in such manner as is agreed upon
by the authorized agent and the Village Board.
C. Items too large for the authorized garbage bags may be disposed of by
requesting a pickup by the authorized agent and by paying the fee as
stipulated in the fee schedule of the garbage collection contract.
D. The use of large-volume containers, sometimes referred to as
"dumpsters," is permitted. However, the provider of service is
responsible for the removal of all garbage, trash and recyclables from
the premises. The occupants of the property may not place items at the
roadside for collection by the village-authorized agent.
E. No person shall dispose of garbage originating within the village except
on the property or in front of the property where that person resides
and shall not dispose of any garbage, trash, refuse, recyclables, etc., on
neighbors' property, village property or in any public receptacle.
F. No private collections shall commence prior to 6:00 a.m., including
dumpsters, nor later than 8:00 p.m. All private haulers must obtain a
§ 74-10 GARAGE SALES § 75-2
74:101
§ 75-3. Unauthorized garbage bags.
§ 75-4. Deposit of garbage restricted.
§ 75-5. Hazardous waste/material.
Hazardous waste and/or materials shall be disposed of in accordance with
the dictates of the Oneida-Herkimer Solid Waste Management Authority and
the village-authorized agent.
§ 75-5.1. Notice to remove. [Added 5-3-2016 by L.L. No. 1-2016]
The Board of Trustees or its designated representative is hereby authorized
and empowered to notify the owner of any occupied, open, or vacant private
property or commercial place within the Village, or the agent of such owner,
to properly dispose of garbage located on such owner's property which is a
nuisance or dangerous to public health, safety, or welfare. Such notice shall
be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting the same on
the lot, tract, or parcel of land. Such notice shall direct that such hazard or
nuisance be remedied within 10 days of the mailing/posting of such notice.
permit from the Village Clerk to be registered as a waste hauler in the
village. [Added 5-1-2001 by L.L. No. 1-2001]
A. Use prohibited. No person shall, except as herein provided:
(1) Use any garbage bag other than a bag distributed by the villageauthorized
agent for the disposal of garbage or trash.
(2) Duplicate or imitate a bag authorized by the village.
(3) Give, sell or issue in any manner a duplicated or imitated
authorized bag.
A. No person shall bring into, place or deposit or cause to be brought into,
placed or deposited in the village any garbage, refuse, trash,
recyclables, paper, hazardous waste and/or material or ashes
originating outside the village for the purpose of disposing of the same
in the village or for the purpose of having the same collected by the
village-authorized agent.
B. No person who is a resident of the village or the owner, lessee or person
in control of real property within the village shall permit any person to
bring into, place or deposit garbage, refuse, trash, recyclables, paper,
hazardous waste and/or material or ashes originating outside of the
village on any real property owned or leased by him or her or under his
or her control.
§ 75-2 YORKVILLE CODE § 75-5.2
74:102
§ 75-5.2. Abatement by Village; lien. [Added 5-3-2016 by L.L. No.
2-2016]
If within said 10 days the owner should fail, refuse, or neglect to abate
the hazard or nuisance, the Village of Yorkville may undertake to abate the
same through the use of Village personnel or equipment, or the Village of
Yorkville may contract with an independent contractor or contractors to do
the work and cause the hazard or nuisance to be abated. In either event,
the costs incurred by the Village of Yorkville to accomplish the abatement
of the hazard or nuisance shall be assessed against and be a lien upon the
lot, tract, or parcel of land where the hazard or nuisance existed.
§ 75-6. Responsibility; penalties for offenses.
Chapter 82
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Deposit of alcoholic beverage
containers — See Ch. 38.
Garbage, rubbish and recyclables — See Ch.
75.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 98.
§ 82-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that litter carelessly deposited in the
Village is the cause of civic disgrace; that litter is a health, fire and safety
hazard and pollutant; that an all-out litter control campaign can result in
substantial savings to taxpayers of the Village; and that litter is a matter
affecting the public interest and consequently should be subject to
supervision and administrative control for the purpose of safeguarding the
health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Village.
A. Presumptions. It shall be presumed that the occupant, the person in
control of the property or the owner, in that specific order, is
responsible for the proper disposal of garbage, trash, refuse and
recyclables. The owner shall ultimately be responsible for the proper
disposal.
B. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not to exceed $250 or
imprisonment not to exceed 15 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 75-5.2 GARAGE SALES § 82-2
74:103
§ 82-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter or any sample
or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature which:
COMMERCIAL PLACE — Any store or group thereof, including shopping
centers, shopping plazas and other similar places, wherein mercantile
activities and services are offered to the public, and further including all
parking areas thereat.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare or creates
unsightliness.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by law;
any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in
accordance with federal statute or regulation; and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by law. In addition thereto,
"newspaper" shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not fewer than four issues per year and sold to the
public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter or any
sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies
of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a
"commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Village owned or used by the Village and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit.
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 82-2 YORKVILLE CODE § 82-2
74:104
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, shopping carts and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VILLAGE — The Village of Yorkville, New York.
§ 82-3. Litter in public places.
No person shall deposit or throw litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Village, except in public or private receptacles
for collection.
§ 82-4. Placing litter in receptacles to prevent scattering.
Persons placing litter in public or private receptacles shall do so in such a
manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 82-5. Litter in streets or gutters. [Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
5-2012]
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the Village the accumulation of litter or debris from any building or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
§ 82-6. Litter from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or public place within the Village or upon private
property.
§ 82-2 GARAGE SALES § 82-7
74:105
§ 82-7. Trucks causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Village
unless such vehicle is so operated, constructed and loaded as to prevent
any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit
in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter
or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 82-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Village except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as
provided herein.
§ 82-9. Litter in bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any river, fountain, pond, lake,
stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the
Village.
§ 82-10. Handbills.
A. Handbills in public places. No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street
or other public place within the Village.
B. Placement on vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle;
provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a
person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof,
a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to
accept it.
C. Handbills on vacant premises. No person shall throw or deposit any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises
which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
D. Handbills on private premises.
(1) No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill
directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or
upon such private premises.
§ 82-7 YORKVILLE CODE § 82-10
74:106
§ 82-11. Litter on private and commercial premises.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private property or
commercial place within the Village, whether owned by such person or
not, except that the owner or person in control of such private property
or commercial place may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon any
private property.
§ 82-12. Vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Village, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 82-13. Notice to remove. [Amended 5-3-2016 by L.L. No. 3-2016]
The Board of Trustees or its designated representative is hereby authorized
and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
or commercial place within the Village, or the agent of such owner, to
properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is a
nuisance or dangerous to public health, safety, or welfare. Such notice shall
be by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by posting the same on
the lot, tract, or parcel of land. Such notice shall direct that such hazard or
nuisance be remedied within 10 days of the mailing/posting of such notice.
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the distribution
of mail by the United States Postal Service nor to newspapers, as
defined herein, except that newspapers shall be placed on private
property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or
upon private property.
E. Handbills on utility poles and trees. No person shall affix any handbills,
posters, signs, etc., to any utility pole or tree either on public or private
property within the Village of Yorkville.
A. Responsibility of owners of commercial premises. Each owner or person
in control of any commercial place, including shopping centers and
delivery and parking areas thereat, shall keep said places, parking
fields, parking areas, delivery areas and other open areas which are a
part of such commercial place free from litter.
B. Responsibility of owners of private premises. The owner or person in
control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises
free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 82-10 GARAGE SALES § 82-13.1
74:107
§ 82-13.1. Abatement by Village; lien. [Added 5-3-2016 by L.L. No.
4-2016]
If within said 10 days the owner should fail, refuse, or neglect to abate
the hazard or nuisance, the Village of Yorkville may undertake to abate the
same through the use of Village personnel or equipment, or the Village of
Yorkville may contract with an independent contractor or contractors to do
the work and cause the hazard or nuisance to be abated. In either event,
the costs incurred by the Village of Yorkville to accomplish the abatement
of the hazard or nuisance shall be assessed against and be a lien upon the
lot, tract, or parcel of land where the hazard or nuisance existed.
§ 82-14. Penalties for offenses.
Chapter 86
NOISE
§ 86-1. Loud and/or raucous noise prohibited.
No person shall emit or cause to be emitted any loud and/or raucous noise
on or from any public street or place.
§ 86-2. Sound-amplifying systems; permit required.
A. Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions. The continuation of an offense against
the provisions of this chapter shall constitute, for each day the offense
is continued, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
B. In addition or as an alternative to the above provided penalties, the
Board of Trustees may also maintain an action or proceeding in the
name of the Village in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel
compliance with or to restrain by injunction the violation of this
chapter.
A. No person shall use or operate or cause to be used or operated any
sound-amplifying device upon any public street or place without the
permission of the Police Department officer-in-charge.
B. No permit shall be refused by the Police Department officer-in-charge
unless there is substantial and convincing evidence that the use of such
a sound-amplifying device would result in unreasonable interference
with the rights of others or unreasonably interfere with the peace and
quiet of those on private property or using public streets and places.
C. Any permit shall prohibit the use of such devices between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in all areas designated "residential" on the
Zoning Map which is part of Ch. 135, Zoning, of the Code of the Village
of Yorkville
§ 82-13.1 YORKVILLE CODE § 86-2
74:108
§ 86-3. Repair work and testing of vehicles and machines.
No person shall conduct any repair work on or testing of vehicles or
machines which causes any loud or raucous noise anywhere in the Village
of Yorkville between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 86-4. Loud noises prohibited on private property.
§ 86-5. Penalties for offenses.
Any person committing an offense against any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a violation pursuant to the Penal Law
of the State of New York, punishable by a fine not to exceed $150 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
The continuation of an offense against the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute, for each incident, a separate and distinct offense hereunder.
D. Any permit may be suspended by the Police Department officer-incharge
or the Village Board of Trustees upon determination that the
holder of the permit has violated any of the provisions of Subsections B
or C of this section until the next regular meeting of the Board of
Trustees, at which time the holder may present any statement or
evidence in his behalf, and thereafter the Board of Trustees, by a
majority vote, shall revoke, cancel or reinstate the permit. In the event
that the holder of the permit does not appear at said meeting, either in
person or by his representative, the permit shall be automatically
revoked.
A. No person shall operate or play any radio, phonograph, tape recorder,
television set or any musical instrument, amplified or nonamplified,
repair or test any motor vehicle, however powered or fueled, operate
any motor vehicle with an improper muffler system, or operate any
snowmobile, go-cart, mini bike or all-terrain vehicle or other
recreational vehicle or device powered by an internal combustion
engine in such a manner or in such volume at any time as to
unreasonably interfere with the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of any
person in any dwelling or other type of residence. [Amended 9-4-2012
by L.L. No. 5-2012]
B. No person shall conduct pool parties or other gatherings of people
whereby loud, raucous or boisterous noises are emitted so as to
unreasonably interfere with the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of any
person in any dwelling or other type of residence between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 86-2 GARAGE SALES § 86-5
74:109
Chapter 87
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 91. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 115.
§ 87-1. Liability of Village in certain actions; prior notice required.
No civil action shall be brought or maintained against the Village of
Yorkville for damages or injuries to person or property sustained in
consequence of any street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk,
curb, grating, opening, drain, sewer, municipal parking lot, Village park,
recreational facility or equipment, parking field, playground or playground
equipment being defective, out of repair, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed,
unless, prior to the occurrence resulting in such damage or injuries, written
notice of the defective, unsafe, dangerous or obstructed condition of such
street, highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, grating,
opening, drain, sewer, municipal parking lot, Village park, recreational
facility or equipment, parking field, playground or playground equipment
relating to the particular place shall have been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk of the Village of Yorkville and that there was a failure or
neglect to repair, remedy or remove the defect within a reasonable time
after the filing of said notice.
§ 87-2. Limitation on actions.
Nothing herein contained, however, shall be held to revive any claim or
cause of action now barred by any existing requirement or statute of
limitations nor to waive any existing limitation now applicable to any claim
or cause of action against the Village of Yorkville.
§ 87-3. Severability.
If any provision or application of this chapter shall be judged
unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby, and the Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have enacted this chapter without
the invalid provision or application, as the case may be, had such invalidity
been apparent.
§ 87-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately.
§ 86-5 YORKVILLE CODE § 87-4
74:110
Chapter 89
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 52. Block parties — See Ch. 115, Art. V.
§ 89-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Village of Yorkville.
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the village.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
VILLAGE — The Village of Yorkville, New York.
§ 89-2. Permit required.
§ 89-3. Application for permit.
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
in or through the village unless a parade permit shall have been
obtained from the Chief of Police.
B. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Wedding processions.
(3) Students going to and from school or classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities. This exception does not apply to parades organized by
a school or anybody thereof more than 24 hours prior to its
occurrence.
(4) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
§ 87-4 PARADES § 89-3
89:111
A. Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Chief of Police not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who and animals and vehicles
which will constitute such parade, the type of animals and a
description of the vehicles.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(9) The location, by streets, of any assembly areas for such parade.
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(11) If the parade is designed to be held by, on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Chief of Police a communication, in writing, from the
person proposing to hold the parade authorizing the applicant to
apply for the permit on his behalf.
(12) Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should issue.
C. Late applications. The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown
therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder
which is filed less than 30 days before the date such parade is proposed
to be conducted.
§ 89-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 89-4
89:112
§ 89-4. Standards for issuance.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
§ 89-5. Time limit for decision; denial.
The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within 10 days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves the
application, he shall mail to the applicant, within 10 days after the day upon
which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons
for his denial of the permit.
§ 89-6. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Board of Trustees. The appeal shall be taken within five days
after notice. The Board shall act upon the appeal within 14 days after its
receipt.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the village to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection of the village.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the village other than that to be occupied by the proposed
line of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of or ambulance services to areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a
disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
H. The parade is not designed to be held purely for private profit.
§ 89-4 PARADES § 89-7
89:113
§ 89-7. Alternate permits.
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall
be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within seven days after notice
of the action of the Chief of Police, file a written note of acceptance with
the Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the
requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this
chapter.
§ 89-8. Notice to village officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall
send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 89-9. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
§ 89-10. Duties of permittee.
§ 89-11. Interference with parade prohibited; parking.
A. The Mayor.
B. The Village Attorney.
C. The Fire Chief.
D. The Superintendent of Public Works.
A. The starting time.
B. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
C. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
D. Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws.
B. Possession of permit. The parade chairman or other person heading or
leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person
during the conduct of the parade.
A. Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, or
impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any
person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
§ 89-7 YORKVILLE CODE § 89-11
89:114
§ 89-12. Revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set
forth.
§ 89-13. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of Chapter 1, General
Provisions.
Chapter 91
PARKS
§ 91-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is for the protection and preservation of the
property of the Village of Yorkville consisting of village parks and other
areas and to establish rules and regulations for the use, care, maintenance,
protection, preservation and enjoyment thereof by the residents of the
Village of Yorkville.
§ 91-2. Hours.
The parks shall be open to the general public hereafter between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. each day and at other times as may be authorized
by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 91-3. Parking of vehicles.
All vehicles shall be operated and/or parked only upon clearly marked and
designated parking areas.
B. Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons
are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.
C. Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of a route of
a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on an unposted
street in violation of this chapter.
§ 89-11 PARKS § 91-4
91:115
§ 91-4. Damage or destruction of park property.
There shall be no willful damage or destruction of park property. Park
property shall include but not be limited to appliances, buildings, trees,
fences, shrubs and amusement and convenience fixtures and appendages.
§ 91-5. Organized groups.
Organized groups must obtain permission from the Village Board if the
group exceeds 15 in number.
§ 91-6. Firearms.
Firearms, including any type of weapon, fireworks, explosive devices and
dangerous instruments (as defined by the Penal Law) are forbidden within
the areas at any time.
§ 91-7. Disposal of refuse.
Littering is specifically prohibited, and all refuse shall be deposited in the
receptacles placed at intervals about the park for that purpose.
§ 91-8. Alcoholic beverages.
Alcoholic beverages of any type are not permitted within the prescribed
areas at any time.
Chapter 94
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 94-1. Legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating the distribution of
certain materials, peddling, soliciting and related activities within the
Village of Yorkville. The licensing of persons engaged in the abovementioned
activities is required so that the identity of persons going door to
door or distributing materials within the village may be established, so that
general regulations may be more effectively enforced, for the protection
and maintenance of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
the village, and to prevent dishonest business practices and dishonest
solicitation of funds in the village.
§ 94-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who distributes or causes to be distributed
on any street or public place within the village any newspaper, periodical,
§ 91-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 94-2
94:116
book, magazine, handbill, circular, card or pamphlet or printed material of
any kind.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares, food, meat, fish, ice cream, fruits,
vegetables, magazines, periodicals, printed material, farm products,
services and orders or contracts for service, home improvements or
alterations and anything that may be sold or distributed by peddlers,
solicitors or distributors as used herein.
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the village or not, who goes
from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, traveling
by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance, carrying or
transporting merchandise for the purpose of selling and delivering the
merchandise to customers. The word "peddler" shall also include the words
"hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, organization,
club, association or any principal or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR — Any person, whether a resident of the village or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other type of conveyance,
soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of merchandise
or services of any kind for future performance or delivery, whether or not
such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the merchandise
or services and whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such
sales or orders, or who engages in any of the foregoing activities from a
stationary location on any street or other public place. The word "solicitor"
shall also include the word "canvasser" or any person who goes from door to
door as described above for the purpose of soliciting and/or collecting funds
or from a stationary location on any street or other public place.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person engaging in the activities
commonly referred to as "transient merchant" or "itinerant vendor" who is
not a resident of the village or does not have a permanent business address
in the village and who merchandises or sells with the intent to close out
or discontinue such business within a period of one year from the date of
commencement and occupies a room, building, tent, lot or other premises
for the purpose of selling merchandise.
§ 94-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, distributor or transient
merchant to sell, offer for sale or distribute merchandise, printed material
or services within the village without first applying for and obtaining a
license therefor from the Village Clerk.
§ 94-4. Application for license.
A. Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this chapter shall
file with the Village Clerk a sworn written application, on a form to be
furnished by said Clerk, which shall give or be accompanied by the
following information or documents:
§ 94-2 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 94-4
94:117
§ 94-5. Investigation of applicants.
(1) The name and description of the applicant.
(2) The permanent home address and full local address of the
applicant.
(3) A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of
the merchandise or service to be sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the license is desired.
(6) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle and its
license number.
(7) The place where the merchandise or services to be sold or offered
for sale are manufactured or produced, where such merchandise is
located at the time such application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery.
(8) Two business references located in the County of Oneida, State of
New York, or, in lieu thereof, such other available evidence of the
character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable
an investigator to properly evaluate such character and
responsibility.
(9) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
B. If applicable, such application shall be accompanied by a certificate
from the Director of Weights and Measures of the county certifying that
all weighing and measuring devices to be used by the applicant have
been examined and approved.
A. When the application is properly filled out and signed by the applicant,
the original and duplicate thereof shall be filed with the Clerk, and the
Clerk shall refer the original to the Chief of Police, who shall make or
cause to be made within five days such investigation of the applicant's
business responsibility and character as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public good.
B. If, as a result of such an investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police
shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons
therefor and shall return said application to the Clerk. Any
determination by the Chief of Police that an application is
unsatisfactory shall be based on one or more of the following findings
with respect to the applicant:
§ 94-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 94-5
94:118
§ 94-6. Denial or issuance of license.
§ 94-7. License fee; renewal.
(1) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(2) Prior violation of a peddling or soliciting ordinance or law.
(3) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) Record of breaches of solicited contracts.
(5) Concrete evidence of bad character.
C. In the absence of any such finding, the Chief of Police shall find the
application satisfactory, shall endorse his approval on the application
and shall return the application to the Clerk.
A. If an application is found unsatisfactory by the Chief of Police and he
has endorsed his disapproval upon the application, the Clerk shall
notify the applicant, by mail, that the application is disapproved and
shall deny the applicant any license.
B. If an application is found satisfactory by the Chief of Police, the Clerk
shall issue a license addressed to the applicant to conduct the business
applied for upon the payment of the proper fee by the applicant. Such
license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show
the name and address of the applicant, the type of business (peddler,
solicitor, distributor or transient merchant) for which the applicant has
registered, the kind of goods or services to be sold thereunder, the date
of issue, the length of time the license shall be operative and the license
number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in the
activity licensed.
A. At the time of the issuance of a license, a fee shall be paid by an
applicant for a peddler's or solicitor's or transient merchants license, to
cover the costs of investigation and the administration and enforcement
of this chapter. The amount of said fee shall be set by resolution of the
Board of Trustees.
B. Where an organization has several agents peddling, soliciting or
distributing merchandise or printed material, each agent shall be
licensed separately, and each shall pay the appropriate fee.
C. Upon the expiration of a license, a new license will be issued upon
compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and the payment of
fees, except that the investigation and waiting period therefor may be
waived if approved by the Clerk and Chief of Police.
D. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed on the part of the holder
or his or her agent or employee, a duplicate in lieu thereof, under the
original application, may be issued by the Clerk upon the filing with him
§ 94-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 94-7
94:119
§ 94-8. Appeals from denial of license.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or of the Village
Clerk in the denial of a license, as provided in § 94-6 of this chapter, shall
have the right of appeal to the Board of Trustees. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Board, within 14 days after the notice of the action
complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for appeal. The Board of
Trustees shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice
of such hearing shall be given in the same manner as provided in § 94-12 of
this chapter for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision of the Board
on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 94-9. License term and conditions.
§ 94-10. Restrictions on license holder.
No person or license holder shall:
or her by the licensee of an affidavit setting forth the circumstances of
the loss and what, if any, search has been made for its recovery.
A. Upon obtaining a license as herein provided, a peddler, solicitor,
distributor or transient merchant may conduct his activities within the
village only as long as he adheres to the regulations set forth in this
chapter.
B. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year issued.
C. A license shall not be assignable. Any holder of a certificate who
permits it to be used by any other person and any person who uses a
license issued to any other person shall be guilty of an offense against
this chapter.
D. No applicant to whom a license has been refused or who has had a
license revoked shall make further application until a period of at least
12 months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection or
revocation unless he can show that the reason for such rejection or
revocation no longer exists.
E. Every peddler, solicitor, distributor or transient merchant shall, while
conducting his activities, carry the license with him and shall exhibit
the same upon demand to any police officer or citizen.
A. Peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and one-half (1/2) hour before sunset, unless specifically
having been invited into a house by the occupant or having made an
appointment with a person previously.
B. Attempt to peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise or printed material
without first having identified himself as a peddler, solicitor or
distributor registered with the Clerk and displaying his license.
§ 94-7 YORKVILLE CODE § 94-10
94:120
§ 94-11. Revocation of license.
C. Have exclusive right to any location in the public streets or operate in
any congested area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public.
D. Leave at a property or house or in any public place circulars, samples or
other matter, except a newspaper, which shall be defined as a periodical
with a paid circulation of at least 90% of its total circulation, except
when handed to a person willing to accept the same.
E. Enter or attempt to enter the land of any resident in the village without
an express invitation from the occupant of such land.
F. Conduct himself in such a manner as to become objectionable to or
annoy an occupant of any house.
G. Shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound-making or -
amplifying device upon any of the streets, parks or public places of the
village or upon private premises in such a manner that sound of
sufficient volume is emitted or produced to be capable of being plainly
heard upon the streets, avenues, parks or other public places of the
village or upon private premises thereof for the purpose of attracting
attention to any merchandise or services.
H. Distribute obscene merchandise or printed material or that which
advocates unlawful conduct.
I. Litter the streets, public places or properties within the village with any
merchandise or printed material.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Board of Trustees, after notice and hearing, for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or a materially incorrect statement
contained in the application for a license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or a materially incorrect statement made
in the course of carrying on the business of solicitor, peddler,
distributor or transient merchant.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
(5) Conducting the business of peddler, solicitor, distributor or
transient merchant in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as
to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. A notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given by the
Village Clerk, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
§ 94-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 94-11
94:121
§ 94-12. Exemptions.
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the holder of the license at the address
given on the application at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing or shall be delivered by an agent of the village in the same
manner as a summons at least three days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
C. Upon revocation, the license shall be surrendered to the Clerk.
A. No part of this chapter shall be enforced so as to conflict with Article 4,
§ 32, of the General Business Law of the State of New York, providing
for exemptions for veterans.
B. The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following,
provided that an official uniform, clothing or other suitable
identification approved by the Board of Trustees is displayed and they
have previously registered with the Chief of Police:
(1) Any recognized local nonprofit religious, charitable, educational,
civic or political organization.
(2) Any such organizations as the Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts or local
volunteer firemen.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be held to apply to:
(1) Sales conducted pursuant to statute or by order of any court.
(2) Persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such
articles.
(3) Merchants having an established place of business within the
village or their employees.
(4) The peddling of meats, fish, fruits and similar produce by farmers
and persons who produce such commodities and by authorized
persons selling such items at farm markets whose location and
hours have been approved by the Board of Trustees.
(5) Dealers in milk, baked goods, heating oil and daily newspapers.
(6) Licensed real estate brokers.
(7) Authorized persons selling personal property at sidewalk sales
whose location and hours have been approved by the Board of
Trustees.
(8) Persons selling antiques, art and crafts at shows whose location
and hours have been approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 94-11 YORKVILLE CODE § 94-12
94:122
Chapter 96
PORTABLE SPORTS APPARATUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Use of streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 115.
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROLLER BLADES — A single platform which is mounted on a single roll of
wheels running from front to rear and having no mechanism or other device
with which to steer or control the direction of movement thereof while being
used, operated or ridden.
SKATEBOARD — A single platform which is mounted on wheels, having no
mechanism or other device with which to steer or control the direction of
movement thereof while being used, operated or ridden.
§ 96-2. Use on public property prohibited.
No person shall use or ride upon any skateboard or roller blades in any
public park or public parking lot or street or sidewalk within the Village of
Yorkville.
§ 96-2.1. Prohibited acts; removal. [Added 5-25-2016 by L.L. No.
6-2016]
(9) Persons selling their own used household goods and clothing, not
purchased for resale, at yard and lawn sales on real property where
they reside.
D. Interstate commerce. This chapter shall not apply so as to unlawfully
interfere with interstate commerce.
A. No portable sports apparatus, hoop, pole, backboard, net or other
attachments may be placed in or on any public roadway, or encroach
upon any Village of Yorkville right-of-way or thoroughfare. In no event
shall any such apparatus, hoop, pole, backboard, net or other
attachment be placed within 10 feet of any Village Street or property.
B. Any such sports apparatus found to be in violation of this restriction
may be removed by Village of Yorkville personnel, upon 10 days' written
notice to the property owner.
C. In the event that the Village of Yorkville Police Department shall
determine that a public hazard and a threat to public safety and motor
§ 94-12 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 96-2.1
94:123
§ 96-3. Penalties for offenses.
Any police officer or peace officer who shall observe any person using,
operating or riding upon a skateboard or roller blades in violation of this
chapter shall take possession of the skateboard or roller blades and issue
a dated, written notice of such violation to the person, if over 18 years of
age, and to the person and his or her parent or guardian, if under 18 years
of age, together with a copy of this chapter at the Police Station. In case
of the first offense, the skateboard or roller blades will be returned to the
rider at the Police Station upon the appearance of the rider, if the rider
is of the age of 18 years or older, or the appearance thereof of the rider
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, if the rider is under the
age of 18 years. In the case of a second offense, the skateboard or roller
blades shall be taken from the rider and not returned to him or her for 15
days upon appearance at the Village Police Station aforesaid. In the case
of a third offense, the skateboard or roller blades shall be taken from the
rider and not returned to him or her for 60 days, upon appearance at the
Village of Yorkville Police Station as set forth above; and in the case of any
further events, the skateboard or roller blades shall be taken from the rider,
forfeited to the Village of Yorkville and destroyed.
Chapter 98
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalties — See Ch. 1, § 1-10.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 49.
Garbage, rubbish and recyclables — See Ch.
75.
Littering — See Ch. 82.
vehicle traffic exists, the sports apparatus may be removed
immediately.
§ 96-2.1 YORKVILLE CODE § 96-3
94:124
ARTICLE I
Weeds and Grass
[Adopted 5-3-1932; amended in its entirety 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
5-201224]
§ 98-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them. All other words shall have the meanings normally
ascribed to them in regular usage.
BRUSH — A dense growth of unkempt grass, weeds and/or shrubbery; grass
clippings or trimmings from trees, shrubs or bushes.
HOLDER — Any owner, tenant, trustee, receiver, executor or other person
or entity who controls, in whole or in part, any subject premises.
LAWN — A usually, closely mown plot or area planted with grass or similar
plants.
PERSON — Includes any individual person or persons, firm, partnership,
corporation, whether business, membership, religious, charitable or
otherwise, any association or other unit or entity owning real property in
the Village of Yorkville.
§ 98-2. Control of grass and weeds on private property.
§ 98-3. Enforcement procedures.
In the event that the Zoning Officer or law enforcement officer determines
that there exists such brush, grass, rubbish or weeds which constitute a fire
or health hazard or public nuisance as described in § 82-13 of the Village
Code, the Village Board shall direct the Codes Enforcement Officer to give
written notice to the owner of such real property to spray, remove, cut or
trim the same as may be necessary to remove such hazard or nuisance. Such
notice shall be given in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the owner of such property and to the owner's last known address as
appears on the latest assessment roll of the Village of Yorkville. In the event
A. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee or person having charge of each
and every parcel of land in this Village to keep said parcel free of
harmful weeds and other rank or noxious vegetation.
B. Grass shall be cut on improved private property at least once every two
weeks and on vacant parcels at least once every month from the first
day of May to the last day of October of each year. The accumulation of
rubbish on the subject premises or the growth of brush, grass or weeds
more than nine inches is prohibited. This provision shall not apply to
land under cultivation, naturally wooded or undeveloped areas which
are at least 200 feet distant from any occupied building or residence.
24.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former §§ 98-3 and 98-4 as §§ 98-5 and
98-6, respectively.
§ 98-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 98-3
94:125
that the lot, tract or parcel of land is unoccupied and the address of the
owner is unknown, service of the notice shall be made upon the owner by
posting the same on such lot, tract or parcel of land. Such notice shall direct
that such hazard or nuisance be remedied within 10 days of the mailing of
such notice.
§ 98-4. Failure to abate; penalties for offenses.
A. If, within said 10 days, the owner or occupant should fail, refuse or
neglect to abate the hazard or nuisance, the Village of Yorkville may
undertake to abate the same through use of its own personal facilities
or equipment, or the Village of Yorkville may contract with an
independent contractor or contractors to do the work and cause the
hazard or nuisance abated. In either event, the costs incurred by the
Village of Yorkville to accomplish the abatement of the hazard or
nuisance shall result in the immediate billing to the owner of the lot,
tract or parcel of land where the hazard or nuisance existed. In the
event of nonpayment for the abatement of the hazard or nuisance, the
cost shall be assessed against and be a lien upon the lot, tract or parcel
of land where the hazard or nuisance existed. Such lien shall be added
to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lot or land, shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and
shall be enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
B. A surcharge of $150 shall be levied for the first offense. A surcharge of
$250 shall be levied for a second offense within one calendar year of the
first offense, and a surcharge of $500 will be assessed for a third
offense within one calendar year of the second offense.
§ 98-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 98-4
94:126
ARTICLE II
Gardens and Composting
[Adopted 5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
§ 98-5. Gardening/agriculture of food for consumption.
§ 98-6. Composting of yard and garden waste.
It shall be lawful for any owner, tenant, or occupant of any residence in
the Village of Yorkville to compost garden and yard waste. The following
conditions shall apply:
A. It shall be lawful for the property owner or owner's legal agent to
construct and cultivate a garden for the purpose of growing organic
foods limited to vegetables and fruits for human consumption.
B. All such gardens shall be:
(1) Limited to the rear yard of the owner's property.
(2) Gardens shall not exceed 50% of the rear yard and must be a
minimum of five feet from any property line.
(3) With the end of the growing season, it is the property owner's
responsibility to "hoe under," uproot, or compost the remaining
plant life for the next year or return the area used to the
surrounding landscape.
A. The maximum size for compost container or pile size shall be three feet
by three feet by three feet.
B. The materials approved for composting are grass clippings, branches,
leaves, sod, plants, shrubs, soil, sawdust or other organic residue.
C. The compost pile may be located only in the rear yard. In no event shall
it be located within 10 feet of any property line.
D. The compost pile must be built and maintained in such a manner as to
prevent the breeding and nesting of rodents and the emission of
offensive or obnoxious odors.
E. The compost pile may not contain any of the following materials: bones,
dairy products, meats, fish scraps, pet manures, grease, lard,
mayonnaise, oils, peanut butter, salad dressing, vegetable oil, glass,
metal or plastic.
F. Complaints of obnoxious odors or rodents being attracted to the site
must be addressed within 48 hours of notification. If odors or rodents
are still present after 48 hours, the pile must be removed.
§ 98-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 98-6
94:127
Chapter 103
RECORDS
§ 98-6 YORKVILLE CODE § 98-6
103:128
ARTICLE I
Public Access to Records
[Adopted 10-4-1988]
§ 103-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 103-2. Records access officer.
A. The People's right to know the process of government decision-making
and the documents and statistics leading to determinations is basic to
our society. Access to such information should not be thwarted by
shrouding it with the cloak of secrecy or confidentiality.
B. These regulations provide information concerning the procedures by
which records may be obtained.
C. Personnel shall furnish to the public the information and records
required by the Freedom of Information Law (§ 84 et seq. of the Public
Officers Law), as well as records otherwise available by law.
D. Any conflict among laws governing public access to records shall be
construed in favor of the widest possible availability of public records.
A. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Yorkville is responsible for
ensuring compliance with the regulations herein and designates the
Village Clerk and, in his or her absence, the Deputy Village Clerk as
records access officer, who shall be responsible for ensuring
appropriate agency response to public requests for access to records.
The designation of a records access officer shall not be construed to
prohibit officials who have in the past been authorized to make records
or information available to the public from continuing to do so.
B. The records access officer shall ensure that personnel:
(1) Maintain an up-to-date subject matter list.
(2) Assist the requester in identifying requested records, if necessary.
(3) Upon locating the records, take one of the following actions:
(a) Make records available for inspection.
(b) Deny access to the records in whole or in part and explain, in
writing the reasons therefor.
(4) Upon request for copies of records:
(a) Make a copy available upon payment or offer to pay
established fees, if any, in accordance with § 103-8; or
(b) Permit the requester to copy those records.
(5) Upon request, certify that a record is a true copy.
§ 103-1 RECORDS § 103-2
103:129
§ 103-3. Location of records.
Records shall be available for public inspection and copying at the
Municipal Building, Sixth Street and Calder Avenue, Yorkville, New York.
§ 103-4. Hours for inspection.
Requests for public access to records shall be accepted and records
produced during all hours that the Clerk's office is regularly open for
business.
§ 103-5. Requests for access.
§ 103-6. Subject matter list.
(6) Upon failure to locate records, certify that:
(a) The Village of Yorkville is not the custodian for such records;
or
(b) The records of which the Village of Yorkville is a custodian
cannot be found after diligent search.
A. A written request may be required, but oral requests may be accepted.
B. A response shall be given regarding any request reasonably describing
the record or records sought within five business days of receipt of the
request.
C. A request shall reasonably describe the record or records sought.
Wherever possible, a person requesting records should supply
information regarding dates, file designations or other information that
may help to describe the records sought.
D. If the records access officer does not provide or deny access to the
records sought within five business days of receipt of a request, he or
she shall furnish a written acknowledgment of receipt of the request
and a statement of the approximate date when the request will be
granted or denied. If access to records is neither granted nor denied
within 10 business days after the date of acknowledgement of receipt of
a request, the request may be construed as a denial of access that may
be appealed.
A. The records access officer shall maintain a reasonably detailed current
list by subject matter of all records in his or her possession, whether or
not records are available pursuant to Subdivision 2 of § 87 of the Public
Officers Law.
B. The subject matter list shall be sufficiently detailed to permit
identification of the category of the record sought.
§ 103-2 YORKVILLE CODE § 103-6
103:130
§ 103-7. Denial of access; appeals.
§ 103-8. Fees.
C. The subject matter list shall be updated not less than twice per year.
The most recent update shall appear on the first page of the subject
matter list.
A. Denial of access to records shall be in writing, stating the reason
therefor and advising the requester of the right to appeal to the
individual or body established to hear appeals.
B. If requested records are not provided promptly, as required in § 103-5D
of this Article, such failure shall also be deemed a denial of access.
C. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Yorkville shall hear appeals for
denial of access to records under the Freedom of Information Law. Such
appeals shall be made within 30 days of a denial.
D. The time for deciding an appeal by the body designated to hear appeals
shall commence upon receipt of a written appeal identifying:
(1) The date of the appeal.
(2) The date and location of the request for records.
(3) The records to which the requester was denied access.
(4) Whether the denial of access was in writing or due to failure to
provide records promptly as required by § 103-5D.
(5) The name and return address of the requester.
E. The body designated to hear appeals shall transmit to the Committee on
Open Government copies of all appeals upon receipt of appeals. Such
copies shall be addressed to the Committee on Open Government,
Department of State, 162 Washington Avenue, Albany, New York 12231.
F. The Board of Trustees shall inform the appellant and the Committee on
Open Government of its determination, in writing, within 10 business
days of receipt of an appeal. The determination shall be transmitted to
the Committee on Open Government in the same manner as set forth in
Subsection E of this section.
A. There shall be no fee charged for:
(1) Inspection of records.
(2) Search for records.
(3) Any certification pursuant to this Article.
B. The fee for photocopies not exceeding eight and one-half by fourteen
(8 1/2 x 14) inches is $0.25 per page.
§ 103-6 RECORDS § 103-8
103:131
§ 103-9. Public notice.
A notice containing the title or name and business address of the records
access officer and appeals body and the location where records can be seen
or copied shall be posted in a conspicuous location wherever records are
kept and/or published in a local newspaper of general circulation.
C. The fee for copies of records not covered by Subsections A and B of this
section shall not exceed the actual reproduction cost (which is the
average unit cost for copying a record, excluding fixed costs of the
town, such as operator salaries).
§ 103-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 103-9
103:132
ARTICLE II
Records Retention
[Adopted 4-6-1992]
§ 103-10. Adoption of records retention schedule.
Records Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1, issued pursuant to
Article 57-A of the Arts and Cultural Affairs Law, and containing legal
minimum retention periods for municipal government records, is hereby
adopted for use by all municipal officers in disposing of municipal
government records listed therein.
§ 103-11. Disposal of records.
In accordance with Article 57-A:
A. Only those records will be disposed of that are described in Records
Retention and Disposition Schedule MU-1 after they have met the
minimum retention period prescribed therein.
B. Only those records will be disposed of that do not have sufficient
administrative, fiscal, legal or historical value to merit retention beyond
established time periods.
§ 103-10 RECORDS § 103-11
103:133
Chapter 107
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Street excavations — See Ch. 115, Art. IV. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 118.
§ 107-1. Inflow/infiltration prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged groundwater or
stormwater into the sanitary sewers by way of a sump pump or other
methods.
§ 107-2. Lateral connection replacement and ownership; cleanout
repair and replacement.
A. Building lateral/street lateral connection.
(1) The connection of the building lateral to an existing street lateral
shall be made at the property line. Except as provided under this
chapter, if a street lateral has not previously been provided, the
street lateral will be constructed from the existing public sewer to
the property line at the owner's expense. The street lateral shall be
installed with a properly sealed and covered cleanout to grade
located at the property.
(2) All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building lateral shall be borne by the property owner.
(3) The property owner shall indemnify the Village from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building lateral.
(4) The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair,
including all costs, of the lateral and connections from the building
to the public sewer.
(5) The method of connection of the building lateral to the street
lateral will be dependent upon the type of sewer pipe material and,
in all cases, shall be approved by the Highway Superintendent.
B. Cleanout repair/replacement. If, in the judgement of the Highway
Superintendent, it is determined that a building lateral, without the
property line cleanout, needs repair or replacement, the Village may
require that the owner install a cleanout at the property line at the
property owner's expense, such that the street lateral can be
maintained independently of the building lateral.
§ 103-11 YORKVILLE CODE § 107-2
103:134
§ 107-3. Applicability of other sewer use rules and regulations.
Chapter 109
SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 23.
Building construction — See Ch. 46.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 70.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 113.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 118.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
C. Street lateral replacement; ownership. Any existing street lateral
which, upon examination by the Highway Superintendent, is
determined to be in need of replacement will be replaced with a new
street lateral with a property line cleanout. The cost of constructing the
replacement street lateral and cleanout shall be at the property owner's
expense.
A. In addition to compliance with the provisions of this chapter, all persons
and property within the Village must also comply with any and all
applicable Oneida County sewer use rules and regulations.
B. Connections to and the use of sewers in the Village of Yorkville shall at
all times be in compliance with the Town of Whitestown and Oneida
County Sewer Rules and Regulations, or as may be hereafter amended
and supplemented. Such rules are hereby incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 107-2 RECORDS § 107-3
103:135

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 109-1. Enactment.
The Village Board of the Village of Yorkville, Oneida County, New York,
does hereby ordain and enact the Village of Yorkville Site Plan Review Law
pursuant to the authority and provisions of § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule
Law.
§ 109-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Village of Yorkville Site Plan Review
Law." The Village of Yorkville is hereinafter referred to as the "Village."
§ 109-3. Intent.
§ 109-4. Authorization of Board to approve and disapprove.
The Village Planning Board is hereby authorized to review and approve
or disapprove site plans for land uses within the Village as hereinafter
designated pursuant to and in accordance with the standards and
procedures set forth in this chapter.
A. Through site plan review, it is the intent of this chapter to promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the Village. A clean, wholesome,
attractive environment is declared to be of importance to the health and
safety of the inhabitants of the Village and, in addition, such an
environment is deemed essential to the maintenance and continued
development of the economy of the Village and the general welfare of
its inhabitants.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to ensure the optimum overall
conservation, protection, preservation, development and use of the
natural and man-related resources of the Village by regulating land use
activity within the Village through review and approval of site plans. It
is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit per se any land use activity
but to allow all land use activities which will meet the standards set
forth in this chapter.
§ 109-1 RECORDS § 109-4
103:137

ARTICLE II
Applicability; Definitions
§ 109-5. Review and approval required; exceptions.
§ 109-6. Applicability.
This chapter does not apply to uses and structures which are lawfully in
existence as of the date this chapter becomes effective. Any use which
would otherwise be subject to this chapter that has been discontinued for a
period of two years or more shall be subject to review pursuant to the terms
of this chapter before such use is resumed. Any use or structure shall be
considered to be in existence, provided that the same has been substantially
commenced as of the effective date of this chapter and fully constructed and
completed within one year from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 109-7. Effect on other provisions.
This chapter in no way affects the provisions or requirements of any other
federal, state or local law or regulations. Where this chapter is in conflict
with any other such law or regulation, the more restrictive shall apply.
A. All new land use activities within the Village shall require site plan
review and approval before being undertaken, except the following:
(1) Construction of one-family dwellings and ordinary accessory
structures and related land use activities.
(2) Landscaping or grading which is not intended to be used in
connection with a land use reviewable under the provisions of this
chapter.
(3) Ordinary repair or maintenance or interior alterations to existing
structures or uses.
(4) Exterior alterations or additions to existing structures in zones R-1,
R-2 and R-3.25
(5) Nonstructural agricultural or gardening uses not involving
substantial timber cutting.
(6) Commercial business changing ownership and continuing the same
business.
(7) Garage, lawn and porch sales not exceeding three days. If such
sales take place more often than three times in any calendar year,
site plan approval will be required.
B. Any person uncertain of the applicability of this chapter to a given land
use activity may apply, in writing, to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a
written jurisdictional determination.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Zoning.
§ 109-5 RECORDS § 109-8
103:139
§ 109-8. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FAMILY — One or more persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
LAND USE ACTIVITY — Any construction or other activity which
changes the use or appearance of land or a structure or the intensity of
use of land or a structure. "Land use activity" shall explicitly include but
not be limited to the following: new structures, expansions to existing
structures, new uses, changes in or expansions of existing uses, roads,
driveways and excavations for the purpose of extracting soil or mineral
deposits.
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A complete, self-contained residential unit
for permanent habitation by one family only and containing one or more
rooms and facilities for living, including cooking, sleeping and sanitary
needs.
SHORELINE — The mean high-water mark of any lake, pond, river or
permanent stream.
STRUCTURE — Any object constructed, installed or placed on land
to facilitate land use and development or subdivision of land, such
as buildings, sheds, signs and tanks and any fixtures, additions and
alterations thereto.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — Any structure designed to accommodate
an accessory use but detached from the principal structure, such as
a freestanding garage for vehicles accessory to the principal use, a
storage shed, a garden house or a similar facility.
B. Any term used in this chapter which is not defined hereinabove shall
carry its customary meaning unless the context otherwise dictates.
§ 109-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 109-8
103:140
ARTICLE III
Site Plan Review Procedures
§ 109-9. Approval required; recommended procedures.
Prior to undertaking any new land use activity, except for existing onefamily
dwelling and other uses specifically exempted in § 109-5 of this
chapter, site plan approval by the Planning Board is required. Applicants
for site plan approval should follow the recommended procedures related to
the sketch plan conference as hereinafter set forth. Applicants must comply
with all other procedures and requirements of this chapter.
§ 109-10. Sketch plan conference.
§ 109-11. Application requirements.
At least two weeks in advance of the Planning Board meeting at which a site
plan is to be considered, at least six copies of the site plan, at a scale of not
less than one inch equals 20 feet for multifamily residential development
and one inch equals 40 feet for all other developments, and three copies
of the application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and shall be accompanied by information contained on the following
checklist. Where the sketch plan conference was held, the accompanying
information shall be drawn from the following checklist as determined
necessary by the Planning Board at said sketch plan conference:
A. A sketch plan conference may be held between the Planning Board and
the applicant prior to the preparation and submission of a formal site
plan. The intent of such a conference is to enable the applicant to
inform the Planning Board of his proposal prior to the preparation of a
detailed site plan and for the Planning Board to review the basic site
design concept, to advise the applicant as to potential problems and
concerns and to generally determine the information to be required on
the site plan. In order to accomplish these objectives, the applicant
shall provide the following:
(1) A statement and rough sketch showing the locations and
dimensions of principal and accessory structures, parking areas,
access signs (with descriptions), existing and proposed vegetation
and other planned features; anticipated changes in the existing
topography and natural features; and, where applicable, measures
and features to comply with flood hazard and flood insurance
regulations.
(2) An area map showing the parcel under consideration for site plan
review and all properties, subdivisions, streets, rights-of-way,
easements and other pertinent features.
B. A topographic or contour map of adequate scale and detail to show site
topography may be required by the Planning Board.
§ 109-9 RECORDS § 109-11
103:141
A. The title of the drawing, including the name and address of the
applicant and of the person responsible for preparation of such
drawing.
B. The North arrow, scale and date.
C. The boundaries of the property plotted to scale.
D. Existing buildings.
E. A grading and drainage plan, showing existing and proposed contours,
rock outcrops, depth to bedrock, soil characteristics and watercourses.
F. The location, design, type of construction, proposed use and exterior
dimensions of all buildings.
G. The location, design and type of construction of all parking and truck
loading areas, showing access and egress.
H. Provisions for pedestrian access.
I. The location of outdoor storage, if any.
J. The location, design and construction materials of all existing or
proposed site improvements, including drains, culverts, retaining walls
and fences.
K. A description of the method of sewage disposal and the location, design
and construction materials of such facilities.
L. A description of the method of securing public water and the location,
design and construction materials of such facilities.
M. The location of fire and other emergency zones, including the location
of fire hydrants.
N. The location, design and construction materials of all energy
distribution facilities, including electrical, gas and solar energy.
O. The location, size and design and type of construction of all proposed
signs.
P. The location and proposed development of all buffer areas, including
existing vegetative cover.
Q. The location and design of outdoor lighting facilities.
R. The identification of the location and amount of building area proposed
for retail sales or similar commercial activity.
S. The general landscaping plan and planting schedule.
T. An estimated project construction schedule.
U. A record of application for and status of all necessary permits from
other governmental bodies.
§ 109-11 YORKVILLE CODE § 109-11
103:142
§ 109-11.1. Stormwater pollution prevention plan required. [Added
11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of Chapter 114, Stormwater Management, shall be required
for site plan approval. The SWPPP shall meet the performance and design
criteria and standards in Chapter 114. The approved site plan shall be
consistent with the provisions of Chapter 114.
§ 109-12. Fees. [Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 109-13. Expenses incurred by Planning Board.
Cost incurred by the Planning Board for consultation fees or other
extraordinary expenses in connection with the review of a proposed site
plan shall be charged to the applicant.
V. Identification of any permits from other governmental bodies required
for the project's execution.
W. Other elements integral to the proposed development as may be
considered necessary in the particular case by the Planning Board.
A. An application for site plan conference shall be accompanied by a fee of
$50.
B. An application for site plan review shall be accompanied by a fee of
$200.
§ 109-11 RECORDS § 109-13
103:143

ARTICLE IV
Review Standards
§ 109-14. Considerations included in review.
The Planning Board's review of the site plan shall include, as appropriate,
but is not limited to the following general considerations:
A. The location, arrangement, size, design and general site compatibility
of buildings, lighting and signs.
B. The adequacy and arrangement of vehicular traffic access and
circulation, including intersections, road widths, pavement surfaces,
dividers and traffic controls.
C. The location, arrangement, appearance and sufficiency of off-street
parking and loading.
D. The adequacy and arrangement of pedestrian traffic access and
circulation, walkway structures, control of intersections with vehicular
traffic and overall pedestrian convenience.
E. The adequacy of stormwater and drainage facilities.
F. The adequacy of water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
G. The adequacy, type and arrangement of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping constituting a visual and/or noise buffer between the
applicant's and adjoining lands, including the maximum retention of
existing vegetation.
H. The adequacy of fire lanes and other emergency zones and the
provision of fire hydrants.
I. Special attention to the adequacy and impact of structures, roadways
and landscaping in areas with susceptibility to ponding, flooding and/or
erosion.
J. Snow removal provisions.
K. The overall impact on the neighborhood, including compatibility of
design considerations.
§ 109-14 RECORDS § 109-14
103:145

ARTICLE V
Public Hearing; Decisions
§ 109-15. Public hearing.
The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on the site plan if
considered desirable by a majority of its members. Such hearing shall be
held within 60 days of the receipt of application for site plan review and
shall be advertised in the Village's official newspaper or, if there is none, in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Village at least five days before
the public hearing.
§ 109-16. Planning Board decisions; extension of time period.
The Planning Board shall act on the site plan no later than the second
regular meeting after submission, or if a public hearing is held, within 60
days of public hearing the Planning Board shall render a decision. In its
decision, the Planning Board may approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove the site plan. The time period in which the Planning Board must
render its decision can be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and
the Planning Board.
A. Approval. Upon approval of the site plan and payment by the applicant
of all fees and reimbursable costs due the Village, the Planning Board
shall endorse its approval on a copy of the site plan and shall
immediately file it and a written statement of approval with the Village
Clerk and the Code Enforcement Officer. A copy of the written
statement of approval shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
B. Approval with modifications. The Planning Board may conditionally
approve the final site plan. A copy of the written statement containing
the modifications required by the conditional approval will be mailed to
the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested. After adequate
demonstration to the Planning Board that all conditions have been met
and payment by the applicant of all fees and reimbursable costs due the
Village, the Planning Board shall endorse its approval on a copy of the
site plan and shall immediately file it and a written statement of
approval with the Village Clerk and the Code Enforcement Officer. A
copy of the written statement of approval shall be mailed to the
applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested.
C. Disapproval. Upon disapproval of the site plan, the decision of the
Planning Board shall immediately be filed with the Village Clerk and the
Code Enforcement Officer and a copy thereof mailed to the applicant by
certified mail, return receipt requested, along with the Planning
Board's reasons for disapproval.
D. No action. Absence of a reply within the time frame herein specified
shall constitute approval, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall
proceed on that basis.
§ 109-15 RECORDS § 109-16
103:147

ARTICLE VI
Appeals
§ 109-17. Procedure.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning Board or any officer,
department, board or bureau of the Village may apply to the Supreme Court
for a review by a proceeding under Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and
Rules. Such proceedings shall be instituted within 30 days after the filing of
a decision in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 109-17 RECORDS § 109-17
103:149

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 109-18. Code Enforcement Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall carry out the duties assigned by local
law or by any additional regulations adopted pursuant to § 109-20 hereof.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the overall
inspection of site improvements, including coordination with the Planning
Board, and other officials and agencies, as appropriate.
§ 109-19. Adoption of further rules and regulations.
The Planning Board may, after a public hearing, adopt such further rules
and regulations as it deems reasonably necessary to carry out the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 109-20. Amendments.
All proposed amendments shall be referred to the Planning Board for a
report and recommendation thereon. The Planning Board shall submit its
report to the Village Board within 30 days after receiving such referral.
Failure of the Planning Board to report within the required time shall
be deemed to constitute a recommendation for approval of the proposed
amendment.
§ 109-21. Integration of other procedures.
Whenever the circumstances of proposed development require compliance
with this chapter and with any other local law, ordinance or requirement of
the Village, the Planning Board shall attempt to integrate, as appropriate,
site plan review as required by this chapter with the procedural and
submission requirements for such other compliance.
§ 109-22. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
Any person, corporation, partnership, association or other legal entity who,
after being notified, shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any
conditions imposed by a permit pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense
and subject to a fine of not more than $250 or by a civil penalty of $250
to be recovered by the Village in a civil action. Every such person or entity
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each week such violation,
disobedience, omission, neglect or refusal shall continue.
§ 109-18 RECORDS § 109-22
103:151

ARTICLE VIII
Performance Guaranty; Inspection
§ 109-23. Performance guaranty.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all improvements shown
on the site plan are installed or a sufficient performance guaranty has
been posted for improvements not yet completed. The sufficiency of such
performance guaranty shall be determined by the Village Board after
consultations with the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, Village
Attorney and other appropriate parties.
§ 109-24. Inspection.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the overall
inspection of site improvements, including coordination with the Planning
Board and other officials and agencies, as appropriate.
§ 109-23 RECORDS § 109-24
103:153

ARTICLE IX
Expiration
§ 109-25. Expiration of approval.
Site approval shall expire after one year of the date of the site plan if actual
construction has not begun by the applicant.
§ 109-25 RECORDS § 109-25
103:155
Chapter 113
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 109.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 118.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 109-25 YORKVILLE CODE § 109-25
103:156
ARTICLE I
Illicit Connections and Discharges
[Adopted 11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 3-2007]
§ 113-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Village of Yorkville through the regulation of
non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state
law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the SPDES
General Permit for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems. The
objectives of this article are:
§ 113-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning is stated in a
definition applicable to only a portion of this article, the following terms will
have meanings set forth below:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Activities requiring authorization under the
SPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction activity,
A. To meet the requirements of the SPDES General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges from MS4s, Permit No. GP-02-02 or as amended or revised;
B. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 since such
systems are not designed to accept, process or discharge nonstormwater
wastes;
C. To prohibit illicit connections, activities and discharges to the MS4;
D. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
article; and
E. To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater,
grease, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products,
hazardous waste, sediment and other pollutants into the MS4.
§ 113-1 RECORDS § 113-2
103:157
GP-02-01, as amended or revised. These activities include construction
projects resulting in land disturbance of one or more acres. Such activities
include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating,
and demolition.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Any drain or conveyance, whether on the
surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4,
including but not limited to:
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in § 113-5 of this article.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities requiring the SPDES permit for
discharges from industrial activities except construction, GP-98-03, as
amended or revised.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Yorkville.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man- made channels, or storm
drains):
Any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including
treated or untreated sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the MS4 and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
B.
A. Owned or operated by the Village of Yorkville;
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Which is not a combined sewer; and
Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
D.
§ 113-2 YORKVILLE CODE § 113-2
103:158
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, filter backwash, solid waste, incinerator
residue, treated or untreated sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, agricultural
waste and ballast discharged into water; which may cause or might
reasonably be expected to cause pollution of the waters of the state in
contravention of the standards.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
SPECIAL CONDITIONS —
Discharge compliance with water quality standards. The condition that
applies where a municipality has been notified that the discharge of
stormwater authorized under its MS4 permit may have caused or has
the reasonable potential to cause or contribute to the violation of
an applicable water quality standard. Under this condition, the
municipality must take all necessary actions to ensure future
discharges do not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards.
A.
303(d) listed waters. The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit
that applies where the MS4 discharges to a 303(d) listed water. Under
this condition the stormwater management program must ensure no
increase of the listed pollutant of concern to the 303(d) listed water.
B.
Total maximum daily load (TMDL) strategy. The condition in the
municipality's MS4 permit where a TMDL including requirements for
control of stormwater discharges has been approved by EPA for a
waterbody or watershed into which the MS4 discharges. If the
discharge from the MS4 did not meet the TMDL stormwater allocations
prior to September 10, 2003, the municipality was required to modify
its stormwater management program to ensure that reduction of the
pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL is achieved.
C.
The condition in the municipality's MS4 permit that applies if a TMDL
is approved in the future by EPA for any waterbody or watershed
into which an MS4 discharges. Under this condition the municipality
must review the applicable TMDL to see if it includes requirements
for control of stormwater discharges. If an MS4 is not meeting the
TMDL stormwater allocations, the municipality must, within six months
of the TMDL's approval, modify its stormwater management program to
ensure that reduction of the pollutant of concern specified in the TMDL
is achieved.
D.
§ 113-2 RECORDS § 113-2
103:159
STATE POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (SPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OFFICER (SMO) — An employee, the
municipal engineer or other public official(s) designated by the Village of
Yorkville to enforce this article. The SMO may also be designated by the
municipality to accept and review stormwater pollution prevention plans,
forward the plans to the applicable municipal board and inspect stormwater
management practices.
303(d) LIST — A list of all surface waters in the state for which beneficial
uses of the water (drinking, recreation, aquatic habitat, and industrial use)
are impaired by pollutants, prepared periodically by the Department as
required by Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. 303(d)-listed waters are
estuaries, lakes and streams that fall short of state surface water quality
standards and are not expected to improve within the next two years.
TMDL — Total maximum daily load.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD — The maximum amount of a pollutant to
be allowed to be released into a water body so as not to impair uses of the
water, allocated among the sources of that pollutant.
WASTEWATER — Water that is not stormwater, is contaminated with
pollutants and is or will be discarded.
§ 113-3. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 generated on any
developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency.
§ 113-4. Responsibility for administration.
The Stormwater Management Officer(s) [SMO(s)] shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Such powers granted
or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement official may be
delegated in writing by the SMO as may be authorized by the municipality.
§ 113-5. Discharge and connection prohibitions; exceptions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the MS4 any materials other than stormwater except
as provided in Subsection A(1). The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article, unless the Department or the
municipality has determined them to be substantial contributors of
pollutants: waterline flushing or other potable water sources,
§ 113-2 YORKVILLE CODE § 113-5
103:160
§ 113-6. Activities contaminating stormwater prohibited.
landscape irrigation or lawn watering, existing diverted stream
flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater
infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, air conditioning condensate, irrigation water, springs,
water from individual residential car washing, natural riparian
habitat or wetland flows, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges,
residential street wash water, water from fire-fighting activities,
and any other water source not containing pollutants. Such exempt
discharges shall be made in accordance with an appropriate plan
for reducing pollutants.
(2) Discharges approved in writing by the SMO to protect life or
property from imminent harm or damage, provided that such
approval shall not be construed to constitute compliance with other
applicable laws and requirements, and further provided that such
discharges may be permitted for a specified time period and under
such conditions as the SMO may deem appropriate to protect such
life and property while reasonably maintaining the purpose and
intent of this article.
(3) Dye testing in compliance with applicable state and local laws is an
allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the SMO
prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any discharge permitted under an
SPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the
Department, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to the MS4.
B. Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of connection.
C. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person
connects a line conveying sewage to the municipality's MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.
A. Activities that are subject to the requirements of this section are those
types of activities that:
§ 113-5 RECORDS § 113-6
103:161
§ 113-7. Use of best management practices to prevent, control, and
reduce stormwater pollutants.
Where the SMO has identified illicit discharges as defined in § 113-2 or
activities contaminating stormwater as defined in § 113-6, the municipality
may require implementation of best management practices (BMPs) to
control those illicit discharges and activities.
§ 113-8. Illicit discharges in emergency situations.
(1) Cause or contribute to a violation of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit.
(2) Cause or contribute to the municipality being subject to the special
conditions as defined in § 113-2 Definitions, of this article.
B. Upon notification to a person that he or she is engaged in activities that
cause or contribute to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES
permit authorization, that person shall take all reasonable actions to
correct such activities such that he or she no longer causes or
contributes to violations of the municipality's MS4 SPDES permit
authorization.
A. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at his, her or its own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the
MS4 through the use of structural and nonstructural BMPs.
B. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge as defined in § 113-2 or an activity
contaminating stormwater as defined in § 113-6, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and
nonstructural BMPs to reduce or eliminate the source of pollutant(s) to
the MS4.
C. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid SPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section.
A. The SMO may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a
person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4. The SMO shall notify the person of such
suspension within a reasonable time thereafter in writing of the reasons
for the suspension. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension
order issued in an emergency, the SMO may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or to minimize
danger to persons.
§ 113-6 YORKVILLE CODE § 113-8
103:162
§ 113-9. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity SPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the municipality prior to the allowing of discharges to the
MS4.
§ 113-10. Access to facilities; monitoring of discharges.
B. Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any persons
discharging to the municipality's MS4 in violation of this article may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The SMO will notify a violator in writing of
the proposed termination of its MS4 access and the reasons therefor.
The violator may petition the SMO for a reconsideration and hearing.
Access may be granted by the SMO if he/she finds that the illicit
discharge has ceased and the discharger has taken steps to prevent its
recurrence. Access may be denied if the SMO determines in writing
that the illicit discharge has not ceased or is likely to recur. A person
commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the
SMO.
A. Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that the SMO must
inspect to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the
authorized enforcement agency has cause to believe that there exists,
or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this article.
B. Access to facilities.
(1) The SMO shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security
measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make
the necessary arrangements to allow access to the SMO.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the SMO ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records as may be required to implement this
article.
(3) The municipality shall have the right to set up on any facility
subject to this article such devices as are necessary in the opinion
of the SMO to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's
stormwater discharge.
(4) The municipality has the right to require the facilities subject to
this article to install monitoring equipment as is reasonably
§ 113-8 RECORDS § 113-10
103:163
§ 113-11. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4, said person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such
release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence
via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous
materials, said person shall notify the municipality in person or by
telephone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed
and mailed to the municipality within three business days of the telephone
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial
or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment
shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 113-12. Enforcement; appeals of notice of violation.
necessary to determine compliance with this article. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at
its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
facility subject to this article is a violation of this article. A person
who is the operator of a facility subject to this article commits an
offense if the person denies the municipality reasonable access to
the facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by this article.
(6) If the SMO has been refused access to any part of the premises
from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, then the SMO may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Notice of violation. When the municipality's SMO finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article,
he/she may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
(1) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
§ 113-10 YORKVILLE CODE § 113-12
103:164
§ 113-13. Penalties for offenses; other remedies.
(2) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
(3) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(4) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(5) Payment of a fine; and
(6) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. If
abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall
further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore
within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator.
B. Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation
may appeal the determination of the SMO to the Village Board of
Trustees within 15 days of its issuance, which shall hear the appeal
within 30 days after the filing of the appeal, and within five days of
making its decision, file its decision in the office of the municipal clerk
and mail a copy of its decision by certified mail to the discharger.
C. Corrective measures after appeal.
(1) If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of
an appeal, within five business days of the decision of the municipal
authority upholding the decision of the SMO, then the SMO shall
request the owner's permission for access to the subject private
property to take any and all measures reasonably necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property.
(2) If refused access to the subject private property, the SMO may seek
a warrant in a court of competent jurisdiction to be authorized to
enter upon the property to determine whether a violation has
occurred. Upon determination that a violation has occurred, the
SMO may seek a court order to take any and all measures
reasonably necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. The cost of implementing and maintaining such measures
shall be the sole responsibility of the discharger.
A. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
§ 113-12 RECORDS § 113-13
103:165
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both
of which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by
a fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for
a period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for
a third or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a
period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
both. However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts
and judicial officers generally, violations of this article shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
B. Injunctive relief. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If
a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
article, the SMO may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
C. Alternative remedies.
(1) Where a person has violated a provision of this article, he/she may
be eligible for alternative remedies in lieu of a civil penalty, upon
recommendation of the Municipal Attorney and concurrence of the
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer, where:
(a) The violation was unintentional.
(b) The violator has no history of previous violations of this article.
(c) Environmental damage was minimal.
(d) The violator acted quickly to remedy violation.
(e) The violator cooperated in investigation and resolution.
(2) Alternative remedies may consist of one or more of the following:
(a) Attendance at compliance workshops.
(b) Storm drain stenciling or storm drain marking.
(c) River, stream or creek cleanup activities.
D. Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement
processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to
exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to
public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a
nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 113-13 YORKVILLE CODE § 113-13
103:166
E. Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law, and it is within the discretion of the authorized
enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies.
§ 113-13 RECORDS § 113-13
103:167
Chapter 114
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Site plan review — See Ch. 109.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 113.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 118.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 114-1. Findings of fact.
It is hereby determined that:
A. Land development activities, as defined herein, and associated
increases in site impervious cover often alter the hydrologic response of
local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, stream channel erosion, or sediment transport and deposition;
B. This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants, including siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and other
desirable species;
C. Clearing and grading during construction tends to increase soil erosion
and add to the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and
aquatic habitat;
D. Improper design and construction of stormwater management
practices can increase the velocity of stormwater runoff thereby
increasing stream bank erosion and sedimentation;
E. Impervious surfaces allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby
decreasing groundwater recharge and stream baseflow;
F. Substantial economic losses can result from these adverse impacts on
the waters of the municipality;
G. Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff
from land development activities;
H. The regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the
public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety.
I. Regulation of land development activities by means of performance
standards governing stormwater management and site design will
produce development compatible with the natural functions of a
§ 113-13 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-1
103:168
§ 114-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the
general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing within this
jurisdiction and to address the findings of fact in § 114-1 hereof. This
chapter seeks to meet those purposes by achieving the following objectives:
§ 114-3. Statutory authority.
In accordance with Article 2, § 10 of the Municipal Home Rule Law of the
State of New York, the Board of Trustees of the Village of Yorkville has the
authority to enact local laws and amend local laws and for the purpose of
promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the Village of Yorkville
and for the protection and enhancement of its physical environment. The
Board of Trustees may include in any such local law provisions for the
appointment of any municipal officer, employees, or independent contractor
to effectuate, administer and enforce such local law.
§ 114-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — The activity of an active farm including
grazing and watering livestock, irrigating crops, harvesting crops, using
land for growing agricultural products, and cutting timber for sale, but
particular site or an entire watershed and thereby mitigate the adverse
effects of erosion and sedimentation from development.
A. Meet the requirements of Minimum Measures 4 and 5 of the SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate
Stormwater Sewer Systems (MS4s), Permit No. GP-02-02;
B. Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from land development
activities, as defined herein, in order to reduce flooding, siltation,
increases in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain
the integrity of stream channels;
C. Minimize increases in pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
development activities which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
D. Minimize the total annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site during and following development to the
maximum extent practicable; and
E. Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management
practices and to ensure that these management practices are properly
maintained and eliminate threats to public safety.
§ 114-1 RECORDS § 114-4
103:169
shall not include the operation of a dude ranch or similar operation, or the
construction of new structures associated with agricultural activities.
APPLICANT — A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed
an application for a land development activity.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls
and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than 100 square feet of area.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for
general public use.
DEPARTMENT — The New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
DESIGN MANUAL — The New York State Stormwater Design Manual, most
recent version including applicable updates, that serves as the official guide
for stormwater management principles, methods and practices.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes land development activities.
EROSION CONTROL MANUAL — The most recent version of the "New York
Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control" manual,
commonly known as the "Blue Book."
GRADING — Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting
conditions thereof.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces, improvements and structures that
cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, snowmelt and water (e.g., building
rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc).
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT — A State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of
industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial
stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION — The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY — Construction activity including
clearing, grading, excavating, soil disturbance or placement of fill that
results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre, or activities
disturbing less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale, even though multiple separate and
distinct land development activities may take place at different times on
different schedules.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those
holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding
proprietary rights in the land.
§ 114-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-4
103:170
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A legally recorded document that acts as
a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
PHASING — Clearing a parcel of land in distinct pieces or parts, with the
stabilization of each piece completed before the clearing of the next.
POLLUTANT OF CONCERN — Sediment or a water quality measurement
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity or
siltation) and any other pollutant that has been identified as a cause of
impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge from the land
development activity.
PROJECT — Land development activity.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
SEDIMENT CONTROL — Measures that prevent eroded sediment from
leaving the site.
SENSITIVE AREAS — Cold water fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming
beaches, groundwater recharge areas, water supply reservoirs, habitats for
threatened, endangered or special concern species.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES GP-02-01
— A permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (SPDES) issued to developers of construction activities to regulate
disturbance of one or more acres of land.
SPDES GENERAL PERMIT FOR STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEMS GP-02-02 — A
permit under the New York State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(SPDES) issued to municipalities to regulate discharges from municipal
separate storm sewers for compliance with EPA-established water quality
standards and/or to specify stormwater control standards.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from
eroding.
STOP-WORK ORDER — An order issued which requires that all construction
activity on a site be stopped.
STORMWATER — Rainwater, surface runoff, snowmelt and drainage.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or toxicants than are found in
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural
practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff and mitigate its
adverse impacts on property, natural resources and the environment.
§ 114-4 RECORDS § 114-4
103:171
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — One or a series of stormwater
management practices installed, stabilized and operating for the purpose of
controlling stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SMPs) — Measures, either
structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective,
practical means of preventing flood damage and preventing or reducing
point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and
water bodies.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan for
controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during and after
construction activities.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK — Lakes, bays, sounds,
ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial
seas of the state of New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural
or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those
private waters that do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface
or underground waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering
the state or within its jurisdiction. Storm sewers and waste treatment
systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons which also meet the criteria
of this definition are not waters of the state. This exclusion applies only
to man-made bodies of water which neither were originally created in
waters of the state (such as a disposal area in wetlands) nor resulted from
impoundment of waters of the state.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of
water, either natural or man made, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERWAY — A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to
the public storm drain.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 114-5. Applicability; stormwater management officer.
A. No application for approval of a land development activity shall be
reviewed until the appropriate Village board has received a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with and the
NYS SPDES General Permit for Construction Activies GP-02-01 and the
specifications in this chapter and until the SWPPP has been reviewed
and approved by the DEC.
B. The municipality shall designate a Stormwater Management Officer
who shall accept all stormwater pollution prevention plans and forward
§ 114-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-5
103:172
§ 114-6. Stormwater management exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the stormwater management
requirements of this chapter.
such plans to the applicable municipal board. The Stormwater
Management Officer may:
(1) Review the plans;
(2) Upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees of the Village of
Yorkville, engage the services of a registered professional engineer
to review the plans, specifications and related documents at a cost
not to exceed a fee schedule established by said governing board;
(3) Accept the certification of a licensed professional that the plans
conform to the requirements of this chapter; or
(4) Postpone local action on the plans until such time as the applicant
has obtained all necessary permit coverage from other state and/or
federal agencies.
A. Agricultural activity as defined in this chapter.
B. Logging activity undertaken pursuant to an approved timber
management plan prepared or approved by the County Soil & Water
Conservation District or the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, except that landing areas and log haul
roads are subject to this chapter.
C. Routine maintenance activities that disturb less than five acres and are
performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or
original purpose of a stormwater management facility.
D. Repairs to any stormwater management practice or facility deemed
necessary by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
E. Any part of a subdivision if a plat for the subdivision has been approved
by the Village of Yorkville on or before the effective date of this chapter.
F. Land development activities, as defined in this chapter, for which a
building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of
this chapter.
G. Cemetery graves.
H. Installation of fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds
of posts or poles.
I. Emergency activity immediately necessary to protect life, property or
natural resources.
§ 114-5 RECORDS § 114-6
103:173
§ 114-7. Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
J. Activities of an individual engaging in home gardening by growing
flowers, vegetable and other plants primarily for use by that person and
his or her family.
K. Landscaping and horticultural activities in connection with an existing
structure.
A. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement. No application for
approval of a land development activity shall be considered until the
appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the NYS SPDES General Permit
for Construction Activities GP-02-01 and the specifications in this
chapter and until the SWPPP is reviewed and approved by the NYS
DEC.
B. Contents of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
(1) In accordance with NYS SPDES General Permit for Construction
Activities GP-02-01 and the specifications in this chapter, all
SWPPPs shall provide the following background information and
erosion and sediment controls:
(a) Background information about the scope of the project,
including location, type and size of project.
(b) Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map at a scale no smaller than one inch equals
100 feet. At a minimum, the site map should show the total site
area; all improvements; areas of disturbance; areas that will
not be disturbed; existing vegetation; on-site and adjacent offsite
surface water(s); wetlands and drainage patterns that
could be affected by the construction activity; existing and final
slopes; locations of off-site material, waste, borrow or
equipment storage areas; and location(s) of the stormwater
discharges(s);
(c) Description of the soil(s) present at the site;
(d) Construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence of
construction activities, including clearing and grubbing,
excavation and grading, utility and infrastructure installation
and any other activity at the site that results in soil
disturbance. Consistent with the New York Standards and
Specifications for Erosion and Sediment Control (Erosion
Control Manual), not more than five acres shall be disturbed at
any one time unless pursuant to an approved SWPPP.
(e) Description of the pollution prevention measures that will be
used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction
debris from becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
§ 114-6 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-7
103:174
(f) Description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on site with updates as appropriate, and a description of
controls to reduce pollutants from these materials including
storage practices to minimize exposure of the materials to
stormwater, and spill prevention and response;
(g) Temporary and permanent structural and vegetative measures
to be used for soil stabilization, runoff control and sediment
control for each stage of the project from initial land clearing
and grubbing to project close-out;
(h) A site map/construction drawing(s) specifying the location(s),
size(s) and length(s) of each erosion and sediment control
practice;
(i) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting
and sizing of any temporary sediment basins;
(j) Temporary practices that will be converted to permanent
control measures;
(k) Implementation schedule for staging temporary erosion and
sediment control practices, including the timing of initial
placement and duration that each practice should remain in
place;
(l) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of the erosion and sediment control practice;
(m) Name(s) of the receiving water(s);
(n) Delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for each
part of the site;
(o) Description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and
the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site to
the degree attainable; and
(p) Any existing data that describes the stormwater runoff at the
site.
(2) Land development activities, as defined herein, meeting Condition
"A", "B" or "C" below shall also include water quantity and water
quality controls (post-construction stormwater runoff controls) as
set forth in Subsection B(3) below as applicable:
(a) Condition A. Stormwater runoff from land development
activities discharging a pollutant of concern to either an
impaired water identified on the Department's 303(d) list of
impaired waters or a Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL)
§ 114-7 RECORDS § 114-7
103:175
designated watershed for which pollutants in stormwater have
been identified as a source of the impairment.
(b) Condition B. Stormwater runoff from land development
activities disturbing five or more acres.
(c) Condition C. Stormwater runoff from construction activity
disturbing between one and five acres of land during the
course of the project, exclusive of the construction of singlefamily
residences and construction activities at agricultural
properties.
(3) SWPPP Content Requirements for Conditions A, B and C:
(a) All information in Subsection B(1) of this section.
(b) Description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
(c) Site map/construction drawing(s) showing the specific
location(s) and size(s) of each post-construction stormwater
management practice;
(d) Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the
applicable design storms;
(e) Comparison of post-development stormwater runoff conditions
with predevelopment conditions;
(f) Dimensions, material specifications and installation details for
each post-construction stormwater management practice;
(g) Maintenance schedule to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management
practice.
(h) Maintenance easements to ensure access to all stormwater
management practices at the site for the purpose of inspection
and repair. Easements shall be recorded on the plan and shall
remain in effect with transfer of title to the property.
(i) Inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all
subsequent landowners served by the on-site stormwater
management measures in accordance with § 114-9 of this
chapter.
C. Plan certification. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a landscape
architect, certified professional or professional engineer and must be
signed by a the professional preparing the plan, who shall certify that
the design of all stormwater management practices meet the
requirements in the NYS SPDES General Permit for Construction
Activities GP-01-02 and this chapter.
§ 114-7 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-7
103:176
§ 114-8. Performance and design criteria.
All land development activities, as defined herein, shall be subject to the
following performance and design criteria:
D. Other environmental permits. The applicant shall certify that all other
applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the land
development activity prior to making application to the Village of
Yorkville.
E. Contractor certification.
(1) Each contractor and subcontractor identified in the SWPPP who
will be involved in soil disturbance and/or stormwater management
practice installation shall sign and date a copy of the following
certification statement before undertaking any land development
activity:
"I certify under penalty of law that I understand and agree to
comply with the terms and conditions of the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan. I also understand that it is unlawful for any
person to cause or contribute to a violation of water quality
standards."
(2) The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of
the site; and the date the certification is made.
(3) The certification statement(s) shall become part of the SWPPP for
the land development activity.
F. A copy of the SWPPP shall be retained at the site of the land
development activity during construction from the date of initiation of
construction activities to the date of final stabilization.
A. Technical standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
documents shall serve as the official guides and specifications for
stormwater management. Stormwater management practices that are
designed and constructed in accordance with these technical
documents shall be presumed to meet the standards imposed by this
chapter:
(1) The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual (New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation, most
current version or its successor, hereafter referred to as the Design
Manual).
(2) New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, (Empire State Chapter of the Soil and Water Conservation
Society, 2004, most current version or its successor, hereafter
referred to as the Erosion Control Manual).
§ 114-7 RECORDS § 114-8
103:177
§ 114-9. Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities.
B. Water quality standards. Any land development activity shall not cause
an increase in turbidity that will result in substantial visible contrast to
natural conditions in surface waters of the state of New York.
A. Maintenance during construction.
(1) The applicant or developer of the land development activity shall at
all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of
treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are
installed or used by the applicant or developer to achieve
compliance with the conditions of this chapter. Sediment shall be
removed from sediment traps or sediment ponds whenever their
design capacity has been reduced by 50%.
(2) The applicant or developer or their representative shall be on site
at all times when construction or grading activity takes place and
shall inspect and document the effectiveness of all erosion and
sediment control practices. Inspection reports shall be completed
every seven days and within 24 hours of any storm event producing
0.5 inch of precipitation or more. The reports shall be delivered to
the Codes Enforcement Officer and also copied to the site log book.
B. Maintenance easement(s). Prior to the issuance of any approval that
has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements, the
applicant or developer must execute a maintenance easement
agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent landowners served
by the stormwater management facility. The easement shall provide for
access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and/or a
designated representative of the Village of Yorkville to ensure that the
facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design
standards and any other provisions established by this chapter. The
easement shall be recorded by the grantor in the office of the County
Clerk after review by the counsel for the Village and acceptance by the
Planning Board.
C. Maintenance after construction. The owner or operator of permanent
stormwater management practices installed in accordance with this
chapter shall be operated and maintained to achieve the goals of this
chapter. Proper operation and maintenance also includes as a
minimum, the following:
(1) A preventive/corrective maintenance program for all critical
facilities and systems of treatment and control (or related
appurtenances) which are installed or used by the owner or
operator to achieve the goals of this chapter.
(2) Written procedures for operation and maintenance and training
new maintenance personnel.
§ 114-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-9
103:178
§ 114-10. Stormwater management inspections.
(3) Actions to ensure discharges from the SMPs shall not exceed
design criteria or cause or contribute to water quality standard
violations in accordance with § 114-8B.
D. Maintenance agreements. The Village of Yorkville shall approve a
formal maintenance agreement for stormwater management facilities
binding on all subsequent landowners and recorded in the office of the
County Clerk as a deed restriction on the property prior to final plan
approval. The maintenance agreement shall be consistent with the
terms and conditions of Schedule C of this chapter entitled Sample
Stormwater Control Facility Maintenance Agreement.26 The Village, in
lieu of a maintenance agreement, at its sole discretion may accept
dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility,
provided such facility meets all the requirements of this chapter and
includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by
easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance.
A. Inspection during construction.
(1) The Village of Yorkville Codes Enforcement Officer may choose to
require such inspections as necessary to determine compliance
with the stormwater management provisions of this chapter.
Following any such inspection, the Codes Enforcement Officer may
either approve that portion of the work completed or notify the
applicant wherein the work fails to comply with the requirements
of this chapter and the stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) as approved. So that the municipality may determine the
need for an inspection, the applicant shall notify the enforcement
official at least 48 hours before any of the following:
(a) Start of construction.
(b) Installation of sediment and erosion control measures.
(c) Completion of site clearing.
(d) Completion of rough grading.
(e) Completion of final grading.
(f) Close of the construction season.
(g) Completion of final landscaping.
(h) Successful establishment of landscaping in public areas.
(2) If any violations are found, the applicant and developer shall be
notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required
corrective actions. No further work shall be conducted except for
26.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Village offices.
§ 114-9 RECORDS § 114-10
103:179
site stabilization until any violations are corrected and all work
previously completed has received approval by the Codes
Enforcement Officer.
B. "As-built" filing requirements. The Village of Yorkville Stormwater
Management Officer is responsible for conducting inspections of
stormwater management practices (SMPs). All applicants are required
to submit to the Codes Enforcement Officer "as built" plans for any
stormwater management practices located on site after final
construction is completed. The plan must show the final design
specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be
certified by a professional engineer.
C. Inspection of stormwater facilities after project completion.
(1) Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis
after construction. The municipality may choose to conduct routine
inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon
complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of
drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of
sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of
businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual
discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a
type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause
violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or
the SPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other
agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws.
(2) Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface
water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control
facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities
and other stormwater management practices.
(3) Such inspections may be performed by officials of the municipality
or the municipality may designate an inspector required to have a
professional engineer's (PE) license or certified professional in
erosion and sediment control (CPESC) certificate. The designated
inspector shall be required to prepare and submit an inspection
report to the Village Clerk.
D. Submission of monitoring reports. The Codes Enforcement Officer may
require monitoring and reporting from entities or applicants subject to
this chapter as are necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter.
E. Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new stormwater management
facility is installed on private property or when any new connection is
made between private property and the public stormwater system, the
landowner shall grant to the Village of Yorkville the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the
purpose of inspection as specified in Subsection C above.
§ 114-10 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-11
103:180
§ 114-11. Performance guarantee; construction completion
guarantee.
§ 114-12. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
A. Construction completion guarantee. In order to ensure the full and
faithful completion of all land development activities related to
compliance with all conditions set forth by the Village of Yorkville in its
approval of land development activities, the Village may require the
applicant or developer to provide, prior to construction, a performance
bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit from an appropriate
financial or surety institution which guarantees satisfactory completion
of the project and names the Village of Yorkville as the beneficiary. The
security shall be in an amount to be determined by the Village based on
submission of final design plans, with reference to actual construction
and landscaping costs. The performance guarantee shall remain in
force until the surety is released from liability by the Village, provided
that such period shall not be less than one year from the date of final
acceptance or such other certification that the facility(ies) have been
constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications
and that a one year inspection has been conducted and the facilities
have been found to be acceptable to the Village. Per-annum interest on
cash escrow deposits shall be reinvested in the account until the surety
is released from liability.
B. Maintenance guarantee. Where stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control facilities are to be operated and maintained by the
developer or by a corporation that owns or manages a commercial or
industrial facility, the developer, prior to construction, may be required
to provide the Village of Yorkville with an irrevocable letter of credit
from an approved financial institution or surety to ensure proper
operation and maintenance of all stormwater management and erosion
control facilities both during and after construction, and until the
facilities are removed from operation. If the developer or landowner
fails to properly operate and maintain stormwater management and
erosion and sediment control facilities, the Village may draw upon the
account to cover the costs of proper operation and maintenance,
including engineering and inspection costs.
C. Recordkeeping. The Village of Yorkville may require entities subject to
this chapter to maintain records demonstrating compliance with this
chapter.
A. Notice of violation. When the Village of Yorkville determines that a land
development activity is not being carried out in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, it may issue a written notice of violation to
the landowner. The notice of violation shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the landowner, developer or applicant;
§ 114-11 RECORDS § 114-12
103:181
(2) The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
(3) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(4) A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the land
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
(5) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(6) A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days
of service of notice of violation.
B. Stop-work orders. The Village of Yorkville may issue a stop-work order
for violations of this chapter. Persons receiving a stop-work order shall
be required to halt all land development activities, except those
activities that address the violations leading to the stop-work order. The
stop-work order shall be in effect until the Village confirms that the land
development activity is in compliance and the violation has been
satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a stop-work order in a
timely manner may result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in
accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter.
C. Violations. Any land development activity that is commenced or is
conducted contrary to this chapter, may be restrained by injunction or
otherwise abated in a manner provided by law.
D. Penalties. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for
conviction of a first offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of
which were committed within a period of five years, punishable by a
fine not less than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third
or subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of
five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purposes of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this chapter shall be deemed
misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued
violation shall constitute a separate additional violation.
E. Withholding of certificate of occupancy. If any building or land
development activity is installed or conducted in violation of this
chapter, the Codes Enforcement Officer may prevent the occupancy of
said building or land.
§ 114-12 YORKVILLE CODE § 114-12
103:182
§ 114-13. Fees for services.
The Village of Yorkville may require any person undertaking land
development activities regulated by this chapter to pay reasonable costs at
prevailing rates for review of SWPPPs, inspections, or SMP maintenance
performed by the Village or performed by a third party for the Village.
Chapter 115
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties for offenses — See Ch. 1, § 1-10.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 38.
Dogs at large on streets — See Ch. 58.
Littering — See Ch. 82.
Parades — See Ch. 89.
Skateboards and roller blades — See Ch. 111.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 118.
Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 127.
F. Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its
undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Village of Yorkville may take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon
the property until paid.
§ 114-12 RECORDS § 114-13
103:183

ARTICLE I
Use of Sidewalks
[Adopted 5-23-1917]
§ 115-1. Use of sidewalks by certain vehicles prohibited. [Amended
3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
No person shall ride or drive any bicycle, skateboard, automobile,
snowmobile, motorcycle, dirt bike, wagon or other vehicle upon or along
any sidewalk within the limits of the village.
§ 115-1 RECORDS § 115-1
103:185

ARTICLE II
Street Trees
[Adopted 10-7-1930]
§ 115-2. Approval required for planting. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
No person shall plant any tree between the curbline and street line in the
Village of Yorkville unless of a species approved by the Board of Trustees.
§ 115-2 RECORDS § 115-2
103:187

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 11-19-1940; amended in its entirety 10-3-2017 by L.L. No.
2-2017]
§ 115-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to preserve the public peace and good order in
the Village, and to contribute to the public welfare, safety and good order
of its people and to contribute to the safe conveyance of its people over the
streets and sidewalks of the Village by establishing certain regulations for
the removal of snow and ice from the streets and sidewalks of the Village
that are consistent with the rights and privileges of other residents of the
Village.
§ 115-4. Duty of property owner and occupant.
Every owner of every parcel of real estate adjoining a public sidewalk,
whether the parcel of real estate is occupied by a structure or not, must
keep the sidewalk adjoining the property free from snow and ice for the full
paved width of the sidewalk.
§ 115-4.1. Time limit.
Snow and ice must be removed within 24 hours after the end of a snowfall.
In addition, sidewalks in front of commercial establishments and
commercial parking lots must be kept free of snow and ice at all times
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
§ 115-4.2. Severe icing.
In case snow and ice on any sidewalk is frozen so hard that it cannot be
removed without damage to the sidewalk, the owner must, within the time
specified in § 115-4.1, cover the sidewalk with ashes, sand, sawdust or other
suitable material, so that it is no longer dangerous to life and limb. As soon
as practical thereafter, the sidewalk must be completely cleared of snow, ice
and other materials strewn thereon, as provided in this article.
§ 115-4.3. Removal by Village.
Whenever the owner of a. parcel of real estate adjoining a public sidewalk
fails to remove the snow and ice from such sidewalk adjoining such property
within the time specified in this article or within 24 hours after notice by
the Superintendent of Public Works to remove same, the Superintendent of
Public Works may remove the snow or ice from the sidewalk and notify the
Village Clerk of the expense incurred by the amount of labor, equipment and
Materials used. The charge may not be less than $100 and may be up to the
equivalent of one's hour benefitted wage for the highest paid hourly Village
Highway employee times hours spent clearing the walks.
§ 115-3 RECORDS § 115-4.4
103:189
§ 115-4.4. Collection of costs for removal by Village.
The Village Clerk must promptly present to the owner of each parcel a bill
for the removal of snow and ice as certified by the Superintendent of Public
Works. If not paid within 30 days, the cost thereof may be assessed against
the property, added to the ensuing tax bill and become a lien thereon,
collectible in the same manner as delinquent Village taxes.
§ 115-4.5. Snow, ice and water falling from buildings.
The owners of buildings adjacent to public sidewalks must take measures to
protect the public from falling snow, ice or water from such buildings.
§ 115-4.6. Depositing on streets prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation may deposit, throw, place or strew, or cause
to be deposited, thrown, placed or strewn, any snow or ice upon any street,
avenue or roadway within the Village.
§ 115-4.7. Placing of snow and ice on another's property prohibited.
No person, firm, corporation, property owner or occupant may remove snow
or ice from any parcel of real estate and place it upon another parcel of
real estate without the express permission of the owner of the parcel of real
estate upon which the snow or ice is to be placed.
§ 115-4.8. Penalties for offenses.
Any person, firm or corporation that violates any section of this article, upon
conviction thereof, is subject to a fine of $100 for each offense. Each day
that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
§ 115-4.4 YORKVILLE CODE § 115-4.8
103:190
ARTICLE IV
Street Excavations
[Adopted 6-13-1989 as L.L. No. 3-1989]
§ 115-5. Permit required; fee. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
No person, firm or corporation shall open or excavate in any village street
without a permit therefor. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees,27 shall be paid in cash, certified check
or bank draft or money order, payable to the Village of Yorkville, for each
street cut made to secure the permit.
§ 115-6. Cash deposits or bonds.
§ 115-7. Right of village to make repairs.
If repairs to the streets are not done in a proper manner and are not
certified as being proper by the Village Engineer or Village Highway
Superintendent, then the village, upon giving written notice to the
contractor, shall have the right to make repairs and use the escrow money
for said repairs.
§ 115-8. Permit application.
The permit application shall include the proper mailing address of the party
securing the permit, and this address shall be used by the village for all
correspondence to the party requesting the permit.
A. A cash deposit (including certified check or bank draft or money order)
or bond in the amount of $500 for all cuts, except those streets in
Subsection B, to be paid to the village and held in escrow for a period of
up to one year, shall also be required.
B. A cash deposit (including certified check or bank draft or money order)
or bond in the amount of $1,000 shall be paid to the village and held in
escrow for a period of up to one year for any street cuts in Whitesboro
Street and Russell Avenue and Fairview Avenue (certain locations).
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. A140, Fees.
§ 115-5 RECORDS § 115-8
103:191

ARTICLE V
Block Parties
[Adopted 3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
§ 115-9. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARTY — A neighborhood block party, celebration or event, but shall not
include a garage sale, yard sale, bazaar, rummage sale or other similar
activity having the principal purpose of fundraising for an individual or an
organization, nor shall it include a political meeting or rally, a carnival or
theatrical or musical performances, such as rock concerts or similar events.
STREET — A village street, highway or road.
§ 115-10. Permit required for temporary blocking of street.
The Board of Trustees or its designee shall be authorized to issue a permit
for the temporary blocking of a street for the purpose of holding a party.
An application for such permit shall be filed with the Board at least 10 days
before the commencement of such party. Such application shall contain at
least the following information: the name and address of the applicant; the
name of the street or streets and a description of the portions thereof to be
blocked; a description of the specific party to be held; and the date and the
hours thereof. The application may require such additional information as
the Board of Trustees shall prescribe by resolution.
§ 115-11. Issuance of permit; fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees,28 which fee shall not be refundable
in the event that the permit is denied. The permit shall be granted by
the Board of Trustees upon determining that the party is authorized by
this Article. The permit shall be denied if the Board finds that blocking
the street or portion thereof on the date requested in the application will
unduly interfere with the flow of vehicular traffic or upon determining that
the party is not authorized under this Article. The Board shall advise the
applicant, in writing, of the reason for denial of the application. The Board
of Trustees shall have the authority to waive the fee if the application is
from a nonprofit or charitable organization.
§ 115-12. Date and hours to be specified.
A permit issued pursuant to this Article shall be valid only for the date and
the hours specified thereon.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. A140, Fees.
§ 115-9 RECORDS § 115-13
103:193
§ 115-13. Removal of debris.
The applicant shall be responsible for removal of litter, debris and other
materials from the street or portion thereof used for the party which is
attributable to or caused by the party.
§ 115-14. Obstacles.
A street or portion thereof blocked off for a party shall not be obstructed
by obstacles which cannot be readily moved to allow emergency and hazard
vehicles to enter it in response to an emergency.
§ 115-13 YORKVILLE CODE § 115-14
103:194
ARTICLE VI
Sidewalk Replacement Program
[Adopted 7-18-1994]
§ 115-15. Funding; lottery to allocate funds.
§ 115-16. Program for replacement sidewalks only.
This program will include only sidewalk construction, that is, the
replacement of sidewalks in place at the time that this program goes into
effect. Construction of new sidewalks, that is installing sidewalks where
at this time no sidewalks exist, may be undertaken at a later time. The
Sidewalk Construction Program will be amended at that time.
§ 115-17. Inspection of sidewalk.
§ 115-18. Standard specifications; permit.
The Highway Superintendent will issue a set of Standard Specifications
of the Village of Yorkville and a permit to the homeowner. The permit
will be signed by the Highway Superintendent and the homeowner. The
homeowner will retain one copy of the permit.
§ 115-19. Performance of work.
The work may be done by a contractor or the homeowner, as long as the
specifications are met.
§ 115-20. Confirmation of measurements; certification of work.
The Highway Superintendent will confirm the measurements and will
certify that the work has been done to his satisfaction.
A. A definite set amount of funds will be included in each yearly budget to
finance the Sidewalk Construction Program. Only the amount budgeted
each year will be expended on this program.
B. Depending on the number of residents requesting to participate in this
program, the order of allotment of funds will be determined each year.
If the number of applicants exceeds the allotted funds for that year, a
lottery format will be used. This determination will be left to the
discretion of the Village Board each year.
A. A request shall be made to the village, at which time, the Highway
Superintendent will inspect the sidewalk to be replaced and will make a
determination as to the number of square feet of sidewalk that need
replacement.
B. The homeowner and the Highway Superintendent must agree on the
number of square feet of sidewalk which will be replaced.
§ 115-15 RECORDS § 115-21
103:195
§ 115-21. Completion of work; forfeit of permit.
All work must be done within 30 days of the issuance of the permit. If not
done within 30 days, the homeowner will forfeit his permit.
§ 115-22. Claim for payment.
§ 115-23. Reimbursement rate. [Amended 5-25-2016 by L.L. No.
7-2016]
When all requirements are met, the homeowner will be reimbursed at the
rate of $3.50 per square foot for the construction of replaced sidewalk.
§ 115-24. Construction period.
§ 115-25. Preference of applications.
Applications which may not be successful in the lottery, if that is the case,
or submitted too late for construction to be done in the current year will be
given preference the following year.
A. A Village of Yorkville claim must be filed within 30 days of completion of
the replacement of the sidewalk.
B. Only the specified Village of Yorkville claim will be accepted for
payment. This claim must be accompanied by the paid invoice from the
Contractor or supplier of the material used. Signatures of the
contractor and the homeowner must be certified by a notary public.
C. This claim must also be certified by the Highway Superintendent as to
his satisfaction of the work done and the number of square feet of
replacement sidewalk authorized in the permit.
A. The period of construction in this program will be from May 1 through
September 30 of each year. No claims will be honored for sidewalk
replacement work done after September 30 of each year.
B. Applications for this program may be submitted at any time, however
the cutoff date for work to be done in the current year's construction
will be July 30 of each year.
§ 115-21 YORKVILLE CODE § 115-25
103:196
Chapter 118
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 23.
Building construction — See Ch. 46.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
70.
Storm sewers — See Ch. 113.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 114.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 115-25 RECORDS § 115-25
103:197

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 118-1. Authority to approve plats. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
By the authority of the resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village
of Yorkville, New York, adopted on February 8, 1966, pursuant to the
provisions of Article 7 of the Village Law of the State of New York, the
Planning Board of the Village of Yorkville, New York, is authorized and
empowered to approve plats showing lots, blocks or sites, with or without
streets or highways, to approve the development of entirely or partially
undeveloped plats already filed in the office of the Clerk of the county and
to conditionally approve preliminary plats within the Village of Yorkville.
§ 118-2. Policy.
It is declared to be the policy of the Planning Board to consider land
subdivision plats as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient and economical
development of the Village. This means, among other things, that the site
can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril
from fire, flood or other menace; that proper provision shall be made for
drainage, water supply, sewerage and other needed improvements; that all
proposed lots shall be so laid out and of such size as to be in harmony with
the development pattern of the neighboring properties; that the proposed
streets shall compose a convenient system conforming to the Official Map
and shall be properly related to the proposals shown on the Master Plan
and shall be of such width, grade and location as to accommodate the
prospective traffic, to facilitate fire protection and to provide access of firefighting
equipment to buildings; and that proper provision shall be made for
open spaces for parks and playgrounds.
§ 118-3. Title; approval and adoption.
In order that land subdivisions may be made in accordance with this policy,
these regulations, which shall be known as and which may be cited as the
"Village of Yorkville Subdivision Regulations," have been approved by the
Board of Trustees on May 6, 1969, and adopted by the Village Planning
Board on May 15, 1969.
§ 118-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein are
defined as follows:
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots
§ 118-1 RECORDS § 118-4
103:199
or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of municipal
facilities.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive plan, prepared by the Planning Board
pursuant to § 7-722 of the Village Law, which indicates the general locations
recommended for various functional classes of public works, places and
structures and for general physical development of the Village, and includes
any unit or part of such plan separately prepared and any amendment to
such plan or parts therein.[Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than four
lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road
or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and not
in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan, Official Map,
Chapter 135, Zoning, or these regulations.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Village Board of Trustees
pursuant to § 7-724 of the Village Law showing streets, highways, parks
and drainage, both existing and proposed.[Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
PLANNING BOARD or BOARD — The Planning Board of the Village of
Yorkville.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A drawing or drawings clearly marked "preliminary
plat," showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, as specified
in § 118-23, submitted to the Planning Board for purposes of consideration
prior to submission of the plat in final form and of sufficient detail to apprise
the Planning Board of the layout of the proposed subdivision.
SKETCH PLAN — A sketch of a proposed subdivision showing the
information specified in § 118-21 to enable the subdivider to save time and
expense in reaching general agreement with the Planning Board as to the
form of the layout and the objectives of these regulations.
STREET — Includes streets, roads, avenues, lanes or other traffic ways
between right-of-way lines.
STREET PAVEMENT — The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway
used by vehicular traffic.
MAJOR STREET — A street which serves or is designed to serve heavy
flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for traffic between
communities and/or other heavy-traffic-generating areas.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which serves or is designed to serve
as a trafficway for a neighborhood or as a feeder to a major street.
B.
MINOR STREET — A street intended to serve primarily as an access to
abutting properties.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A street or a portion of a street with only
one vehicular traffic outlet and having a turning loop or similar
arrangement at the closed end.
D.
§ 118-4 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-4
103:200
STREET WIDTH — The width of right-of-way, measured at right angles to
the center line of the street.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association
who shall lay out any subdivision or part thereof, as defined herein, either
for himself or others.
SUBDIVISION — The division of any parcel of land into two or more lots,
plats, sites or other divisions of land, with or without streets or highways,
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or
building development, and shall include resubdivision, in whole or in part,
of any plat, filed or unfiled, which is entirely or partially undeveloped.
SUBDIVISION PLAT or FINAL PLAT — A drawing, in final form, showing a
proposed subdivision, containing all information or detail required by law
and by these regulations to be presented to the Planning Board for approval
and which, if approved, may be duly filed or recorded by the applicant in
the office of the County Clerk or Registrar.
VILLAGE ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer designated by the
Village.
§ 118-4 RECORDS § 118-4
103:201

ARTICLE II
Plat Submission and Approval Procedures
§ 118-5. Approval required.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed to be made and before any
contract for the sale of or any offer to sell any lots in such subdivision
or any part thereof is made and before any permit for the erection of a
structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider
or his duly authorized agent shall apply, in writing, for approval of such
proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures.
§ 118-6. Sketch plans.
§ 118-7. Minor subdivisions.
A. Submission of sketch plan. Any owner of land shall, prior to subdividing
or resubdividing land, submit to the Secretary of the Planning Board, at
least 10 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board, two copies of a
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision, which shall comply with the
requirements of § 118-21, for the purpose of classification and
preliminary discussion.
B. Discussion of requirements and classification.
(1) The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend
the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the requirements of
these regulations for street improvements, drainage, sewerage,
water supply, fire protection and similar aspects as well as the
availability of existing services and other pertinent information.
(2) A determination is to be made at this time by the Planning Board as
to whether the proposed subdivision is a minor or major
subdivision, as defined in these regulations. The Board may
require, however, when it deems it necessary for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare, that a minor subdivision
comply with some or all of the requirements specified for major
subdivisions. If the sketch plan is classified as a minor subdivision,
the subdivider shall then comply with the procedure outlined in
§§ 118-7 and 118-11. If it is classified as a major subdivision, the
subdivider shall then comply with the procedures outlined in
§§ 118-8, 118-9, 118-10 and 118-11.
C. Study of sketch plan. The Planning Board shall determine whether the
sketch plan meets the purposes of these regulations and shall, where it
deems it necessary, make specific recommendations, in writing, to be
incorporated by the applicant in the next submission to the Planning
Board.
A. Application and fee.
§ 118-5 RECORDS § 118-7
103:203
§ 118-8. Preliminary plat for major subdivisions.
(1) Within six months after classification of the sketch plan as a minor
subdivision by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall submit an
application for approval of a minor subdivision plat. The plat shall
conform to the layout shown on the sketch plan plus any
recommendations made by the Planning Board. Said application
shall also conform to the requirements listed in § 118-22A. Failure
to comply with any of the above will require resubmission of the
sketch plan to the Planning Board for reconsideration.
(2) All applications for plat approval for minor subdivisions shall be
accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Trustees.29 [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
B. Number of copies. Three copies of the minor subdivision plat shall be
presented to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 10 days prior
to a scheduled monthly meeting of the Planning Board.
C. Subdivider to attend Planning Board meeting. The subdivider, or his
duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning
Board to discuss the minor subdivision plat.
D. When officially submitted. The time of submission of the minor
subdivision plat shall be considered to be the date of the regular
monthly meeting of the Planning Board, at least 10 days prior to which
the complete application and exhibits for plat approval shall have been
filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board.
E. Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board
within 30 days of the time of submission of the minor subdivision plat
for approval. Said hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village at least five days before such hearing.
[Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
F. Action on minor subdivision plat. The Planning Board shall, within 30
days of the date of the public hearing, approve, modify and approve or
disapprove the minor subdivision plat. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L.
No. 1-1993]
A. Application. Prior to the filing of an application for the approval of a
major subdivision plat, the subdivider shall file an application for the
consideration of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, in the
form described in § 118-23 hereof. The preliminary plat shall comply
with the requirements set forth in the provisions of § 118-23, except
where a waiver may be specifically authorized by the Planning Board.
B. Number of copies. Three copies of the preliminary plat shall be
presented to the Secretary of the Planning Board at least 10 days prior
to a regular monthly meeting of the Planning Board.
29.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 118-7 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-8
103:204
C. Subdivider to attend Planning Board meeting. The subdivider, or his
duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning
Board to discuss the preliminary plat.
D. Study of preliminary plat. The Planning Board shall study the
preliminary plat, taking into consideration the requirements of the
community and the best use of the land being subdivided. Particular
attention shall be given to the arrangement, location and width of
streets, their relation to the topography of the land, water supply,
sewage disposal, drainage, lot sizes and arrangement, the future
development of adjoining lands as yet unsubdivided and the
requirements of the Master Plan, the Official Map and Chapter 135,
Zoning.
E. When officially submitted. The time of submission of the preliminary
plat shall be considered to be the date of the regular monthly meeting
of the Planning Board, at least 10 days prior to which the completed
application and exhibits for conditional approval of the preliminary plat
shall have been filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board.
F. Conditional approval of the preliminary plat.
(1) Within 60 days after the time of submission of a preliminary plat,
the Planning Board shall take action to conditionally approve, with
or without modifications, or disapprove such preliminary plat, and
the basis of any modification required or the basis for disapproval
shall be stated upon the records of the Planning Board. Failure of
the Planning Board to act within such sixty-day period shall
constitute a conditional approval of the preliminary plat.
[Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
(2) When granting conditional approval of a preliminary plat, the
Planning Board shall state the conditions of such approval, if any,
with respect to:
(a) The specific changes which it will require in the preliminary
plat.
(b) The character and extent of the required improvements for
which waivers may have been requested and which, in its
opinion, may be waived without jeopardy to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
(c) The amount of improvement or the amount of all bonds
therefor which it will require as prerequisite to the approval of
the subdivision plat.
(3) The action of the Planning Board, plus any conditions attached
thereto, shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary plat. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one retained by the
Planning Board and one forwarded to the Board of Trustees.
Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
§ 118-8 RECORDS § 118-8
103:205
§ 118-9. Final plat for major subdivisions.
approval of the subdivision plat, but rather it shall be deemed an
expression of approval of the design submitted on the preliminary
plat as a guide to the preparation of the plat which will be
submitted for approval of the Planning Board and for recording
upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the
conditions of the conditional approval, if any.
(4) Prior to approval of the subdivision plat, the Planning Board may
require additional changes as a result of further study of the
subdivision in final form or as a result of new information obtained
at the public hearing.
A. Application for approval and fee. The subdivider shall, within six
months after the conditional approval of the preliminary plat, file with
the Planning Board an application for approval of the subdivision plat in
final form, using the approved application blank available from the
Secretary of the Planning Board. All applications for plat approval for
major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by
resolution of the Board of Trustees.30 If the final plat is not submitted
within six months after the conditional approval of the preliminary plat,
the Planning Board may require resubmission of the preliminary and
final plats. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
B. Number of copies. A subdivider intending to submit a proposed
subdivision plat for the approval of the Planning Board shall provide the
Secretary of the Board with a copy of the application and three copies
(one copy in ink on linen) of the plat, the original and one true copy of
all offers of cession, covenants and agreements and two prints of all
construction drawings at least 10 days in advance of the regular
monthly Planning Board meeting at which it is to be officially submitted.
C. When officially submitted. The time of submission of the subdivision
plat shall be considered to be the date of the regular monthly meeting
of the Planning Board, at least 10 days prior to which the complete
application and exhibits for approval of the subdivision plat shall have
been filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board. In addition, if the
applicant elects to construct any or all required improvements, as
specified in § 118-10A(1)(b), the Village Engineer shall file a certificate
with the Board of Trustees stating that these improvements have been
satisfactorily installed before the subdivision plat shall be officially
accepted.
D. Endorsement of state and county agencies. Water and sewer facility
proposals contained in the subdivision plat shall be properly endorsed
and approved by the Village Engineer and the State Department of
Health. Applications for approval of plans for sewer or water facilities
will be filed by the subdivider with all necessary Village, county and
30.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the Office of the Village Clerk.
§ 118-8 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-9
103:206
§ 118-10. Required improvements.
state agencies. Endorsement and approval by the State Department of
Health shall be secured by the subdivider before official submission of
the subdivision plat.
E. Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board
within 30 days after the time of submission of the subdivision plat for
approval. This hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village, and notice shall be posted at three prominent
places in the Village at least five days before such hearing. [Amended
3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
F. Action on proposed subdivision plat. The Planning Board shall, within
30 days of the date of the public hearing on the subdivision plat,
approve, modify and approve or disapprove the subdivision plat.
However, the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the authorized
officers of the Planning Board for recording until the subdivider has
complied with the provisions of § 118-10 of this chapter. [Amended
3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993]
A. Improvements and performance bond.
(1) Before the Planning Board grants final approval of the subdivision
plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedure set forth in either
Subsection A(1)(a) or (b) below:
(a) The subdivider shall either file with the Village Clerk a certified
check to cover the full cost of the required improvements or a
performance bond to cover the full cost of the required
improvements. Any such bond shall comply with the
requirements of § 7-736 of the Village Law and shall be
satisfactory to the Board of Trustees and Village Attorney as to
form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety. A period of
one year, or such other period as the Planning Board may
determine appropriate, but not to exceed three years shall be
set forth in the bond, within which required improvements
must be completed. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
(b) The subdivider shall complete all required improvements to
the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees, which shall file with
the Planning Board a letter signifying the satisfactory
completion of all improvements required by the Board. For any
required improvements not so completed, the subdivider shall
file with the Village Clerk a bond or certified check covering
the costs of such improvements and the cost of satisfactorily
installing any improvement not approved by the Board of
Trustees. Any such bond shall be satisfactory to the Board of
Trustees as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and
surety.
§ 118-9 RECORDS § 118-10
103:207
§ 118-11. Filing of approved plat.
(2) The required improvements shall not be considered to be
completed until the installation of the improvements has been
approved by the Board of Trustees and a map satisfactory to the
Planning Board has been submitted indicating the location of
monuments marking all underground utilities as actually installed.
If the subdivider completes all required improvements according to
Subsection A(1)(b), then said map shall be submitted prior to
endorsement of the plat by the appropriate Planning Board officer.
However, if the subdivider elects to provide a bond or certified
check for all required improvements as specified in Subsection
A(1)(a), such bond shall not be released until such map is
submitted.
B. Modification of design of improvements. If, at any time before or during
the construction of the required improvements, it is demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the Board of Trustees that unforeseen conditions
make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such
required improvements, the Board of Trustees may authorize
modifications, provided that these modifications are within the spirit
and intent of the Planning Board's approval and do not extend to a
waiver or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements
required by the Board. The Board of Trustees shall issue any
authorization under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of
such authorization to the Planning Board at its next regular meeting.
C. Inspection of improvements. At least five days prior to commencing
construction of required improvements, the subdivider shall notify the
Board of Trustees, in writing, of the time when he proposes to
commence construction of such improvements so that the Board of
Trustees may arrange for inspections to be made to assure that all
Village specifications and requirements shall be met during the
construction of required improvements and to assure the satisfactory
completion of improvements and utilities required by the Planning
Board.
D. Proper installation of improvements. If the Village Engineer finds, upon
inspection of the improvements performed before the expiration date of
the performance bond, that any of the required improvements have not
been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications filed by
the subdivider, he shall so report to the Board of Trustees, Building
Inspector and Planning Board. The Board of Trustees then shall notify
the subdivider and, if necessary, the bonding company and take all
necessary steps to preserve the Village's rights under the bond. No plat
shall be approved by the Planning Board as long as the subdivider is in
default on a previously approved plat.
A. Final approval and filing. Upon completion of the requirements in
§ 118-7 or §§ 118-9 and 118-10 above and notation to that effect upon
the subdivision plat, it shall be deemed to have final approval and shall
§ 118-10 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-11
103:208
§ 118-12. Acceptance of streets or recreation areas.
be properly signed by the appropriate officer of the Planning Board
(Chairman or Acting Chairman) and may be filed by the applicant in
the office of the County Clerk. Any subdivision plat not so filed or
recorded within 90 days of the date upon which such plat is approved or
considered approved by reason of the failure of the Planning Board to
act shall become null and void, unless the particular circumstances of
said applicant warrant the Planning Board to grant an extension, which
shall not exceed two additional periods of 90 days.
B. Plat void if revised after approval. No changes, erasures, modifications
or revisions shall be made in any subdivision plat after approval has
been given by the Planning Board and endorsed, in writing, on the plat
unless said plat is first resubmitted to the Planning Board and such
Board approves any modifications. In the event that any such
subdivision plat is recorded without complying with this requirement,
the same shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall institute
proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the County
Clerk.
A. Public acceptance of streets. The approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of any
acceptance by the Village of any street, easement or other open space
shown on such subdivision plat.
B. Ownership and maintenance of recreation areas. When a park,
playground or other recreation area shall have been shown on a plat,
the approval of said plat shall not constitute an acceptance by the
Village of such area. The Planning Board shall require the plat to be
endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. The Planning Board may
also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and
the Board of Trustees covering future deed and title, dedication and
provision for the cost of grading, development, equipment and
maintenance of any such recreation area.
§ 118-11 RECORDS § 118-12
103:209

ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 118-13. Interpretation of standards.
In considering applications for subdivision of land, the Planning Board shall
be guided by the standards set forth hereinafter. Said standards shall be
considered to be minimum requirements and shall be waived by the Board
only under circumstances set forth in Article V herein.
§ 118-14. General requirements.
§ 118-15. Street layout.
A. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that
it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or
peril from fire, flood or other menace.
B. Conformity to Official Map and Master Plan. Subdivisions shall conform
to the Official Map of the Village and shall be in harmony with the
Master Plan.
C. Specifications for required improvements. All required improvements
shall be constructed or installed to conform to the Village
specifications, which may be obtained from the Village Clerk.
A. Width, location and construction. Streets shall be of sufficient width,
suitably located and adequately constructed to conform to the Master
Plan and to accommodate the prospective traffic and afford access for
fire-fighting, snow-removal and other road-maintenance equipment.
The arrangement of streets shall be such as to cause no undue hardship
to adjoining properties and shall be coordinated so as to compose a
convenient system.
B. Arrangement.
(1) The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the
continuation of principal streets of any adjoining subdivision and
for proper projection of principal streets into adjoining properties
which are not yet subdivided in order to make possible necessary
fire protection, movement of traffic and the construction or
extension, presently or when later required, of needed utilities and
public services, such as sewers and water and drainage facilities.
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, topographic or other
conditions make such continuance undesirable or impracticable,
the above conditions may be modified.
(2) Subdivisions containing 20 lots or more shall have at least two
street connections with existing public streets or streets shown on
the Official Map or streets on an approved subdivision plat for
which a bond has been filed.
§ 118-13 RECORDS § 118-15
103:211
C. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by
through traffic will be discouraged.
D. Special treatment along arterial streets. When a subdivision abuts or
contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Board may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting
contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep
lots with rear service alleys or such other treatment as may be
necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
E. Provision for future resubdivision. Where a tract is subdivided into lots
substantially larger than the minimum size required in the zoning
district in which a subdivision is located, the Board may require that
streets and lots be laid out so as to permit future resubdivision in
accordance with the requirements contained in these regulations.
F. Dead-end streets. The creation of cul-de-sac or loop residential streets
will be encouraged wherever the Board finds that such type of
development will not interfere with normal traffic circulation in the
area. In the case of such streets, where needed or desirable, the Board
may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide easement to provide
for continuation of pedestrian traffic and utilities to the next street.
G. Block size. Blocks generally shall not be less than 400 feet nor more
than 1,200 feet in length. In general, no block width shall be less than
twice the normal lot depth. In blocks exceeding 800 feet in length, the
Planning Board may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide
easement through the block to provide for the crossing of underground
utilities and pedestrian traffic, where needed or desirable, and may
further specify, at its discretion, that a paved walk at least four feet
wide be included.
H. Intersections with collector, major or arterial streets or roads. Minor or
secondary street openings into such roads shall, in general, be at least
500 feet apart.
I. Street jogs. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.
J. Angle of intersection. In general, all streets shall join each other so that,
for a distance of at least 100 feet, the street is approximately at right
angles to the street it joins.
K. Relation to topography. The street plan of a proposed subdivision shall
bear a logical relationship to the topography of the property, and all
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many of the building sites as
possible at or above the grade of the streets. Grades of streets shall
conform as closely as possible to the original topography.
L. Other required streets. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a
railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the
§ 118-15 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-15
103:212
§ 118-16. Street design.
Planning Board may require a street approximately parallel to such
right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the
intervening land, (as for park purposes in residential districts or for
commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts). Such
distances shall also be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
A. Widths of rights-of-way and street pavements. Streets and pavements
shall have the following widths. The classification of streets shall be
determined by the Board.
Type of Street
Minimum Rightof-
Way
(feet)
Minimum
Pavement
(feet)
Major 66 40
Collector 60 30
Minor 50 26
B. Required street improvements. Not later than 90 days after the
granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or shall
have furnished adequate bond or other security for the installation,
within a specified time, of the required improvements listed and
described in this section. All of the required improvements shall be
made by the subdivider in full compliance with the specifications for
each of the various units of work, as required by the Board of Trustees,
according to the nature of the improvements.
(1) Subgrade. The developer shall grade all streets from street line to
street line in accordance with cross sections and grades approved
by the Board of Trustees. The entire width shall be stripped, and all
objectionable material shall be removed and replaced with material
approved by the Village Engineer. After the subgrade has been
formed, it shall be thoroughly rolled and compacted. Fill shall be
made with material approved by the Village Engineer and shall be
placed in layers not over six inches thick, and each layer shall be
properly rolled and compacted. No base material is to be placed on
the subgrade until the subgrade has been approved by the Village
Engineer.
(2) Base course. The thickness and method of constructing the base
course may vary depending upon the amount of traffic anticipated,
the type of material used and the condition of the subgrade. A base
course equal to the width of the pavement and consisting of not less
than a compacted thickness of 12 inches of approved run-of-bank
gravel, laid in two layers, shall be constructed.
§ 118-15 RECORDS § 118-16
103:213
(3) Final course. The final course of the street pavement shall be as
specified by the Board of Trustees.
(4) No street shall be accepted until backfill in trenches has been in
place for at least three months. Where conditions warrant, the
Board of Trustees may require a longer period of time for
settlement of such backfill.
C. Street drainage.
(1) Street and road culverts, headwalls or other appurtenances shall
be installed by the developer where necessary. Where there is no
natural stream or watercourse for the drainage of surface water
from the proposed street or road, the developer shall secure rightsof-
way and construct ditches or install stormwater drains to a
natural waterway as the Board of Trustees directs. All street storm
and sanitary sewers shall be constructed according to the grades
on the plat submitted at the public hearing. Any changes in grade
shall require the approval of the Board of Trustees.
(2) Driveway culverts shall be not less than 12 inches in diameter and
20 feet in length and shall be of corrugated metal or reinforced
concrete. Installation is to be approved by the Board of Trustees.
D. Utilities in streets.
(1) The Planning Board shall require that underground utilities be
placed in the street at locations approved by the Board of Trustees.
The subdivider shall have installed underground service
connections in the street to the property line of each lot within the
subdivision for such required utilities before the street is paved.
Installation of fire hydrants shall be in conformity with all
requirements of standard thread and nut as specified by the New
York Fire Insurance Rating Organization and the Division of Fire
Safety of the State of New York.
(2) Utility poles, if used, shall be installed at locations approved by the
Board of Trustees.
E. Utility easements. Where topography is such as to make impractical the
inclusion of utilities within the street rights-of-way, perpetual
unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width shall be provided with
satisfactory access to the street. Wherever possible, easements shall be
continuous from block to block and shall present as few irregularities as
possible. Such easements shall be cleared and graded where required.
F. Grades.
(1) Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain and
shall be not less than seventy-five hundredths percent (0.75%) nor
more than 5% for major, 7% for collector or 10% for minor streets
§ 118-16 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-16
103:214
in residential areas, but in no case more than 3% within 50 feet of
any intersection.
(2) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of such
length and radius as meet with the approval of the Board of
Trustees, so that clear visibility shall be provided for a safe
distance.
(3) A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided.
G. Curves and visibility at intersections.
(1) All street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be rounded by
curves of a radius of at least 25 feet, and curbs shall be adjusted
accordingly.
(2) In order to provide visibility for traffic safety, that portion of any
corner lot (whether at an intersection entirely within the
subdivision or of a new street with an existing street) which is
within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street rightof-
way lines and a straight line joining said lines at 30 feet distant
from the point of intersection shall be cleared of all growth (except
isolated trees) and obstructions more than 2 1/2 feet above the
finished grade at the street center line. If directed, ground shall be
excavated to achieve visibility. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
H. Culs-de-sac. Where cul-de-sac streets are designed to be so
permanently, they should, in general, not exceed 500 feet in length and
shall terminate n a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way
radius of 75 feet and a pavement radius of 60 feet. At the end of
temporary dead-end streets, a temporary turnaround with a minimum
pavement radius of 50 feet shall be provided, unless the Planning Board
approves an alternate arrangement.
I. Watercourses.
(1) Where a watercourse separates a proposed street from abutting
property, provision shall be made for access to all lots by means of
culverts or other structures of design approved by the Board of
Trustees.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way as required by the Board of Trustees and
in no case less than 20 feet in width.
J. Curve radii. In general, street lines within a block deflecting from each
other at any point shall be connected with an appropriate curve.
K. Reserve strips prohibited. Reserve strips of land to be used to control
access from the proposed subdivision to any neighboring property or to
any land within the subdivision itself shall be prohibited.
§ 118-16 RECORDS § 118-16
103:215
§ 118-17. Street names.
All street names shown on a preliminary plat or subdivision plat shall
be approved by the Planning Board. In general, streets shall have names
and not numbers or letters. Proposed street names shall be substantially
different so as not to be confused in sound or spelling with present names,
except that streets which join or are in alignment with streets of an abutting
or neighboring property shall bear the same name. Generally, no street
should change direction by more than 90° without a change in street name.
§ 118-18. Lots.
§ 118-19. Drainage improvements.
Adequate storm drainage systems shall be required in all new subdivisions.
The drainage system shall be designed by a person licensed to perform such
work.
L. Free flow of vehicular traffic abutting commercial developments. In
front of areas zoned and designed for commercial use or where a
change of zoning to a zone which permits commercial use is
contemplated, the street width shall be increased by such amount on
each side as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Board to assure
the free flow of through traffic without interference by parked or
parking vehicles and to provide adequate and safe parking space for
such commercial or business district.
A. All lots shall have area and width equal to the minimum requirements of
the zoning regulations, if any, and local and State Department of Health
regulations applying to the district in which they are located.
B. Side lines. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
lines and radial to curved street lines, unless a variance from this rule
will give a better street or lot plan.
C. Corner lots. In general, corner lots should be a minimum of 25% larger
than interior lots to provide a desirable building site with proper
building setback from each street.
D. Driveway access. Driveway grades between the street and the setback
line shall not exceed 7%.
E. Access from private streets. Lots on private streets shall be deemed
acceptable only if such streets are designed and improved in
accordance with these regulations.
F. Monuments and lot corner markers. Permanent monuments meeting
specifications approved by the Village Engineer as to size, type and
installation shall be set at such block corners, angle points, points of
curves in streets and other points as the Village Engineer may require,
and their location shall be shown on the subdivision plat.
§ 118-16 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-19
103:216
§ 118-20. Parks, open spaces and natural features.
A. Removal of spring and surface water. Any spring- or surface water that
may exist either previous to or as a result of the subdivision shall be
carried away by pipe or open ditch. Such drainage facilities shall be
located in the street right-of-way, where feasible, or in permanent
easements having a minimum width of 20 feet and are subject to
approval of the Village Engineer.
B. Drainage structure to accommodate potential development upstream. A
culvert or other drainage facility shall, in each case, be large enough to
accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside of the subdivision. The Village Engineer shall
approve the design and size of facility based on anticipated runoff from
a ten-year storm under conditions of total potential development
permitted by Chapter 135, Zoning, in the watershed. The cost of a
culvert or other drainage facility in excess of that required for the
particular subdivision may be deemed to be the responsibility of the
Village or may be prorated among the upstream property owners.
C. Responsibility for drainage downstream. The subdivider's engineer
shall also study the effect of each subdivision on the existing
downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision, and
this study shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer. When it is
anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the
subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility
during a five-year storm, the Planning Board shall notify the Board of
Trustees of such potential condition. In such case, the Planning Board
shall not approve the subdivision until provision has been made for the
improvement of said condition.
D. Land subject to flooding. Land subject to flooding or land deemed by
the Planning Board to be uninhabitable because of flooding, soil
conditions or other such hazards to person or property shall not be
platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may
increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate the flood
hazard, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as
shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or
improved in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board and Board of
Trustees to remedy said hazardous conditions.31
E. All subdividers shall present an individual lot drainage plan for each lot
in their proposed subdivision. Such plan shall be used in the grading of
lots before a certificate of occupancy is granted, as required by Chapter
135, Zoning. No roof leaders or footing drains which carry stormwater
will be permitted to use a sanitary sewer or a so-called "dry well" in an
area where the dominant soil is harpan, but stormwater shall be
adequately disposed of upon the ground surface.
31.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 70, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 118-19 RECORDS § 118-20
103:217
A. Recreation areas.
(1) The Planning Board shall require that the plat show sites of a
character, extent and location suitable for the development of a
park, playground or other recreation purpose in or adjacent to the
subdivision. Where a proposed park, playground or open space
shown on the Village Plan is located in whole or in part in the
subdivision, the Board shall require that such area or areas be
shown on the plat in accordance with the requirements specified
above. Such area or areas may be dedicated to the Village by the
subdivider if the Board of Trustees approves such dedication. A
maximum of 10% of the area of the subdivision may be required for
dedication for park, playground or other recreation purposes.
(2) In the event that an area suitable for a park or playground is
located in the subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the Board,
prior to final approval, three prints (one on cloth), drawn in ink,
showing, at a scale of not less than 30 feet to the inch, such area
and the following features thereof:
(a) The boundaries of said area.
(b) Existing features such as brooks, ponds, clusters of trees, rock
outcrops and structures.
(c) Existing and, if applicable, proposed changes in grade and
contours of said area and of the area immediately adjacent.
B. Waiver of plat designation of area for parks and playgrounds.
(1) In cases where the Planning Board finds that, due to the size,
topography or location of the subdivision, land for park, playground
or other recreation purposes cannot be properly located therein or
if, in the opinion of the Board, it is not desirable, the Board may
waive the requirement that the plat show land for such purposes.
The Board of Trustees may then require, as a condition to approval
of the plat, a payment into a special Village Recreation Site
Acquisition and Improvement Fund of up to $200 per gross acre of
land included in the subdivision.
(2) Such amount shall be paid to the Board of Trustees at the time of
final plat approval, and no plat shall be signed by the authorized
officer of the Planning Board until such payment is made. All such
payments shall be held by the Board in a special Village Recreation
Site Acquisition and Improvement Fund to be used for the
acquisition of land that is suitable for permanent park, playground
or other recreational purposes and is so located that it will serve
primarily the general neighborhood in which the land covered by
the plat lies and shall be used only for park, playground or other
recreational land acquisition or improvements. Such money may
also be used for the physical improvement of existing parks or
recreation areas serving the general neighborhood in which the
§ 118-20 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-20
103:218
land shown on the plat is situated, provided that the Planning
Board finds there is a need for such improvements.
C. Preservation of natural features. The Planning Board shall, wherever
possible, establish the preservation of all natural features which add
value to residential developments and to the community, such as large
trees or groves, watercourses and falls, beaches, historic sites, vistas
and similar irreplaceable assets. No tree with a diameter of eight inches
or more as measured three feet above the base of the trunk shall be
removed unless such tree is within the right-of-way of a street as shown
on the final subdivision plat or individual house sites and driveways.
Removal of additional trees shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
§ 118-20 RECORDS § 118-20
103:219

ARTICLE IV
Documents to Be Submitted
§ 118-21. Sketch plan.
§ 118-22. Minor subdivision plat.
A. The sketch plan initially submitted to the Planning Board shall be based
on Tax Map information or some other similarly accurate base map of a
scale (preferably not less than 200 feet to the inch) to enable the entire
tract to be shown on one sheet.
B. The sketch plan shall show the following information:
(1) The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to
the entire tract and the distance to the nearest existing street
intersection.
(2) All roads, structures, wooded areas, streams, utilities and other
physical features within the portion to be subdivided and within
100 feet thereof. If topographic conditions are significant, contours
shall also be indicated at intervals of not more than 10 feet.
(3) The name of the owner and all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
(4) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers, if any.
(5) The proposed pattern of lots (including lot width and depth), street
layout, recreation areas, systems of drainage, sewerage and water
supply (see §§ 118-22 and 118-23 below) within the subdivided
area.
(6) All existing restrictions on the use of land, including easements,
covenants or zoning lines.
A. In the case of minor subdivision only, the subdivision plat application
shall include the following information:
(1) A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to
cover all or part of the tract.
(2) An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving
complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and
certified to by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract
shall also be located on the ground and marked by monuments, as
approved by the Board of Trustees, and shall be referenced and
shown on the plat.
(3) All on-site sanitation and water supply facilities shall be designed
to meet the minimum specifications of the State Department of
Health, and a note to this effect shall be stated on the plat and
signed by a licensed engineer.
§ 118-21 RECORDS § 118-22
103:221
§ 118-23. Major subdivision preliminary plat and accompanying
data.
The following documents shall be submitted for conditional approval:
(4) The proposed subdivision name and the name of the Village and
county in which it is located.
(5) The date, the North point, the map scale and the name and address
of the record owner and subdivider.
B. The plat to be filed with the County Clerk shall be printed or drawn on
linen or equivalent material or be clearly drawn in India ink upon
tracing cloth. The size of the sheet shall conform to requirements of the
County Clerk.
A. Five copies of the preliminary plat, prepared at a scale of not more than
100 but preferably not less than 50 feet to the inch, showing:
(1) The proposed subdivision name, the name of the Village and the
county in which it is located, the date, the true North point, the
scale and the name and address of the record owner, subdivider
and engineer or surveyor, including license number and seal.
(2) The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names
of the owners of record of all adjacent unsubdivided property.
(3) The zoning district, including exact boundary lines of the district if
more than one district, and any proposed changes in the zoning
district lines and/or the zoning text applicable to the area to be
subdivided.
(4) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication.
(5) The location of existing property lines, easements, buildings,
watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, single trees
with a diameter of eight inches or more as measured three feet
above the base of the trunk and other significant existing features
for the proposed subdivision and adjacent property.
(6) The location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts and drains on
and adjacent to the property, with pipe sizes, grades and directions
of flow.
(7) Contours with intervals of five feet or less, as required by the
Board, including elevations on existing roads, and an approximate
grading plan if natural contours are to be changed more than two
feet.
(8) The width and location of any streets or public ways or places
shown on the Official Map or the Master Plan within the area to be
§ 118-22 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-23
103:222
§ 118-24. Major subdivision final plat and accompanying data.
The following documents shall be submitted for plat approval:
subdivided and the width, location, grades and streets profiles of
all streets or public ways proposed by the developer.
(9) The approximate location and size of all proposed waterlines,
valves, hydrants and sewer lines connected to existing lines or
alternate means of water supply or sewage disposal and treatment,
as provided in the Public Health Law.
(10) A storm drainage plan indicating the approximate location and size
of proposed lines or channels.
(11) The proposed lot lines.
B. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of the NYS SPDES General Permit for Construction
Activities GP-01-02 and Chapter 114, Stormwater Management, shall
be required for preliminary subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall
meet the performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter
114. The approved preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with
the provisions of Chapter 114. [Added 11-5-2007 by L.L. No.
4-200732]
C. If the application covers only a part of the subdivider's entire holding, a
map of the entire tract, drawn at a scale of not less than 400 feet to the
inch, showing an outline of the platted area with its proposed streets
and an indication of the probable future street system with its grades
and drainage in the remaining portion of the tract and the probable
future drainage layout of the entire tract shall be submitted. The part of
the subdivider's entire holdings submitted shall be considered in the
light of the entire holdings.
D. A copy of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to cover
all or part of the tract.
A. The final plat. The plat to be filed with the County Clerk shall be printed
upon linen or equivalent or be clearly drawn in India ink upon tracing
cloth. The size of the sheets shall conform to Village standards. The plat
shall be drawn at a scale of no more than 100 feet to the inch and
oriented with the North point at the top of the map. When more than
one sheet is required, a key map or an additional index sheet of the
same size shall be filed, showing to scale the entire subdivision with lot
and block numbers clearly legible. The plat shall show:
(1) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title and the name of
the Village and county in which the subdivision is located, the name
32.Editor's Note: This local law also redesignated former Subsections B and C as Subsections
C and D.
§ 118-23 RECORDS § 118-24
103:223
and address of the record owner and subdivider and the name,
license number and seal of the licensed land surveyor.
(2) Street lines, pedestrianways, lots, reservations, easements and
areas to be dedicated to public use.
(3) Sufficient data acceptable to the Village Engineer to determine
readily the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line
and boundary line and to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
Where applicable, these should be referenced to monuments
included in the State System of Plane Coordinates and in any event
should be tied to reference points previously established by a
public authority.
(4) The length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, length of curves
and central angles of all curves and tangent bearings for each
street. All dimensions and angles of the lines of each lot shall also
be given. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and inches. The plat
shall show the boundaries of the property, the location, the graphic
scale and the true North point.
(5) By proper designation thereon all public open spaces for which
deeds are included and those spaces, title to which is reserved by
the developer. For any of the latter, there shall be submitted with
the subdivision plat copies of agreements or other documents
showing the manner in which such areas are to be used and
maintained and the provisions made therefor.
(6) All offers of cession and covenants governing the maintenance of
unceded open space shall bear the certificate of approval of the
Village Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
(7) Lots and blocks within a subdivision shall be numbered and
lettered in alphabetical order to accordance with the prevailing
Village practice.
(8) Permanent reference monuments shall be shown and shall be
constructed in accordance with specifications of the Board of
Trustees. When referenced to the State System of Plane
Coordinates, they shall also conform to the requirements of the
State Department of Transportation. They shall be placed as
required by the Board of Trustees and their location noted and
referenced upon the plat.
(9) All lot corner markers shall be at least 3/4 inch (if metal) in
diameter and at least 24 inches in length and permanently located
in the ground to existing grade in a manner satisfactory to the
Board of Trustees.
(10) Monuments of a type approved by the Board of Trustees shall be
set at all corners and angle points of the boundaries of the original
tract to be subdivided and at all street intersections, angle points in
§ 118-24 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-24
103:224
street lines, points of curve and such intermediate points as shall
be required by the Village Engineer.
B. Construction drawings include plans, profiles and typical crosssections,
as required, showing the proposed location, size and type of
streets, sidewalks, streetlighting standards, street trees, curbs, water
mains, sanitary sewers and storm drains, pavements and subbase,
manholes, catch basins and other facilities. As-built drawings shall also
be filed with the Board of Trustees and Planning Board if the
construction has deviated significantly from the plans approved by the
Boards.
C. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the
requirements of the NYS SPDES General Permit for Construction
Activities GP-01-02 and Chapter 114, Stormwater Management, shall
be required for preliminary subdivision plat approval. The SWPPP shall
meet the performance and design criteria and standards in Chapter
114. The approved preliminary subdivision plat shall be consistent with
the provisions of Chapter 114. [Added 11-5-2007 by L.L. No.
4-2007]
§ 118-24 RECORDS § 118-24
103:225

ARTICLE V
Variances and Waivers
§ 118-25. Variances.
Where the Planning Board finds that extraordinary and unnecessary
hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may
vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured, provided that such variations will not have the effect of
nullifying the intent and purpose of the Official Map, the Master Plan or
Chapter 135, Zoning.
§ 118-26. Waivers.
Where the Planning Board finds that, due to the special circumstances of
a particular plat, the provision of certain required improvements is not
requisite in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare
or is inappropriate because of inadequacy or lack of connecting facilities
adjacent or in proximity to the proposed subdivision, it may waive such
requirements, subject to appropriate conditions.
§ 118-27. Conditions.
In granting variances and modifications, the Planning Board shall require
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 118-25 RECORDS § 118-27
103:227
Chapter 121
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Assessments — See Ch. 5.
§ 118-27 YORKVILLE CODE § 118-27
121:228
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizens Tax Exemption
[Adopted 9-26-1967 by resolution; amended in its entirety at time of
adoption of Code33]
§ 121-1. Exemption granted; qualifications.
Pursuant to § 467 of the Real Property Tax Law, the Board of Trustees of
the Village of Yorkville hereby grants a tax exemption of 50% of assessed
valuation on real property located in the Village of Yorkville and owned
by persons 65 years of age or over, provided that the applicant for such
exemption meets all of the requirements of § 467 of the Real Property Tax
Law and the income of such applicant does not exceed $8,000.
§ 121-2. Application for exemption.
An application for such exemption shall be made on the forms provided for
such purpose at the office of the Village Clerk on or before December 31 of
each year.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 121-1 TAXATION § 121-2
121:229

ARTICLE II
Business Investment Exemption
[Adopted 5-3-1988 as L.L. No. 2-1988]
§ 121-3. Exemption reduced.
Pursuant to the authority of Subdivision 7 of § 485-b of the Real Property
Tax Law, the partial exemption from taxation, special and valorem levies
and service charges provided by Subdivision 2 of such § 485-b to eligible
real property assessed for town purposes is hereby reduced as provided
herein. The exemption granted for the first year shall be to the extent of
zero percent 0%. Thereafter, for each of the next succeeding nine years,
such exemption shall be zero percent 0%.
§ 121-3 TAXATION § 121-3
121:231
Chapter 127
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
vehicles — See Ch. 38.
Litter from vehicles — See Ch. 82.
Parades — See Ch. 89.
Use of sidewalks by vehicles — See Ch. 115,
Art. I.
Closing of streets for block parties — See Ch.
115, Art. V.
§ 121-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 121-3
121:232
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 127-1. Definitions.
§ 127-2. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Highway Department shall install and maintain traffic control devices
when and as required under the provisions of this chapter, to make effective
the provisions of this chapter, and may install and maintain such additional
traffic control devices as it may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide
traffic under the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, subject
to the provisions of §§ 1682 and 1684 of that law.
§ 127-3. Schedules; adoption of regulations.
For the purpose of maintaining an accurate record of all regulations
adopted under the provisions of this chapter, there is hereby established a
system of schedules, appearing as Article VI of this chapter, in which shall
be entered all regulations after adoption. Such schedules shall be deemed a
part of the section to which they refer. All regulations shall be adopted with
reference to the appropriate schedule as indicated in the various sections
of this chapter and may be adopted by resolution of the Board of Trustees
in accordance with provisions of the Village Law and the Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
A. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of
this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by Article
1 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
B. The following words and phrases, which are not defined by Article 1 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for the purposes
of this chapter:
CURBLINE — The prolongation of the lateral line of a curb or, in the
absence of a curb, the lateral boundary line of the roadway.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Presidents' Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever certain hours are named
herein or on traffic control devices, they shall mean the time standard
which is in current use in this state.
§ 127-1 TAXATION § 127-3
121:233

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 127-4. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 127-34), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 127-5. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the Village is hereby established at 30 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 127-35) shall be as indicated
in said schedule.
§ 127-6. School speed limits.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of that indicated in
Schedule III (§ 127-36), in the areas described in said Schedule III, during
school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 127-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 127-37), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 127-8. U-turns.
U-turns are hereby prohibited on all streets except on the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 127-38), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 127-9. Right turns only.
The locations designated in Schedule VII (§ 127-39), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are designated for right turns only, and no person shall
make a turn other than a right turn at such locations.
§ 127-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VIII (§ 127-40),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 127-4 TAXATION § 127-11
121:235
§ 127-11. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 127-41), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 127-12. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 127-42), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 127-13. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the weights indicated are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 127-43), except for
the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 127-11 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-13
121:236
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 127-14. Application of article.
The provisions of this article shall apply except when it is necessary to
stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.
§ 127-15. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XII (§ 127-44), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 127-16. All-night parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in the Village between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. throughout the year.
§ 127-17. No stopping.
No person shall stop a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 127-45), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 127-18. No standing.
No person shall stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 127-46), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 127-19. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XV
(§ 127-47) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XV, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 127-20. No stopping certain hours.
No person shall stop a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 127-48) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XVI, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 127-21. No standing certain hours.
No person shall stand a vehicle during the times specified in Schedule XVII
(§ 127-49) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
§ 127-14 TAXATION § 127-21
121:237
or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVII, attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 127-22. Time-limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 127-50) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XVIII of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVIII, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 127-23. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIX (§ 127-51) except at the angle designated and
only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where
angle parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked
thereon shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 127-24. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 127-52), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 127-25. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 127-53), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 127-26. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 127-54), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 127-27. Winter parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XXIII (§ 127-55), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, during the period beginning from January 1 to April 1 of each year.
§ 127-28. Permit required for parking in designated handicapped
parking spaces.
A. Pursuant to §§ 1203-a, 1203-b and 1203-c of the Vehicle and Traffic Law,
there shall be no parking, stopping or standing of a motor vehicle in an
area or space designated for handicapped parking on all property,
whether public or private, within the Village of Yorkville except those
persons conspicuously displaying a valid handicapped parking permit
(MVD Form MV-664) on the dashboard or the sun visor of the driver's
side of the vehicle.
§ 127-21 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-28
121:238
B. Parking spaces reserved for use by handicapped persons shall be
designated by resolution of the Board of Trustees and the Village Clerk
shall maintain a list of such locations.
C. Penalties for offenses against handicapped parking requirements. Any
person found guilty of violating any provision of Subsection A or B shall
be fined $100. [Amended 8-5-2014]
§ 127-28 TAXATION § 127-28
121:239

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Storage of Vehicles
§ 127-29. Authority to impound vehicles; penalties for offenses.
§ 127-30. Storage and charges.
After removal of any vehicle as provided in this article, the Police
Department may store or cause such vehicle to be stored in a suitable place
at the expense of the owner. Such owner or person in charge of the vehicle
may redeem the same upon payment to the person with whom stored of the
amount of all expenses actually and necessarily incurred in effecting such
removal and storage, such storage charges not to exceed $20 per day or
fraction thereof.
§ 127-31. Notice of removal.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to ascertain to the extent
possible the owner of the vehicle or the person having the same in charge
and to notify him of the removal and disposition of such vehicle and of
the amount which will be required to redeem the same. Said Department
shall also without delay report the removal and disposition of any vehicle
removed as provided in this article to the Village Clerk.
§ 127-31.1. Towing rotation list authorized. [Added 3-2-2010 by L.L.
No. 1-2010]
The Village Board is hereby authorized to establish a list of persons or
businesses to be used on a rotating basis by the Village of Yorkville Police
Department whenever towing and/or wrecking services are called upon by
the said Department.
§ 127-31.2. Standards for operation and placement on rotation list.
[Added 3-2-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
A. When any vehicle is parked or abandoned on any highway or public
parking lot within this Village during a snowstorm, flood, fire or other
public emergency which affects that portion of the public highway or
parking lot upon which said vehicle is parked or abandoned, said
vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of any police officer
of the Village.
B. When any vehicle is found unattended on any highway or public parking
lot within the Village where said vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, said vehicle may be removed by or under the direction of any
police officer of the Village.
C. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall
be fined $50 per violation.
§ 127-29 TAXATION § 127-31.2
121:241
A. All towing services shall provide and maintain facilities for secure
storage of towed vehicles.
B. The towing service shall be available for assignment on a twenty-fourhour-
per day-per-week basis.
C. The towing service must be able to arrive at the location in which its
service is needed within 20 minutes from the time it was first called.
D. The towing service operator shall own, maintain and equip its towing
vehicle(s) in accordance with the laws of the State of New York and
such additional requirements as may be prescribed by the Village
Board. No towing service shall lease or sublease its towing vehicle for
purposes of this article.
E. Any person removing a vehicle from a highway shall retrieve any glass
or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such
vehicle at no cost to the customer.
F. All towing service operators must have a certificate of insurance
coverage that will consist of a minimum of $100,000 for bodily injury for
each person, $300,000 for bodily injury per occurrence, and $50,000
for property damage for each occurrence.
G. All towing service operators will keep a logbook in their office listing
the date and time the vehicle was picked up, the location from where
the vehicle was towed, the make, model, vehicle color, and the license
plate number. The logbook will be subject to inspection by any police
officer or the Police Commissioner.
H. The tow operator shall also provide extra services upon request, to
include winch outs, lock-out service, and removal of off-road vehicles
such as ATVs, snowmobiles, or motorcycles.
I. Towing services will notify the Yorkville police, in writing, of any towed
vehicle left unclaimed for more than 48 hours after notification by
police of the registered owner of said vehicle.
J. Towing services shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the Village
of Yorkville from any claim or liabilities which occur as a result of
performing towing or wrecker services at the request of the Village of
Yorkville.
K. Upon request for a rotation tow service, the service next on rotation
must be the service to respond. Other tow services, whether on the
rotation list or not, cannot respond in the place of the next-on-rotation
service. In the event the tow service on the rotation cannot respond to
the call, then the next on the list shall be called to respond, and so forth
until a tow service does respond to the call.
§ 127-31.2 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-31.3
121:242
§ 127-31.3. Distance to be maintained from accidents. [Added
3-2-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a tow truck wrecker within the
corporate limits of the Village of Yorkville or any agent working on behalf of
such operator to be within 1,000 feet of any accident or cause any wrecker
to approach nearer than 1,000 feet to the scene of any accident of any
automobile or other vehicle within the corporate limits of said Village until
the Police Department has had an opportunity to investigate said accident
and has directed and authorized such person(s) and/or wrecker to approach
within said prohibited distance.
§ 127-31.4. Applications for towing service: renewal fees. [Added
3-2-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 127-31.5. Promulgation of rules and regulations. [Added 3-2-2010
by L.L. No. 1-2010]
The Village Board is hereby given authority to promulgate such other rules
or regulations as it deems necessary, consistent with the intent of this
article.
A. Applications can be obtained from the Yorkville Village Clerk. After
completion, the application is to be submitted to the Village Clerk,
containing all the information required. The applications are valid for
one calendar year. There shall be no more than five towing services
participating on the towing rotation list at any one time, with
application preference given to towing services within the corporate
limits of the Village. This is to ensure that those Village tow services
interested will be part of the five services on the rotating list.
B. At the beginning of each calendar year, all tow services must reapply to
ensure that all interested tow services have the opportunity to
participate in the rotation.
C. There is a yearly application fee of $75 to be paid to the Village Clerk
upon the time of application.
D. In the event that more than five towing services apply to be on the
rotation, preference shall be given to towing services located within the
limits of the Village and any remaining slots on the rotation list shall be
selected on a lottery basis.
§ 127-31.3 TAXATION § 127-31.5
121:243

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 127-32. Penalties for offenses.
Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any provision
of this chapter which is not a violation of any provision of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law of the State of New York shall, for a first conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not more
than 15 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; for a second such
conviction within 18 months thereafter, such person shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment for not more than 45 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; upon a third or subsequent conviction
within 18 months after the first conviction, such person shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $250 or by imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 127-32.1. Penalties for offenses of wrecker or tow services.
[Added 3-2-2010 by L.L. No. 1-2010]
§ 127-33. When effective.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in wrecker or tow services
violating sections of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine not exceeding $250 for the first offense and/or imprisonment for up
to 15 days. The limit for the fine shall increase by $250 for each
conviction of any defendant within five years of the date of the subject
offense.
B. It shall be the duty of the officer-in-charge to notify the Village Board of
any of the tow services on the rotation list that are in violation of any
part of of this chapter. After notice and opportunity to be heard by the
Village Board, it may suspend or revoke said towing service from the
rotation list.
A. Except those parts, if any, which are subject to approval under § 1684 of
the Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York, this chapter and
any regulations adopted hereunder shall take effect as provided by law.
B. Any part or parts of this chapter and any regulations adopted
hereunder which are subject to approval under § 1684 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law of the State of New York shall take effect from and after
the day on which approval, in writing, is received from the New York
State Department of Transportation.
§ 127-32 TAXATION § 127-33
121:245

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 127-34. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended 5-1-2018 by
L.L. No. 3-2018]
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Whitesboro Street and Hall Avenue
Whitesboro Street and Main Street
§ 127-35. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-5, speed limits other than 30
miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
(Reserved)
§ 127-36. Schedule III: School Speed Limits. [Amended 4-16-2008
by L.L. No. 2-2008]
In accordance with § 127-6, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the
speeds indicated below, in the areas designated below, during school days
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
(Reserved)
§ 127-37. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-7, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 127-38. Schedule VI: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-8, U-turns are prohibited on all
streets within the Village, except on the streets or parts of streets indicated
below:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-34 TAXATION § 127-39
121:247
§ 127-39. Schedule VII: Right Turns Only.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-9, the following locations are
designated for right turns only:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Hours
At Intersection
of
Commercial Drive
East
East All Main Street
Erie Street West All Main Street
Main Street South All Erie Street
West Whitesboro
Street
East All Champlin Avenue
§ 127-40. Schedule VIII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-10, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street Direction of Travel
Prohibited Right Turn
on Red Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 127-41. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Ann Street West Ney Avenue
Arnold Avenue East Champlin Avenue
Bayliss Avenue South Whitesboro Street
Calder Avenue Both Myers Avenue
Calder Avenue Both Sixth Street
Calder Avenue East Champlin Avenue
Calder Avenue West Cooper Avenue
Caroline Street [Added
5-1-2018 by L.L. No.
3-2018]
Both Ney Avenue
Clark Avenue Both Seventh Street
Commercial Drive East East Main Street
Cooper Avenue North Oriskany Boulevard
Coventry Avenue South Whitesboro Street
§ 127-39 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-41
121:248
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Cross Street North Campbell Avenue
Dudley Avenue Both Campbell Avenue
Dudley Avenue North Calder Avenue
Dudley Avenue South Hillcrest Avenue
Edward Street North Whitesboro Street
Edward Street South Oriskany Boulevard
Eighth Street North Calder Avenue
Elmwood Avenue North Whitesboro Street
Elmwood Avenue South Oriskany Boulevard
Erie Street East Cooper Avenue
Erie Street West Main Street
Fairview Avenue East Bunker Avenue
Fairview Avenue West Bayliss Avenue
Fifth Street North Calder Avenue
Fifth Street South Campbell Avenue
First Street North Calder Avenue
First Street South Campbell Avenue
Fourth Street North Calder Avenue
Fourth Street South Campbell Avenue
Graham Avenue Both Tabor Place
Graham Avenue East Ney Avenue
Graham Avenue West Champlin Avenue
Hall Avenue North Fairview Avenue
Hall Avenue South Whitesboro Street
Highland Avenue West Champlin Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue East Montrose Avenue
Inman Place North Whitesboro Street
Inman Place South Highland Avenue
Jones Place South Whitesboro Street
JPJ Boulevard [Added
5-4-2015 by NYS
Order]
North Oriskany Boulevard
Maynard Avenue Both Tabor Place
Maynard Avenue East Ney Avenue
Maynard Avenue West Champlin Avenue
McBride Avenue North Whitesboro Street
§ 127-41 TAXATION § 127-41
121:249
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
McBride Avenue West Inman Place
Montrose Avenue Both Campbell Avenue
Montrose Avenue North Oriskany Boulevard
Montrose Avenue North West Highland Avenue
Myers Avenue Both Calder Avenue
Myers Avenue Both Campbell Avenue
Myers Avenue [Added
5-4-2015 by NYS
Order]
North Oriskany Boulevard
Myers Avenue North West Whitesboro Street
Myers Avenue South Hillcrest Avenue
Ney Avenue [Added
5-1-2018 by L.L. No.
3-2018]
Both Caroline Street
Ney Avenue North Highland Avenue
Noyes Street West Ney Avenue
Oatley Avenue North Whitesboro Street
Oatley Avenue South Oriskany Boulevard
Russell Avenue North Fairview Avenue
Russell Avenue South Whitesboro Street
Second Street North Calder Avenue
Second Street South Campbell Avenue
Seventh Street North Calder Avenue
Seventh Street South Campbell Avenue
Sinclair Avenue Both Tabor Place
Sinclair Avenue East Ney Avenue
Sinclair Avenue West Champlin Avenue
Sixth Street Both Calder Avenue
Sixth Street South Campbell Avenue
Stelter Avenue South Whitesboro Street
Tabor Place Both Caroline Street
Tabor Place North Highland Avenue
Tabor Place South Graham Avenue
Third Street North Calder Avenue
Third Street South Campbell Avenue
Trinity Avenue South Whitesboro Street
Walcott Avenue Both Tabor Place
§ 127-41 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-41
121:250
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Walcott Avenue East Ney Avenue
Walcott Avenue West Champlin Avenue
West Graham Avenue East Champlin Avenue
West Graham Avenue West Montrose Avenue
West Highland Avenue East Champlin Avenue
West Highland Avenue West Dudley Avenue
West Sinclair Avenue East Champlin Avenue
West Sinclair Avenue West West Walcott Avenue
West Walcott Avenue East Champlin Avenue
West Walcott Avenue West Montrose Avenue
West Whitesboro Street Both Montrose Avenue
West Whitesboro Street East Champlin Avenue
West Whitesboro Street West Myers Avenue
Wilcox Avenue Both Campbell Avenue
Wilcox Avenue North Calder Avenue
§ 127-42. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Montrose Avenue North Oriskany Boulevard
Myers Avenue
[Repealed 5-4-2015
by NYS Order]
§ 127-43. Schedule XI: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-13, trucks in excess of the
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of
streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight
(tons) Location
Calder Avenue 5 Entire length
Campbell Avenue 5 Entire length
Cross Street 5 From the southerly Village line to
Campbell Avenue
Edward Street 5 Entire length
§ 127-41 TAXATION § 127-43
121:251
Name of Street
Weight
(tons) Location
Elmwood Avenue 5 Entire length
Main Street 5 From Whitesboro Street to
Oriskany Boulevard
Oatley Avenue 5 Entire length
Seventh Street 5 Entire length
Sixth Street 5 Entire length
Whitesboro Street 5 From the westerly Village line to
Oriskany Boulevard
§ 127-44. Schedule XII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-15, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bayliss Avenue East Entire length
Bunker Avenue West Entire length
Calder Avenue North From Dudley Avenue to
Myers Avenue
Campbell Avenue North From Champlin Avenue
to a point 130 feet west
thereof
Campbell Avenue North From Dudley Avenue to
First Street
Campbell Avenue South From Cross Street to the
westerly Village line
Campbell Avenue South From 30 feet west of
Dudley Avenue to
Champlin Avenue
Caroline Street North From Ney Avenue to a
point 140 feet west
Caroline Street South From Champlin Avenue
to Tabor Place
Caroline Street South From Ney Avenue to a
point 140 feet west
Champlin Avenue Both Entire length
Commercial Drive East Both From the Village line to
Main Street
§ 127-43 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-44
121:252
Name of Street Side Location
Cooper Avenue [Added
4-16-2008 by L.L. No.
2-2008]
East From Oriskany
Boulevard to a point 160
feet south thereof
Cooper Avenue West From Oriskany
Boulevard to Calder
Avenue
Coventry Avenue West Entire length
Cross Street Both Entire length
Edward Street East Entire length
Elmwood Avenue West Entire length
Erie Street [Amended
9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
3-2012]
Both Entire length
Erie Street [Added
5-5-2009 by L.L. No.
1-2009]
South 133 feet from Cooper
Avenue west to Main
Street
Hall Avenue East Entire length
Highland Avenue North From Village line west
to Tabor Place
Highland Avenue South From Tabor Place to
Champlin Avenue
Inman Place East Entire length
Jones Place East Entire length
Main Street East From Village line north
to Oriskany Boulevard
Main Street East From Whitesboro Street
to a point 40 feet south
thereof
Main Street West From Oriskany
Boulevard to a point 180
feet north
Maynard Avenue North Entire length
McBride Avenue North Entire length
McBride Avenue West Entire length
Myers Avenue West From Campbell Avenue
to a point 100 feet north
Ney Avenue West From Sinclair Avenue to
Walcott Avenue
Oatley Avenue East Entire length
Russell Avenue East Entire length
§ 127-44 TAXATION § 127-44
121:253
Name of Street Side Location
Seventh Street East Entire length
Sixth Street Both From Calder Avenue to
Oriskany Boulevard
Sixth Street West From Calder Avenue to
Campbell Avenue
Tabor Place East Entire length
Trinity Avenue West Entire length
West Sinclair Avenue Both Entire length
West Walcott Avenue North From Champlin Avenue
to Montrose Avenue
West Whitesboro Street North Entire length
Whitesboro Street North From Erie Street, Utica,
to the railroad tracks
Whitesboro Street North From a point 80 feet
east of Main Street to
the westerly Village line
Whitesboro Street
[Added 1-8-2013 by
L.L. No. 1-2013]
South From Bunker Avenue to
Oatley Avenue
Whitesboro Street South From Main Street to a
point 40 feet east
thereof
Whitesboro Street South From Main Street to the
westerly Village line
§ 127-45. Schedule XIII: No Stopping.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-17, no person shall stop a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-46. Schedule XIV: No Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-18, no person shall stand a
vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
§ 127-44 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-46
121:254
Name of Street Side Location
Calder Avenue North From Champlin Avenue
to a point 75 feet west
thereof
McBride Avenue East From Whitesboro Street
to a point 20 feet south
thereof
Whitesboro Street South From McBride Avenue
to a point 20 feet east
thereof
Whitesboro Street South From McBride Avenue
to a point 60 feet west
thereof
§ 127-47. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
[Amended 4-16-2008 by L.L. No. 2-2008]
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-19, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
(Reserved)
§ 127-48. Schedule XVI: No Stopping Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-20, no person shall stop a vehicle
between the times specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-49. Schedule XVII: No Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-21, no person shall stand a
vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-50. Schedule XVIII: Time-Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-22, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 127-46 TAXATION § 127-50
121:255
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-51. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-23, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-52. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-24, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-53. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 127-54. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Campbell Avenue North Montrose Avenue
Dudley Avenue
Candee Avenue
Myers Avenue
Wilcox Avenue
Second Street
Third Street
Fourth Street
Fifth Street
§ 127-50 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-54
121:256
Name of Street Side Location
Sixth Street
Seventh Street
Campbell Avenue South Opposite Seventh
Street, New York Mills
Andrews Avenue,
Whitestown
Cross Street
Wilcox Avenue
Myers Avenue
Dudley Avenue
Montrose Avenue
Champlin Avenue
Caroline Street North Ney Avenue
Tabor Place
Champlin Avenue
Caroline Street North Tabor Place
Ney Avenue
Whitesboro Street North Dent Street, Utica
Erie Street, Utica
Opposite Champlin
Avenue
Coventry Avenue
Trinity Avenue
Bunker Avenue
Hall Avenue
Russell Avenue
Bayliss Avenue
Jones Place
158 Whitesboro Street
Whitesboro Street South Main Street
Opposite Jones Place
Oatley Avenue
29 Whitesboro Street
Inman Place
McBride Avenue
§ 127-54 TAXATION § 127-55
121:257
§ 127-55. Schedule XXIII: Winter Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 127-27, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below during the period
beginning from January 1 to April 1 of each year:
Name of Street Side Location
Bayliss Avenue West Entire length
Bunker Avenue East Entire length
Coventry Avenue East Entire length
Edward Street West Entire length
Elmwood Avenue East Entire length
Jones Place West Entire length
Oatley Avenue West Entire length
Russell Avenue West Entire length
Trinity Avenue East Entire length
§ 127-55 YORKVILLE CODE § 127-55
121:258
Chapter 135
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 46.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
70.
Site plan review — See Ch. 109.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 114.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 118.
§ 127-55 TAXATION § 127-55
121:259

ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Definitions
§ 135-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Yorkville
Zoning Ordinance of April 7, 1970," as revised.
§ 135-2. Purposes.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted to promote the health, safety and general welfare of this
community. Such requirements are deemed necessary for the following
purposes:
A. Promote orderly development: to protect the character and maintain
the stability of residential, business and manufacturing areas within the
Village and to promote the orderly and beneficial development of such
areas.
B. Regulate intensity of use: to regulate the intensity of use of zoning lots
and to determine the area of open space surrounding buildings to
provide adequate light and air, privacy and convenience of access to
property and to protect the public health.
C. Regulate location of buildings: to establish building lines and the
location of buildings designed for residential, commercial,
manufacturing or other uses within such lines.
D. Establish standards of development: to fix reasonable standards to
which buildings or structures shall conform.
E. Prohibit incompatible uses: to prohibit uses, buildings or structures
which are incompatible with the character of development or the
permitted uses within specified zoning districts.
F. Regulate alterations of existing buildings: to regulate such additions to
and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures as
would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder.
G. Limit congestion in streets: to limit congestion in the public streets and
so protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare by
providing for off-street parking of automobiles and for the loading and
unloading of commercial vehicles.
H. Protect against hazards: to provide protection against fire, explosion,
noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest of the public health,
safety, comfort and the general welfare.
I. Conserve taxable value of land: to conserve the taxable value of land
and buildings throughout the Village.
§ 135-1 TAXATION § 135-3
121:261
§ 135-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words
used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense shall include the future. The
singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
(2) The word "person" includes a firm, association, partnership, trust,
company or corporation as well as an individual.
(3) The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
(4) The word "building" includes the word "structure."
(5) The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building,
shall be construed to include the words "built, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
(6) The word "shall" is mandatory.
B. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal
building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those
of the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such
principal use or building.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories
or height of a building or structure.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment
having operations or merchandise depicting or relating to specified
sexual activity or specified anatomical areas defined below, for
purchaser observation by patrons therein. The following applies for the
purpose of this definition:[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
A SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION — More than 20% of
an establishment's gross sales or more than 20% net floor area.
(1)
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
(2)
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or human male
genitals in a discernably turgid state, whether or not covered.
(3)
§ 135-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-3
121:262
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS — Any business offering for sale, lease
or hire products, materials or inventory, the majority of which consists
of adult-oriented products, or any business that provides any adultoriented
services.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
ADULT-ORIENTED PRODUCT — Anything which depicts, describes,
presents or displays human nudity, humans engaging in sexual foreplay
or intercourse and appearing to have at least a significant motivation
for such depiction, presentation or display the sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification of the consumer of same. Also included within
this definition is any object which is intended or may be used by the
consumer for purposes of sexual stimulation or gratification. Movies
having received an R or PG-13 rating, or literary equivalent of same,
shall not be considered adult-oriented products.[Added 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
ADULT-ORIENTED SERVICE — Any action performed, for
consideration, by one or more persons to or for the benefit of another
person or persons where at least one motivation for such action is
the sexual stimulation or gratification of either the performer or the
recipient.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
ALLEY — A service way which affords a secondary public means of
vehicular access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — Any construction or renovation to an existing structure
other than repair or addition.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
ANTENNA — Exterior apparatus designed for transmitting and/or
receiving communications signals through electromagnetic waves,
digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar) or
any form of wireless telecommunications signal, including radio
television, telephone, microwave, cellular and PCS signals.[Added
9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
ANTENNA ARRAY — A set of interconnected antennas installed on one
tower by one telecommunications provider that receive and/or transmit
one type of telecommunications signal.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
AUTO BODY SHOP — Any area for repair or alteration of the frame
or body of automobiles. No more than three uninspected, unregistered
motor vehicles shall be on site at a given time.
AUTO SALVAGE — The dismantling of used or wrecked motor vehicles
for the purpose of storage and sale of their salvaged parts. As used
herein, the term "motor vehicle" shall mean automobile, truck, tractor
truck, bus, motorcycle, snowmobile or any other self-propelled vehicle.
Said business shall be confined within a building approved for such use
by the Codes Officer. Outside work on, or storage of, any vehicle shall
be prohibited.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 135-3 TAXATION § 135-3
121:263
AUTO WASH — A building or portion thereof, the use of which is
devoted to the washing of automobiles, including but not limited to one
of the following types:
BASEMENT/CELLAR — A space of full story height partly below grade
and having at least 1/2 of its clear height, floor to ceiling, above average
grade of the adjoining ground and which is not designed to be used
primarily for year-round living accommodations.[Amended 9-4-2012
by L.L. No. 4-2012]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — An owner-occupied singlefamily
detached dwelling where one to five rooms are rented to
overnight guests. A bed-and-breakfast establishment may operate yearround;
however, the length of stay for any overnight guest shall not
exceed one continuous week. Meals, if offered, are only to registered
overnight guests. All bed-and-breakfast establishments must conform
to New York State and local codes.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
BUILDING — Any roofed structure intended for the shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals or property. When a building is divided
into separate parts extending from the ground up, each part so divided
is deemed a separate "building."
BUILDING AREA — The total ground-floor area of a principal building
and accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered porches, parapets,
steps and terraces.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That area of the lot or plot covered by a
building.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on all
sides on the same lot.
BUILDING FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of
the several floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same
lot, including basement areas devoted to residential occupancy and
CONVEYOR-TYPE — An auto wash facility where automobiles
progress through the washing process pulled by an electrically
operated chain conveyor or by some means other than their own
power.
(1)
DRIVE-THROUGH-TYPE — An auto wash facility where
automobiles are driven through the washing process under their
own power.
(2)
SELF-SERVICE-TYPE — An auto wash facility where automobiles
are washed by the drivers of the automobiles using machinery
provided by the manager of the facility.34
(3)
34.Editor's Note: The former definition of "auto wrecking," which immediately followed, was
repealed 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012.
§ 135-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-3
121:264
the area of bays, dormers, roofed porches and roofed terraces. All
dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline
of mansard roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridges for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line established by legal variance, usually parallel
with a property line, beyond which a structure may not nor its extension
protrude.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which the main use of the lot is
conducted.
CELLAR — That space of a building that is partly or entirely below
grade, which has more than half of its height, measured from floor to
ceiling, below the average established curb level or finished grade of
the ground adjoining the building.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN, ELECTRONIC — A sign or portion thereof
that displays electronic, nonpictorial text information in which each
alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol is defined by a small
number of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or
other different illumination devices within the display area. Electronic
changeable copy signs include computer-programmable,
microprocessor-controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable
copy signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.[Added 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility that provides care for any
number of preschool- or school-age children any part of a twentyfour-
hour day. All state licensing requirements are to be met, and all
operations are to be in accordance with New York State Department of
Social Services regulations. Allowed only by special exception by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that supports one or
more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers,
monopole towers and alternative tower structures, and further includes
all base and supports for the structure of the tower.[Added 9-4-2012
by L.L. No. 4-2012]
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail store offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and
magazines, sandwiches and any other freshly prepared foods for off-site
consumption. Convenience stores may also include the sale of gasoline,
in which case they shall conform to the requirements for gasoline
stations.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 135-3 TAXATION § 135-3
121:265
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed divided by the
total number of acres within the tract.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
DISH ANTENNA — Consists of three main components; the antenna
itself, often called a dish; a low-noise amplifier (LNA); and a receiver.
The antenna and LNA are generally located outdoors and are connected
by coaxial cable to the receiver, which is usually placed indoors.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT or REFRESHMENT STAND — Any place or
premises used for sale, dispensing or serving food, refreshments or
beverages to persons in automobiles, including those establishments
where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food,
refreshments or beverages on the premises or those primarily of a
pickup or carry-out service nature.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
DRIVEWAY — That space or area of a lot which is specifically
designated and reserved for the movement of motor vehicles from a
lot to a public street. Such space or area shall be a minimum of nine
feet in width and a maximum of 20 feet in width. The curb cut is to
be a maximum of two feet more than the driveway width.[Amended
5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
DRIVEWAY, RESIDENTIAL — For every residential dwelling, there shall
be one driveway permitted. This driveway shall conform to the
specifications set forth in this chapter and in accordance with Article
IV, § 135-26, Off-street parking, Subsections C, F and I, of the Village
Code. In no instance shall a motor vehicle be parked in the front or
side yard, except for this designated area. The following shall also
apply:[Added 5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011; amended 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
DUMP — A plot of land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal,
by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any other means or for
whatever purpose of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded
machinery, vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any kind.
A permit shall be required for any new construction or any
alteration of an existing driveway, including the resurfacing of
same. Excluded: seal coating.
(1)
Failure to obtain a permit for driveway resurfacing will result in a
penalty of double the fee for new construction.
(2)
All driveways are subject to on-site inspection and final
determination by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Highway
Superintendent as needed.
(3)
In no instance shall existing concrete sidewalks be paved over.
Existing concrete sidewalks may be removed, but must be replaced
with new concrete as per Village of Yorkville specifications.
(4)
§ 135-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-3
121:266
DUMPSTER — A refuse container with the individual capacity of 1.5
cubic yards [40.5 cubic feet (1.15 m3)] or more. The user of the
container shall schedule collection from the container so that garbage
and other waste materials do not overflow the confines of the dumpster
or restrict the closing of the container's cover.[Added 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
DWELLING — Any building that contains one or more dwelling units
used, intended or designed to be to be built, used, rented, leased,
let or hired out to be occupied or that are occupied for living
purposes.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building or group of buildings
designed for year-round occupancy by more than two families,
including apartment houses and group houses, but excluding hotels and
rooming houses.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building, containing a single
dwelling unit, other than a trailer, mobile home or other temporary
structure, designed for exclusive year-round occupancy by one family
only.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building, other than a trailer,
mobile home or other temporary structure, designed for exclusive yearround
occupancy, containing two dwelling units living independently of
each other.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit, with provisions for living, cooking,
sanitary and sleeping facilities, arranged for the use of one or more
persons. A factory-finished living unit delivered to the owner's lot in
sections and capable of complying with all applicable local and state
building codes shall be deemed to be a dwelling unit.[Amended
9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY SIGN — A sign or portion thereof
that displays electronic static images, static graphics and static
pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small number
of matrix elements using different combinations of light-emitting diodes
(LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within
the display area where messages change sequence, accomplished
immediately or by means of fade, repixielization or dissolve mode.
Electronic graphic signs include computer-programmable,
microprocessor-controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic
graphic display signs include projected images or messages with these
characteristics onto buildings or other objects.[Added 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood or marriage or other
recognized family relationship maintaining a common household.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — The accessory structure associated with dwelling
units used primarily for the storage of one or more motor vehicles,
provided that no business, occupation or service is conducted for profit
§ 135-3 TAXATION § 135-3
121:267
therein nor space therein leased to a nonresident of the
premises.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof operated for gain and
used for the storage, hiring, greasing, servicing or repair of
automobiles and smaller motor vehicles, but not including body and
fender repair and the repair of heavy equipment.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building or part thereof used only for the
storage of vehicles for gain and at which automobile fuels and oils are
not sold and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or
sold.
GASOLINE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used or designed to be used for the sale of gasoline or oil or other
motor vehicle fuel and which may include facilities for lubricating,
washing, cleaning or otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not
including the painting or major repair thereof. The term "gasoline
station" shall be deemed to include filling stations and service stations.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within
a dwelling or its accessory buildings and carried on only by the
inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental to the use of the
dwelling as a place of residence, and not more than 25% of the floor
area of the dwelling unit is used in the conduct of the "home
occupation"; and further provided that no article is sold or offered
for sale except as may be produced by the immediate family residing
therein.
In particular, a "home occupation" includes but is not limited to
the following: a professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer,
engineer, surveyor, architect or other similar profession; an art
or photographic studio; a dressmaker or seamstress; teaching of
musical instruments limited to one pupil at a time; and a barberor
beauty shop operated only by a resident of the premises and in
which no nonresidents are employed or engaged.
(1)
However, a "home occupation" shall not be interpreted to include
a barbershop or beauty parlor or other use in which nonresidents
of the premises are employed or engaged; a commercial stable
or kennel; a restaurant; a tourist or boarding house; an animal
hospital; a convalescent home; a mortuary establishment; and
stores, trades or businesses of any kind not herein excepted.
(2)
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises or other visible evidence of the conduct of such "home
occupation" other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot
in area, nonilluminated and mounted flat against the wall of the
principal building.
(3)
No traffic shall be generated by such "home occupation" in greater
volume than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the "home
(4)
§ 135-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-3
121:268
HOSPITAL — A building or structure for the diagnosis and medical or
surgical care of human sickness or injuries, including facilities for the
temporary housing of patients.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL — A building or structure for the diagnosis and
medical or surgical care of sick or injured animals, including facilities
for the temporary housing of such animals.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings where transient
guests are lodged for hire, but excluding rooming houses.
JUNK — Any worn, cast-off, discarded or waste material, including, but
not limited to, unlicensed vehicles, machinery and equipment ready for
destruction or which has been collected for salvage or conversion to
some use.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
JUNKYARD, AUTOMOBILE — Any place of storage or deposit, whether
in connection with another business or not, where two or more
unregistered, old or secondhand motor vehicles no longer intended or
in condition for legal use on the public highways are held, whether
for the purpose of resale of used parts therefrom, for the purpose of
reclaiming for use some or all of the materials therein, whether metal,
glass, fabric or otherwise, for the purpose of disposing of the same or
for any other purpose. Such term shall include any place of storage
or deposit for any such purpose of used parts or waste materials
from motor vehicles which, taken together, equal in bulk two or more
such vehicles; provided, however, that the term "junkyard" shall not
be construed to mean an establishment having facilities for processing
iron, steel or nonferrous scrap and whose principal produce is scrap
iron, steel or nonferrous scrap for sale for remelting purposes. See
"auto wrecking" as defined in this chapter.
JUNKYARD, DOMESTIC — A lot, land or structure, or part thereof,
used for the collection or storage of any cast-off discarded material,
including but not limited to one unlicensed vehicle no longer intended
for use on the public highway, used equipment or machinery unfit for
use and ready for destruction which has been collected for salvage for
conversion to some other use. See "auto salvage" as defined in this
chapter.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
JUNKYARD, GENERAL — A lot, land or structure or part thereof used
for the collection, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metals,
occupation" shall be provided off the street and not in a required
front yard.
No equipment or process shall be used in such "home occupation"
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot; and in the
case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.
(5)
§ 135-3 TAXATION § 135-3
121:269
used or salvaged building materials or other discarded material or
for the collecting, dismantling, storing and salvaging of machinery or
vehicles and for the sale of the parts thereof.
LAUNDERETTE — A business premises equipped with individual
clothes-washing or -cleaning machines for use by retail customers,
exclusive of laundry facilities provided in an apartment, fraternity,
sorority, residential hotel or club.
LOT — A parcel of land considered as a unit, occupied or capable of
being occupied by a building or use and accessory buildings or uses
or by a group of buildings united by a common use or interest, and
including such open spaces as are required by this chapter and having
its principal frontage on a public street or an officially approved place.
LOT, AREA OF — The total area included within lot lines. No part of the
area within a public right-of-way may be included in the computation of
lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of and fronting on two
or more intersecting streets and having an interior angle at the corner
of the intersection of less than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having frontage on two approximately parallel
or converging streets, other than a corner lot.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between side lot lines measured parallel to
the front lot line at a distance from the front lot line equal to the front
yard specified for the district
MANUFACTURED HOME — A factory-manufactured dwelling unit built
on or after June 15, 1976, and conforming to the requirements of the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards, 24 CFR 3280 4-1-1993,
transportable in one or more sections, which in traveling mode is
eight feet (2,438 mm) or more in width or 40 feet (12,192 mm) in
length or, when erected on site, is 320 square feet (29.7 m2) minimum,
constructed on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
FRONT LOT LINE — The lot line separating the lot from the street
right-of-way.
(1)
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
(2)
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A
"side lot line" separating a lot from a street is called a "side street
lot line."
(3)
§ 135-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-3
121:270
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and
electrical systems contained therein. The term "manufactured home"
shall also apply to any structure that meets all requirements of this
definition except size requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by HUD and
complies with the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act
of 1974,35 as amended. The term "manufactured home" shall not
include any self-propelled recreational vehicle.[Added 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Occupancy of a building or premises part for
one use and part for some other use not customarily accessory to the
first.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
MOBILE HOME — A factory-manufactured dwelling unit built prior
to June 15, 1976, with or without a label certifying compliance with
NFPA, ANSI or a specific state standard, transportable in one or more
sections, which in traveling mode, is eight feet (2,438 mm) or more in
width or 40 feet (12,192 mm) in length or, when erected on site, is 320
square feet (29.7 m2) minimum, constructed on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities and includes plumbing, heating, and
air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. The term
"mobile home" shall not include travel trailers or self-propelled
recreational vehicles.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any area which has been planned and
improved with provisions for utilities and sanitary service for the
placement of two or more mobile homes.
MODULAR DWELLING UNIT — A residential dwelling unit consisting
of component parts manufactured off site which must be transported
to the building site separately for erection, construction or installation
as a permanent structure. Modular homes differ from mobile homes in
that the former must be installed on a site-built permanent foundation,
are not designed to be moved or transported once installed on the
foundation and have been certified by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development as modular housing units.[Added 9-4-2012
by L.L. No. 4-2012]
MODULAR HOME — A factory-manufactured dwelling unit, conforming
to applicable provisions of this Code and bearing the insignia of
approval issued by the State Fire Prevention and Building Code
Council, which is constructed by a method or system of construction
whereby the components are wholly or in part manufactured in a
manufacturing facility, intended or designed for permanent installation
or assembly and permanent installation.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L.
No. 4-2012]
35.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.
§ 135-3 TAXATION § 135-3
121:271
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE — Use of a building or of land
that does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is
situated.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot that does not meet the size or
dimension standards for the zoning district in which it is
located.[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
NONCONFORMING USE — The use of land or a building that is located
in a zoning district that no longer allows that use.[Added 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
NONCONFORMING USE, LEGAL — A use that was started or built
prior to the adoption of the regulation that now makes it
nonconforming.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
NURSERY SCHOOL — Facilities for the daytime care or instruction of
two or more children from two to five years old, inclusive, and operated
on a regular basis.
NURSING HOME — A facility for the accommodation of convalescents
or other persons who require skilled nursing care and related medical
services which are prescribed by or performed under the direction
of a person or persons licensed to provide such care or services in
accordance with the laws of the State of New York.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of one
motor vehicle and having an area of not less than 180 square feet,
exclusive of passageways and driveways thereto.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT — A tract of land in single
ownership or controlled by an individual, partnership, cooperative or
corporation, designed or capable of being designed and used as a
unit or group of related units and having certain facilities in common,
such as yards, open space, recreation areas, garages or parking areas.
A "planned development district" may be residential, commercial,
industrial, recreational or a combination of such uses.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A mobile recreation unit, including travel
trailers, motor homes, pickup campers, converted buses, tent trailers,
tents or similar devices used for temporary portable housing.
REPAIR — The restoration to good and sound condition of any part of an
existing building for the purpose of its maintenance.[Added 9-4-2012
by L.L. No. 4-2012]
SIGN — Any device affixed to or painted or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building, structure or land and which directs attention
to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business. Each display surface shall be considered to be a "sign."
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered elsewhere than
upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed
and only incidentally on the premises, if at all.
§ 135-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-3
121:272
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or a commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed. A "for sale" or "to let" sign relating to the lot on which it is
displayed shall be deemed to be a "business sign."
SIGN, FLASHING — Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is
not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color when such
sign is in use. For the purpose of this chapter, any revolving illuminated
sign shall be considered a "flashing sign."
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use that would not be appropriate generally
or without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if
controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood,
would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order,
comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such
uses may be permitted in a certain zoning district as a "special
exception" if specific provision for such "special exception" is made in
this chapter.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) — A plan
for controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants from a site during
and after construction activities in accordance with Chapter 114,
Stormwater Management.[Added 11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — That part of a building between a pitched roof and the
uppermost full story and having a floor area at least half as large as the
floor below. Space with less than five feet of clear headroom shall not
be considered as floor area.
STREET — A public or private way which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
required location on the ground or attachment to something having
location on the ground.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure, basin, chamber or tank which is
intended for swimming, diving, recreational bathing or wading and
which is capable of containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm)
deep at any point. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-theground
pools; indoor pools; hot tubs; spas; and fixed-in-place wading
pools.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
TAVERN — An establishment used primarily for the serving of alcoholic
beverages by glass to the general public and where food or packaged
liquors may be served or sold only as accessory to the primary. Taverns
do not include liquor stores.[Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ 135-3 TAXATION § 135-3
121:273
THEATER, OUTDOOR — An open lot or part thereof, with its
appurtenant structures and facilities, devoted primarily to the showing
of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis.
TRAILER CAMP — An area occupied or designed for occupancy by two
or more travel trailers.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A unit for an individual or a family group designed
for highway transportation behind or on top of another vehicle, which
travel unit provides partial housekeeping facilities for short-time
outdoor living.
USED CAR SALES — Any area of land, including the structures thereon,
that is used for the wholesale or retail sale or exchange of used cars.
When the sale of used cars is affiliated with a new car dealership and
is located on the same premises as the dealership, the term "used car
sales" shall not apply.
VARIANCE — A modification of the terms of this chapter where such
"variance" will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing
to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions
of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the chapter would result in
unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a "variance"
is authorized only for height, area and size of structures or size of
yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise
prohibited shall not be allowed by "variance," nor shall a "variance"
be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning
district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the principal street
side of a lot measured between the side yard lines, the depth of which
yard is the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and
the main building or any projection thereof, other than steps and
unenclosed balconies not extending more than eight feet from the front
of the building, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the rear of a lot
measured between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal building
or any projection thereof, other than steps and unenclosed balconies
not extending more than eight feet from the rear of the building, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter. On both corner and interior lots,
the "rear yard" shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from
the front yard.
YARD, SIDE — An open space from the front yard to the rear yard
between the building and the nearest side lot line unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except for steps and as
otherwise specified in this chapter.
§ 135-3 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-3
121:274
ARTICLE II
Zoning Districts; Boundaries
§ 135-4. Designation of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Village of Yorkville is divided into the
following districts:
R-1 Residential District
R-2 Residential District
C-1 Retail Commercial District
C-2 General Commercial District
M-1 Manufacturing District
F-P Floodplain Overlay District
P-D Planned Development District
P-R Planned Unit Residence District
P-C Planned Commercial District
P-M Planned Manufacturing District
P-MH Planned Mobile Home District
§ 135-5. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on
the Zoning Map of the Village of Yorkville, dated April 7, 1970, which is
attached hereto and is hereby made a part of this chapter.36
§ 135-6. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. The district boundary lines are intended generally to follow the center
lines of streets; the center lines of railroad rights-of-way; existing lot
lines; the center lines of creeks, streams and other waterways; and
Village boundary lines. Where a district boundary line does not follow
such a line, its position shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific
dimension expressing its distance in feet from a street line or other
boundary line, as indicated.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
C. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the center of right-of-way lines of streets or highways, such
district boundaries shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such
distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
D. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership at the
time of the passage of this chapter, the regulations for the less-
36.Editor's Note: Copies of the Zoning Map are available from the Village Clerk.
§ 135-4 TAXATION § 135-6
121:275
§ 135-7. Application of regulations.
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided:
restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 30 feet into the
more-restricted portion, provided that the lot has frontage on a street
in the less-restricted district.
E. In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary line
in a particular instance, the Zoning Officer shall make a determination
with respect thereto.
A. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
altered, added to or enlarged nor shall any land or building be
designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner
other than as specified among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted
in the district in which such building or land is located.
B. No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to
exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in
which such building is located.
C. No building shall be erected, no existing building shall be altered,
enlarged or rebuilt nor shall any open space surrounding any building
be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity
with the yard, lot area and building location regulations hereinafter
designated for the district in which such building or open space is
located.
D. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building,
and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
E. No lot in any R-1 or R-2 Residential District shall be used for more than
one residential structure, unless lot area and yard requirements are
met for each dwelling, including required street frontage.
§ 135-6 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-7
121:276
ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 135-8. Purposes of residential districts.
The purposes of the residential districts are to:
§ 135-9. R-1 Residential District.
In the R-1 Residential District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following
uses:
§ 135-10. R-2 Residential District.
In the R-2 Residential District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building shall be erected or altered except for one or more of the following
uses:
A. Delineate those areas where predominantly residential development
has occurred or will be likely to occur in accordance with the Village
Plan.
B. Improve the character of residential areas by requiring standards of
land use and lot and building size which accurately reflect existing and
desirable development.
C. Protect the integrity of residential areas by prohibiting the intermixture
of incompatible nonresidential uses.
A. Uses permitted.
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Public or parochial schools.
(3) Churches, parish houses, convents or rectories.
(4) Public parks or playgrounds.
(5) Public libraries, fire houses or other public buildings or uses.
(6) Customary home occupations.
(7) Accessory buildings or uses.
(8) Private swimming pools.
B. Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals.
(1) Public utility stations or structures.
(2) Child day care. [Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
A. Uses permitted.
§ 135-8 TAXATION § 135-10
121:277
§ 135-11. C-1 Retail Commercial District.
(1) R-1 Residential District uses.
(2) Two-family dwellings.
(3) Three- or four-family dwellings, by conversion of existing
structures and conforming to the lot area requirements of Schedule
A.37
(4) Rooming or boarding houses.
(5) Customary home occupations.
(6) Accessory buildings or uses.
(7) Private swimming pools.
B. Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals.
(1) Public utility stations or structures.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C-1 Retail Commercial District is to:
(1) Delineate an area where retail stores, personal services and offices,
recreational, institutional and cultural facilities and municipal
buildings and services are provided for the community.
(2) Encourage new development in the Retail Commercial District by
providing for public and commercial off-street parking areas for
patrons of the businesses in the district.
B. In the C-1 Retail Commercial District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more
of the following uses:
(1) Uses permitted.
(a) Existing residential uses.
(b) Retail stores or bakeries for retail sale of goods primarily on
the premises.
(c) Personal service shops.
(d) Launderettes.
(e) Restaurants or taverns.
(f) Business or professional offices or studios.
(g) Education, eleemosynary, religious or philanthropic
institutions.
37.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 135-10 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-11
121:278
§ 135-12. C-2 General Commercial District.
(h) Florist shops.
(i) Funeral homes.
(j) Clubs or lodges, except those the chief activity of which is a
service customarily carried on as a business.
(k) Radio, television or household appliance sales or service.
(l) Antique sales and accessory service.
(m) Public utility stations or structures.
(n) Business signs.
(o) Accessory buildings or uses.
(2) Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals.
(a) Gasoline stations.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the C-2 General Commercial District is to
delineate areas appropriate for commercial uses which are oriented
either to highway use or intended for service to vehicles or nonretail
commercial uses.
B. In the C-2 General Commercial District, no building or premises shall
be used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or
more of the following uses:
(1) Uses permitted.
(a) Uses permitted in the C-1 Retail Commercial District, except
residences.
(b) Motels, restaurants or taverns.
(c) New car, boat, farm implement, mobile home, trailer,
snowmobile or motorcycle sales or rental. [Amended
9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
(d) Garages or gasoline stations.
(e) Laundries or dry-cleaning plants.
(f) Office equipment or business machines sales and service.
(g) Letter press shops or printing plants.
(h) Animal hospitals or kennels.
(i) Hardware or building supplies.
§ 135-11 TAXATION § 135-12
121:279
§ 135-13. M-1 Manufacturing District.
(j) Heating, plumbing, air-conditioning, electrical, cabinet or
similar fabrication shops.
(k) Bowling alleys or billiard or pool halls.
(l) Business signs.
(m) Accessory buildings or uses.
(2) Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals.
(a) Drive-in restaurants or refreshment stands.
(b) Auto washes.
(c) Used car sales.
(d) Auto body shops.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the M-1 Manufacturing District is to:
(1) Delineate those areas best suited for industrial use because of
location, transportation, topography, existing facilities and relation
to other land uses.
(2) Preserve the integrity of the manufacturing areas by excluding
uses which are incompatible with industry.
B. In the M-1 Manufacturing District, no building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered except for one or more
of the following uses:
(1) Uses permitted.
(a) Uses permitted in the C-2 General Commercial District.
(b) Metal fabrication or welding.
(c) Concrete products.
(d) Machine shops.
(e) Light manufacturing or assembly plants.
(f) Wholesale, storage or warehouse facilities.
(g) Cold storage or meat packing plants.
(h) Development or research centers.
(i) Business or advertising signs.
(j) Accessory buildings or uses.
C. Uses permitted as a special exception by the Board of Appeals.
§ 135-12 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-13
121:280
§ 135-14. F-P Floodplain Overlay District.
§ 135-15. Planned Development District.
(1) Auto washes.
(2) Truck terminals.
(3) Junkyards, general. [Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
(4) Auto body shops.
(5) Auto salvage. [Added 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the F-P Floodplain Overlay District is to
delineate those areas which lie within the special flood hazard
boundaries as defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's National Flood Insurance Program's Flood Insurance Rate
Map for the Village of Yorkville.
B. Procedure. The Floodplain Overlay District is an overlay. The uses in the
underlying districts are permitted subject to conformance with Chapter
70, Flood Damage Prevention, and approval by the Zoning Officer.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Development District is to:
(1) Provide for new residential, commercial or manufacturing districts
in which the economics of scale and creative and innovative
planning and architectural concepts and techniques may be utilized
by the developer without departing from the spirit and intent of this
chapter.
(2) Provide for the use of those relatively extensive land areas within
the community considered appropriate for the type of development
possible in a Planned Development District but for which no
development has been proposed.
(3) Ensure that the regulations of this section are so interpreted and
applied that the benefits of this chapter to the residents or
occupants of the Planned Development District and the residents or
occupants of adjacent properties will be protected.
B. Procedures. Planned Development Districts may be established in
accordance with the procedures specified below:
(1) Application for designation of a P-R, P-MH, P-C or P-M Planned
Development District shall be made to the Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trustees shall refer the application to the Planning Board
within 10 days of receipt. The applicant shall furnish basic data
pertaining to the boundaries of the proposed development, the
existing zoning, topography, drainage, soil conditions and such
preliminary plans as may be required for an understanding of the
type, uses and design of the proposed development.
§ 135-13 TAXATION § 135-15
121:281
(2) The Planning Board and the Board's professional planning
consultant, if any, shall review such application. The Board may
require such changes in the preliminary plans as are found to be
necessary to meet the requirements of this section, to protect the
established permitted uses in the vicinity and to promote the
orderly growth and sound development of the community. In
evaluating the proposal and in reaching its decision regarding the
preliminary plans, the Planning Board shall consider and make
findings regarding the following:
(a) The existing character of the neighborhood.
(b) The location of principal and accessory buildings on the site in
relation to one another and to other structures and uses in the
vicinity.
(c) The pedestrian circulation and open space in relation to
structures.
(d) The traffic circulation features within the site and the amount
of, location of and access to automobile parking areas and
loading areas.
(e) The height and bulk of buildings.
(f) The proposed location, type and size of signs, driveways and
landscape features.
(g) The safeguards provided to minimize possible detrimental
effects of the proposed use on adjacent properties and the
neighborhood in general.
(h) Storm drainage, sanitary and solid waste disposal and other
utilities on and adjacent to the site.
(3) The Planning Board shall report its findings and render its decision
to the Board of Trustees within 45 days. It may approve, disapprove
or give conditional approval subject to modifications regarding the
proposed development.
(4) The Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing after public
notice as required for any amendment to this chapter and shall
consider the report and recommendations of the Planning Board
and all other comments, reviews and statements pertaining
thereto. It may amend the Zoning Map to establish and define the
type and boundaries of the planned district and in so doing may
state specific conditions, in addition to those provided by this
chapter, further restricting the nature or design of the
development. In the event that the Planning Board disapproved the
proposal or rendered conditional approval subject to modifications
with which the developer is not willing to comply, the Board of
Trustees may amend the Zoning Map in accordance with the
§ 135-15 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-15
121:282
application only upon an affirmative vote of at least three-fourths
(3/4) of the members of the Board of Trustees.
(5) Amendment of the Zoning Map shall not constitute authorization to
develop in the district. Such authorization, after a planned
development district has been established, shall require that the
applicant submit to the Planning Board such further plans and
specifications, supporting documents and data as shall be required
by the Board and shall specify on the plans and in writing the
building types and layout, setbacks, off-street parking and loading,
ingress and egress, signs, existing and proposed amenities,
screening, planting and ornamental features and the plan or
arrangements for development the area of in stages or in its
entirety.
(6) All conditions imposed by the Board of Trustees in its amendment
and all subsequent conditions imposed by the Planning Board in its
review of the final plans, including any the performance of which
may be conditions precedent to the issuance of any permit, shall
run with the land and shall not lapse or be waived as a result of any
change in tenancy or ownership of any or all of the designated
district. No building permit shall be issued until the Planning Board
has rendered final approval and has authorized issuance of a
permit by resolution.
(7) If construction of the development in accordance with the approved
plans and specifications has not begun within one year after the
date of issuance of the building permit, all permits shall become
null and void, the approval shall be deemed revoked and vacated
and the Board of Trustees shall have the authority to again amend
the map to restore the zoning designation for the district to that
which it had been prior to the application or to any other district.
C. Standards for development.
(1) Permitted uses in P-R, P-MH, P-C and P-M Planned Development
Districts and area and yard dimensions shall be as approved by the
Planning Board using the requirements of Schedule A as
guidelines.38
(2) Building height shall be limited to 40 feet for commercial or
industrial uses.
(3) Locations for ingress and egress, off-street parking and off-street
loading in P-C and P-M Districts shall be so arranged as not to
connect directly with local residential streets and shall not cause
excessive conflict with pedestrian or motor traffic.
38.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 135-15 TAXATION § 135-15
121:283
(4) The standards established for signs in § 135-25 shall be used as
guidelines in the review of any proposed signs and according to the
comparable classification for any Planned Development District.
D. P-D Planned Development District (general). The Planned Development
District created by this chapter is intended to identify certain
distinctive areas of the community which are relatively extensive and in
which existing uses may be marginal and subject, therefore, to
discontinuance. Such areas are expressly regarded as primarily suited
for uses other than those presently occupying all or part of these
districts but wherein it is not possible to select specific development
objectives until other conditions are satisfied. Therefore, in a P-D
Planned Development District, only existing uses and uses accessory to
existing uses are permitted. No additional development or other use
may be permitted except as may be allowable after procedures for
rezoning of the area to a specific Planned Development District as
described by this chapter are fully accomplished and the Zoning Map
has been duly amended to designate such area as P-R Planned
Residential, P-MH Planned Mobile Home Park, P-C Planned
Commercial, or P-M Planned Manufacturing, after preliminary
evaluation and review procedures, as provided.
(1) The Planning Board shall approve, approve with modification or
disapprove an application for designation of a Planned
Development District amendment of the Zoning Map of the Village
or for a building project within an established Planned
Development District and shall report its findings to the Board of
Trustees within 45 days following the date of referral to the
Planning Board by the Board of Trustees. Planning Board approval
of the preliminary plans shall not constitute or imply a permit for
said project.
(2) The Board of Trustees shall hold a public hearing on any proposal
to create or change a Planned Development District, with public
notice, as provided by law as in the case of any amendment to this
chapter. The Board of Trustees may amend the chapter to establish
and define the type and boundaries of the planned district after a
public hearing.
(3) A building project within a planned district shall conform
substantially to the preliminary construction plans approved by the
Planning Board. A building permit may be issued only after
construction plans and specifications have been filed and approved
by resolution of the Board of Trustees. In the event that the
Planning Board disapproves a building permit within a Planned
Development District or approves with modifications which the
applicant is unwilling to make, an affirmative vote of not less than
3/4 of the members of the Board of Trustees shall be required to
approve said building project.
§ 135-15 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-15
121:284
(4) If construction work on the proposed building project is not begun
within time limits specified by the building permit or if such work is
not completed within the period of time specified by such permit,
approval of the project application shall become null and void, and
all rights therein shall cease, unless the Board of Trustees for good
cause authorizes an extension.
(5) All conditions imposed by the Board of Trustees, including those
the performance of which are conditions precedent to the issuance
of any permit necessary for the development of any part of the
entire site, shall run with the land and shall not lapse or be waived
as a result of any subsequent change in the tenancy or ownership of
any or all of said area. Such conditions shall be stated in any
certificate or occupancy issued for any use or structure in such
development.
§ 135-15 TAXATION § 135-15
121:285

ARTICLE IV
Supplementary Regulations
§ 135-16. Lot, yard and building regulations.
Regulations governing lot area and lot width, front, side and rear yards,
building coverage and building height are specified in Schedule A and
in the additional regulations of this Article and are supplemented by the
regulations of other sections of this chapter. Schedule A accompanies and,
with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter.39
§ 135-17. Additional area regulations.
A. Existing lots of record. A single-family structure may be constructed on
any lot of record filed in the County Clerk's office in any residence
district even if said lot has less than the minimum area required for
building lots in the district in which it is located, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) Adjoining vacant land. The owner of said lot owns no adjoining
vacant land which would create a conforming lot if combined with
the lot which is deficient in area.
(2) Side yards. Any structure erected on a nonconforming lot shall
have a minimum side yard of three feet or a minimum side yard of
10 feet adjacent to a side street lot line.
(3) Front and rear yards. Any structure erected on a nonconforming lot
shall have front and rear yards conforming to the minimum
required for the residence district in which said lot is located,
except as said lot may meet the conditions set forth in this section
of this chapter.
B. Lot width. The minimum width of any lot shall be measured along the
minimum building setback line required for the district in which it is
located.
C. Reduction of lot area. The minimum yards and open spaces, including
lot area per family, required by this chapter shall not be encroached
upon or consider as yard or open space requirements for any other
building, nor shall any lot be reduced below the district requirements of
this chapter.
D. Number of dwellings on lot. Two permanent residential structures on
one lot, other than group housing, shall be prohibited unless lot area
and yard requirements are met for each dwelling, including required
street frontage.
E. Through lots. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends
from one street to another parallel or nearly parallel street or alley, the
39.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 135-16 TAXATION § 135-17
121:287
wider street shall be deemed the street upon which the property fronts,
and no principal structures and no dwelling shall be erected on the rear
of such a lot, except where such lot may be subdivided to create not
fewer than two conforming lots. Where a single lot extends between
two streets of equal width, either of the two streets may be deemed
as that upon which the property fronts. The building height shall be
measured from the grade of the street on which the building fronts.
F. Visibility at street corners. On a corner lot in any district where a front
yard is required, no fence, wall, hedge or other structure or planting
more than 2 1/2 feet above the finished grade on the street center line
shall be erected, placed or maintained so as to obstruct visibility of
vehicular traffic within the triangular area formed by the intersecting
street right-of-way lines and a straight line joining said lines at points
30 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said lines.
G. Front yard exception. When a vacant lot is situated between two
improved lots, each having a principal building within 25 feet of any
side lot line of such unimproved lot, the front yard of the vacant lot may
be reduced to a depth equal to the greater of the depths of the front
yards of the two adjoining improved lots, but not less than 10 feet.
H. Transition yard requirements.
(1) Where a residential district abuts a nonresidential district at a
street line, there shall be provided in the nonresidential district, for
a distance of 50 feet from the district boundary line, a front yard at
least equal in depth to that required in the residential district.
(2) Where a district boundary line divides a lot in one ownership at the
time of adoption of said district line, the regulations for the morerestricted
portion of such lot shall extend not more than 50 feet into
the less-restricted portion, provided that the lot has frontage on a
street in the less-restricted district.
(3) Where the side or rear yard in a residential district abuts a side or
rear yard in a nonresidential district, there shall be provided along
such abutting line or lines in the nonresidential district a side or
rear yard at least equal in depth to that required in the residential
district. In no case, however, shall the abutting side yard be less
than 10 feet and the abutting rear yard less than 20 feet.
I. Projections into required yards.
(1) The space in any required yard shall be open and unobstructed
except for accessory buildings in a side or rear yard and except for
the ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices,
eaves and other architectural features; provided, however, that
such features shall not project more than two feet into any required
yard.
§ 135-17 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-17
121:288
(2) A paved terrace shall not be considered as part of a building in the
determination of yard sizes or lot coverage, provided that such
terrace is unroofed and without walls, parapets or other form of
enclosures exceeding four feet in height.
(3) In determining the percentage of building coverage or the size of
yards for the purpose of this chapter roofed or enclosed porches
shall be considered a part of the building.
(4) An open fire escape may extend into any required yard not more
than six feet, provided that such fire escape shall not be closer than
four feet at any point to any lot line.
(5) Unenclosed entrance steps or stairways providing access to the
first story of a building may extend into any required yard a
distance not to exceed six feet.
J. Walls, fences and hedges. [Amended 3-5-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
(1) No fences, walls, barricades, or structures similar thereto shall be
erected or maintained in the front yard, nor shall they protrude into
Village streets or pedestrian walkways to create a traffic hazard or
to obstruct the free use of said street or walkway, or to endanger
the person or property of any other person, This provision does not
apply to unenclosed commercial or industrial uses. [Amended
9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012; 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 3-2017;
5-1-2018 by L.L. No. 2-2018]
(2) All fences, walls, barricades or structures similar thereto shall be
properly erected, supported and braced with the smooth side
facing the neighbor and the constructed side facing the
homeowner. [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 3-2011]
(3) No barbed-wire fence shall be erected or maintained within the
limits of the Village of Yorkville.
K. Side yards.
(1) Side yard width may be varied. Where the side wall of a building is
not parallel with the side lot line or is broken or otherwise
irregular, the side yard may be varied. In such case, the average
width of the side yard shall not be less than the otherwise required
minimum width; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be
narrower at any one point than one-half (1/2) the otherwise
required minimum width.
(2) Width of one side yard may be reduced. When authorized as a
variance by the Board of Appeals, the width of one side yard may be
reduced to a width of not less than five feet, provided that the sum
of the widths of the two side yards is not less than the required
minimum for both side yards, and further provided that the
distance between the proposed structure and any structure
§ 135-17 TAXATION § 135-17
121:289
§ 135-18. Additional height restrictions.
§ 135-19. Accessory buildings.
existing or proposed on an adjacent lot is not less than the required
minimum sum of the widths of the two side yards. Such reduction
may be authorized only when the Board of Appeals finds it to be
warranted by the location of existing buildings or conducive to the
desirable development of two or more lots.
A. General application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories nor have an aggregate height of a greater number of
feet than is permitted in the district in which such building or structure
is located, except as noted elsewhere in this chapter.
B. Chimneys, spires, etc. The height limitations of this chapter shall not
apply to belfries, church spires, cupolas, penthouses and domes which
are not used for human occupancy, nor to chimneys, ventilators,
skylights, water tanks and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually
carried above the roof level nor to flagpoles, monuments, transmission
towers and cables, radio and television antennas or towers and similar
structures. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height
as is necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they are intended.
No advertising device of any kind whatsoever shall be inscribed upon or
attached to that part of any chimney, tower, tank or other structure
which extends above the height limitations.
C. Permitted exceptions to height regulations. Schools, public buildings
and institutions may be erected to a height not exceeding 85 feet in any
district in which they are permitted, provided that front, side and rear
yards are increased in width one foot for each foot of height that the
building exceeds the height regulations of the district in which it is
located.
A. Number.
(1) On any lot intended or used for residential purposes, one accessory
building, in addition to a private garage, such as a home workshop,
storage shed or like structure for personal use related and
subsidiary to the principal dwelling, may be permitted.
(2) On any lot permitting other than a residential use, two accessory
buildings not to exceed a total of 50% of the ground-floor area of
the principal building may be permitted.
B. Height. The maximum height of accessory buildings shall be one story
or 15 feet.
C. Location. Accessory buildings in residence districts which are not
attached to a principal building may be erected within the rear yard in
accordance with the following requirements:
§ 135-17 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-19
121:290
§ 135-20. Access to streets.
In any district, a lot to be used for residential dwelling purposes shall have
direct frontage on a public or private street.
§ 135-21. Residential living area requirements.
Minimum living areas, measured from exterior faces of exterior walls,
exclusive of garages, cellars and unenclosed porches, shall be as follows for
dwelling units hereafter established:
District
Minimum Living
Area Per Dwelling
Unit
(square feet)
R-1 Residence, 1-family
1 story 1,000
More than 1 story 1,200
R-2 Residence, general
1 story 750
More than 1 story 1,000
Apartments
2-bedroom 720
1-bedroom 600
Efficiency 480
§ 135-22. Screening and fencing regulations.
(1) Rear yard: five feet from the side or rear property line; except when
abutting an alley, then 10 feet.
(2) Side yard, street side of corner lot: same as for principal building.
(3) Not closer to a principal or accessory building than 10 feet.
D. Attached accessory building in residence district. When an accessory
building is attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all
respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the
principal building.
E. Accessory building. Nonresidential accessory buildings shall comply
with front and side yard requirements for the principal building to
which they are accessory and shall be not closer to any rear property
line than 10 feet.
A. Enclosed uses. For any use required by this chapter to be screened in
accordance with this subsection, the owner shall provide a fence,
§ 135-19 TAXATION § 135-22
121:291
§ 135-23. Swimming pools.
A private outdoor swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory use to
a dwelling unit only in accordance with the following regulations:
screen or landscaping sufficient to obscure such use from view from
abutting properties in residence districts or from the public right-ofway.
B. Unenclosed uses. Any commercial or industrial use which is not
conducted within a completely enclosed building, including but not
limited to junkyards, storage yards and used building material yards,
and which use is in, abuts or is adjacent to a residence district or fronts
on a public right-of-way shall be screened from view from such
residence districts and public rights-of-way in an effective manner. The
provisions in § 135-17J(1) do not apply in the case of an unenclosed
commercial or industrial use.
C. Approval by the Planning Board. Plans and site design for the
installation of such fencing or screening as is required by this chapter
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board prior to issuance
of a building permit. Any fencing or screening in accordance with this
section shall be maintained in good order to achieve the objectives of
this section. Failure to maintain fencing, screening or plant material
shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
A. Such pool shall be accessory to a principal residential use and shall be
erected only on the same lot as the principal structure.
B. Such pool may be erected or constructed only in the side or rear yard of
the lot and shall conform to the yard requirements set forth in
§ 135-19C of this chapter. [Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
C. The fence shall be no closer than five feet to any property boundary line
and shall be constructed in such a manner that no footholes shall be
found on the outside of the structure facing away from the pool. Where
a picket-type fence is provided, horizontal openings between pickets
shall not exceed 3 1/2 inches; and where a chain link fence is provided,
the openings between links shall not exceed 2 3/8 inches. The purpose
of this requirement is to ensure that no one will use footholes or boards
or other material to place their foot into to climb over the fence into the
pool. Gates to the pool shall be constructed so that no one can enter
from the outside of the pool with the latch being the type required by
the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and Building Code. When
obtaining a permit, which shall be required for the construction of any
type pool, whether above or below ground, the person seeking the
permit shall also receive a permit for the fence and shall give a detailed
description with full specifications for the permit. [Amended 3-5-1991
by L.L. No. 1-1991]
§ 135-22 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-23
121:292
D. Such pool shall be adequately screened or otherwise situated so as not
to be obtrusive from the public right-of-way or to present a nuisance to
any adjoining use.
E. Such pool shall not adversely affect the character of any residential
neighborhood, and all lighting or other appurtenances shall be so
arranged as not to interfere with neighboring uses.
F. In addition, a swimming pool to be constructed or installed as an
accessory use to a motel, tourist or like accommodation or as part of
any commercial or club facility shall be permitted after application to
and issuance of a permit therefor by the enforcement officer. Such
swimming pool shall be so located as not to cause a hazard or nuisance
and shall be designed and located in accord with acceptable
engineering standards and any applicable county or state
requirements.
G. In respect to the maintenance for the regular use as a swimming pool
and the fence, it shall be required that the fence shall be of sturdy
construction and shall be maintained in a sturdy workmanlike
construction with all fence posts and other materials to be sound and all
posts to be securely placed into the ground. In the event that the pool is
not being used during any time of the year, it shall have a proper cover
manufactured by a swimming pool manufacturer and shall be securely
tied down at all times. The intent of this section is to ensure that if a
pool is used seasonally, it should be fully covered the balance of the
year, and the intent is also that if a pool is not being used seasonally, it
shall be covered throughout the year. Pools that do not continue to meet
the standards of the New York State Uniform Fire Prevention and
Building Code and become in disrepair shall be properly closed and
filled in with the proper material to fully protect the public and to keep
from being unsightly or a health hazard due to the lack of insect control
or other health reasons. [Added 3-5-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
H. Upon written specific notice by certified mail, the Village may require
existing pool owners to also abide by these rules and regulations
throughout this section. This section shall provide that the Village,
through its Zoning Enforcement Officer, will inspect all existing
swimming pools of an outdoor nature, either above ground or below
ground, and shall make specific recommendations pursuant to this
section to the property owner; but if the Zoning Enforcement Officer
feels that an existing pool satisfies the clear intent of this section, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be able to approve the existing pool
for continued occupancy and use even though various pools may differ
somewhat in their present construction or state of repair. The intent of
this section is to make sure that all pools comply with a safe standard
for use and occupancy but at the same time to give the Zoning
Enforcement Officer the discretion to approve pools he believes to be
safe for the use of the homeowner and the homeowner's invited guests,
provided that they basically conform to this chapter. In the event that,
after being issued a violation notice, the owner does not agree, the
§ 135-23 TAXATION § 135-23
121:293
§ 135-24. Antennas.
The following regulations shall apply to all dish- or tower-type antennas:
§ 135-25. Signs. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No. 1-1993; 9-4-2012 by
L.L. No. 4-2012]
owner may appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an appropriate
variance pursuant to law. [Added 3-5-1991 by L.L. No. 1-1991]
A. No dish- or tower-type antennas shall be erected, altered or
reconstructed without the issuance of a building permit by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
B. Application for such permit shall include construction drawings
showing the proposed method of installation, structural engineering
analysis and a site plan depicting structures and plantings on the
property and all contiguous properties. At the request of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, documentation of a maintenance program may be
required.
C. All towers and antennas and tower-type antennas shall have setbacks
from any lot line two times the height of the proposed structure.
[Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 4-2017]
D. Distance of any guy anchorage or similar device shall conform to the
minimum setbacks and/or yard requirements established for the zoning
district in which the structure is proposed.
E. Suitable protective anticlimb fencing and a landscape planting screen
shall be provided and maintained around the structure and accessory
attachments.
F. The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any
required federal or state license.
G. No structure shall exceed the height limitations established for the
zoning district in which it is proposed.
H. Only one such structure shall exist at any one time on any lot or parcel.
I. The owner of such structure shall assume complete liability in case of
personal or property damage.
J. No dish- or tower-type antennas shall be placed in any front or side
yard.
K. Tower-type antennas or antenna arrays shall be erected only in Planned
Development Districts, and they shall meet all zoning requirements of
the zoning district in which they are located. [Added 10-3-2017 by
L.L. No. 6-2017]
§ 135-23 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-25
121:294
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Village of Yorkville that signs contribute to
the aesthetic character of the Village and do not adversely affect such
character.
B. General regulations. A permit is required from the Zoning Enforcement
Officer for the erection, alteration or reconstruction of any business or
advertising sign except where noted.
C. Sign measurement. The area of a sign enclosed in frames or cabinets is
determined by measuring the outer dimensions of the frame or cabinet
surrounding the sign face.
(1) Sign area does not include foundations or supports.
(2) For signs constructed of individual pieces attached to a building
wall, the cumulative area of the sign shall be determined by
calculating the area in the form of a perimeter around each
individual piece.
(3) Signs shall be constructed of wood, plastic, metal, glass, foam or
stone.
D. No sign shall contain flashing, intermittent, rotating or moving lights
nor consist of pennants, banners, ribbons or streamers; however,
temporary advertising devices, including but not limited to inflatables,
banners, ribbons or streamers, may be employed on an occasional or
temporary basis, not more than three times per year, for periods of up
to two weeks, to call attention to special business or related events.
Only one such device shall be allowed per business.
E. Mobile or portable signs or attracting devices are prohibited.
F. Signs on buildings shall be placed flat against the exterior wall and
shall not project more than eight inches from the wall to which they are
fixed. No sign shall project beyond the top or side of the wall to which it
is fixed. In any district, no sign shall be placed to extend over where it
may cause danger to a pedestrian or interfere with circulation or in
such a position that will cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring
the view.
G. No sign shall have more than two sides.
H. Not more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted per site except
for directional signs that do not exceed four square feet in sign area and
which are limited to such texts as "entrance," "exit," "no parking," etc.
For the purposes of this provision, a single business or activity shall
include all businesses or activities subordinate to or integrated with
that business or activity located on the same premises as that business
or activity.
I. If freestanding signs are used to identify two or more uses in a single
structure or per site, the total square footage of a freestanding sign,
only, shall be allowed to be doubled per side.
§ 135-25 TAXATION § 135-25
121:295
(1) Freestanding signs shall be placed at a minimum of five feet from
the front property line measured from the leading edge of the sign
and in accordance with all other setback restrictions of the
principal use, but in no case obstruct the vision of motorists
entering and leaving the premises and shall otherwise not interfere
with pedestrian traffic nor interfere with the use and enjoyment of
the adjoining properties.
J. No sign shall have a source of illumination directed toward a public
street or adjacent property.
K. No sign, other than an official traffic sign or public notice, shall be
erected within the right-of-way line of any public street.
L. No billboard or sign advertising functions, uses, products or services
not pertaining to the premises on which it is located shall be permitted.
M. Signs allowed to deteriorate or signs that represent a use no longer in
existence for a period of three months or longer shall be removed.
N. Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs shall not require a
permit:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which the
sign is located; this shall be limited to one per realtor.
(2) Signs denoting the architect, lending institution, engineer or
contractor where construction, repair or renovation is in progress,
which shall be limited to one sign per property.
(3) Professional and trade name plates and home business signs. Such
signs may be illuminated by external light only and shall be limited
to one per person or business.
(4) Signs which mark property boundaries; give directions for roads or
trails; prohibit trespassing, hunting, fishing or off-road vehicles; or
warn of hazards.
(5) Signs up to two square feet in size, giving the name of the residents
of a dwelling or its address. Such signs may be illuminated by
external light and shall be limited to one per dwelling.
O. Amortization of existing signs. Signs not in compliance with this
chapter must be brought into compliance within 10 years of the date of
enactment of this chapter.
P. Video display signs, electronic graphic display signs, changeable copy
signs and electronic changeable copy signs shall be permitted in a C-2
and M-1 Zone only. In addition to the regulations of Subsections D, E
and F, the Planning Board of the Village of Yorkville shall review each
application on an individual basis, and said application shall be subject
to their discretion in accordance with the following regulations:
§ 135-25 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-25
121:296
§ 135-26. Off-street parking.
Off-street parking space shall be required for all buildings constructed or
substantially altered after the effective date hereof. Each off-street space
shall consist of at least 180 square feet, with a minimum width of nine
feet. In addition, space necessary for aisles, maneuvering and drives shall
(1) Brightness. The sign must not exceed a maximum illumination of
5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a
maximum illumination of 280 nits (candelas per square meter)
between dusk and dawn as measured from the sign's face at
maximum brightness.
(2) Dimmer control. Electronic graphic display signs must have an
automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change
from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period
between 1/2 hour before sunset and 1/2 hour after sunrise.
(3) Audio or pyrotechnics. Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics
are prohibited in association with an electronic graphic display
sign.
(4) Images or messages shall be static in nature, not streaming or
scrolling.
(5) No image or message may be displayed for less than six seconds.
(6) Transition time shall be instantaneous.
(7) Spacing. If more than one CEVMS sign face is visible to a driver at
the same time on either side of the highway, signs must be placed
at least 5,000 feet apart.
(8) Signs of this nature shall not be permitted as wall-mounted signs or
on buildings in general.
Q. Prohibited locations.
(1) Within an interchange. An interchange is defined as "a system of
interconnecting roadways providing for traffic movement between
two or more highways that do not intersect at grade. Acceleration/
deceleration lanes are considered part of the interchange
measured along a highway from the beginning or ending of
pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the maintraveled
way." If auxiliary lanes are present between two
consecutive interchanges, CEVMS may not be located within 800
feet of the gore areas between the two interchanges as measured
from the physical nose of each gore area.
(2) Within an intersection at grade. Turning lanes are considered part
of the intersection measured along a highway from the beginning of
pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the maintraveled
way.
§ 135-25 TAXATION § 135-26
121:297
be provided. Required off-street parking areas shall be so arranged and
regulated as not to interfere with pedestrian or motor traffic on the public
street or highway, and no parking or maneuvering incidental to off-street
parking shall be on any right-of-way or walkway. Parking requirements are
specified in Schedule B, which is hereby made a part of this chapter.40
A. For uses not specified, the Board of Appeals shall, on appeal and after
recommendation of the Planning Board, establish parking requirements
in specific cases consistent with those specified in Schedule B.
B. For any building having more than one use, parking space shall be
required for each use pursuant to Schedule B.
C. In residence districts, the required off-street parking established in
Schedule B shall be located only in the side or rear yard of the lot and
not between the street and the building setback line. Any additional offstreet
parking over and above that required by Schedule B shall be
limited to a designated driveway as defined in § 135-3B.
D. Required off-street parking in commercial or industrial districts shall be
located within 250 feet of the commercial or industrial use but not in
any residence district; and if such parking area abuts a dwelling or a
residence district, the parking area shall be screened in accordance
with § 135-22.
E. Floor areas for the purpose of computing parking requirements shall be
the sum of the horizontal area within exterior walls of the several floors
of a building, excluding basement, cellar and attic areas used primarily
for storage or service.
F. No travel trailer, boat or boat trailer or recreational vehicle shall be
parked or stored in any residential district except in the side or rear
yard. No travel trailer, or recreational vehicle shall be used for any
residential, commercial or industrial purpose on the premises for a
period exceeding two weeks annually. No travel trailer, boat or boat
trailer or recreational vehicle shall be located within 10 feet of any
property line unless parked in the designated driveway. For a single
property, no more than one unit of each type shall be placed on the
property at any given time. [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L. No.
3-2011]
G. Overnight parking or storage out of doors in any residence district of
any vehicle licensed for commercial purposes shall be prohibited.
H. Off-street parking lots for five or more cars or trucks shall be designed
with careful regard to orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping,
ease of access, pedestrian walkways, ingress and egress and shall be
developed as an integral part of an overall site design, and the plan
shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
40.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included in Subsection I of this section.
§ 135-26 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-26
121:298
I. Off-street parking shall be provided as follows:
Schedule B
Off-Street Parking
Use Spaces Required
Dwellings 1 for each dwelling unit
Apartments 1 1/2 for each dwelling unit
Motels, hotels or rooming houses 1 for each guest room
Fraternities, sororities or
dormitories
1 for each resident
Offices 1 for each 400 square feet of floor
space in excess of 2,000 square
feet
Funeral homes 15, plus space for all employee and
resident personnel
Churches or temples 1 for each 8 seating spaces in main
assembly room
Schools: 2 for each classroom 4 for each
classroom 1 for each 5 students
Elementary
High
Colleges or universities
Theaters or other places of
assembly
1 for each 5 seating spaces
Hospitals or nursing or
convalescent homes
1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for each
employee
Retail stores 1 for each 300 square feet of floor
space devoted to retail or customer
use
Shopping centers [Amended
9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
1 for each 300 square feet of floor
space devoted to retail or customer
use
Clubs or restaurants 1 for each 100 square feet of floor
space
Bowling alleys 5 for each alley
Wholesale, storage or freight
terminals
1 for each employee on the
maximum shift. Parking area shall
not be less than 25% of the
building floor area.
Industrial or manufacturing uses 1 for each 4 employees on the
maximum working shift
§ 135-26 TAXATION § 135-26
121:299
§ 135-27. Off-street loading.
Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for each commercial or
industrial establishment hereafter erected or substantially altered and shall
be so arranged as not to interfere with pedestrian or motor traffic on the
public street or highway and shall be adequately screened if adjacent to
a dwelling or a residential area. Such off-street loading space shall be
logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to
delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles when
required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading
space is not to be included as off-street parking space in computation of
required off-street parking space. Any required off-street loading berth shall
have a clear area not less than 12 feet in width by 25 feet in length.
§ 135-27.1. Stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement.
[Added 11-5-2007 by L.L. No. 4-2007]
No application for approval of a land development activity shall be
considered until the appropriate board has received a stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) prepared in accordance with the NYS SPDES
General Permit for Construction Activities GP-02-01 and the specifications
set forth in Chapter 114, Stormwater Management, and until the SWPPP is
reviewed and approved by the NYS DEC.
Schedule B
Off-Street Parking
Use Spaces Required
Home occupations Off-street parking space for all
customers, patients, clients and
residents
Auto washes 1 for each bay, plus space for all
employee cars and stacking space
for 4 cars per bay
§ 135-26 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-27.1
121:300
ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Buildings or Uses
§ 135-28. Continuation; regulations and restrictions.
The lawful use of any land or building existing at the time of the adoption
of this chapter may be continued although such use does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter, and any such building may be reconstructed or
structurally altered and the nonconforming use therein changed, subject to
the following regulations:
A. Registration. All nonconforming uses shall be registered with the
Zoning Enforcement Officer by the owner or agent within six months of
the date of adoption of this chapter.
B. Additions. A nonconforming building or use shall not be added to or
enlarged unless such nonconforming building or use is made to conform
to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Alterations. A building nonconforming as to use may not be
reconstructed or structurally altered during its life to an extent
exceeding in aggregate cost 50% of the fair value of the building, unless
the use of such building is changed to a conforming use.
D. Changes. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another
nonconforming use under the provisions of this section.
E. Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued
for a period of one year, any future use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. A reasonable interim, however, between
tenants or occupants shall not be construed to mean discontinuance.
F. Restoration. A building nonconforming as to use which has been
damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of not more than 50% of
its fair value may be restored, reconstructed or used as before,
provided that the bulk, height and area requirements shall not exceed
that which existed before said damage. Said restoration must be
completed within two years of such occurrence, or the use of the
building or land as a legal nonconforming use thereafter shall be
terminated.
G. Removal. If any building in which any nonconforming use is conducted
is hereafter removed, the subsequent use of the land on which such
building was located and the subsequent use of any building erected
thereon shall conform to the regulations of the district.
H. Validity of permit. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully
granted and on which the construction has been started and diligently
prosecuted before the effective date of this chapter may be completed.
§ 135-28 TAXATION § 135-28
121:301

ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 135-29. Enforcement official designation.
This chapter shall be enforced by a person hereinafter called the "Zoning
Enforcement Officer," designated by the Board of Trustees, who shall in
no case grant any permit for any building or use on premises where the
proposed erection, alteration, relocation or use thereof would be in violation
of any provision of this chapter. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make
such inspections of buildings or premises as are necessary to carry out his
duties. No permit or certificate of occupancy required hereunder shall be
issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or as directed by the Board of Appeals under the
provisions of Article VII.
§ 135-30. Zoning permits.
§ 135-31. Certificates of occupancy.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, structurally altered, added to,
enlarged or a change in its use effected and no change in the use of a
property or alteration of land and no excavation for any building shall
be begun unless and until a permit for such action has been issued by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer or by the Board of Appeals wherever it
is provided in this chapter that the approval of the Board of Appeals is
required. The fee for any such permit shall be as determined by the
Board of Trustees from time to time.41
B. No such permit shall be issued until there has been filed with the
Zoning Enforcement Officer a sketch or plot plan showing the actual
dimensions and angles of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location on the lot of the building or accessory buildings to be erected,
relocated or altered and such other information as may be necessary to
determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. Each
application shall state the purpose for which the structure or land is to
be used and a general description of the type of construction.
C. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue or refuse to issue such
permits within a reasonable time. Notice of refusal to issue any permit
shall be given to the owner or to his authorized representative in
writing and shall state the reasons for said refusal.
D. The permit, when signed and issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer,
shall be posted conspicuously on the premises facing the street or road
where the permit authorizes the work to be done. Said permit shall
remain posted until all such constructed for which the permit was
issued has been completed.
41.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 135-29 TAXATION § 135-31
121:303
§ 135-32. Completion of existing buildings.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building actually under construction
legally at the time of the passage of this chapter and which entire building
shall be completed within one year from the date of the passage of this
chapter.
§ 135-33. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 3-2-1993 by L.L. No.
1-1993]
Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in § 1-10 of
Chapter 1, General Provisions. Each week a violation continues shall
constitute a separate additional violation. Upon determination by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer that a violation of this chapter exists, he shall
send written notice to the last known owner of record of the property,
as determined by the assessment records, informing said owner of the
violation of specific provisions of this chapter and stating that action is to
be taken by said owner to remove such violation in a time given by the
issuing officer or proceedings to compel compliance with the chapter will
be instituted. Any violation of this chapter may also be enjoined pursuant to
law.
A. No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter erected,
altered or extended shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Under such rules as may be established by the Board of Appeals, a
temporary certificate of occupancy for not more than 30 days for a part
of a building may be issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. For
previously existing construction, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may,
on request, issue such certificate if he determinesthat the use of the
building in question meets the requirements of this chapter.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued only if the proposed use of the
building or land conforms to the provisions of this chapter and to the
plot plan, purpose and description for which the permit was issued. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall make or cause to have made an
inspection of each building or lot for which a certificate of occupancy
has been applied before issuing such certificate. Such inspection shall
be made within 10 days from the date of application, Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays excepted.
§ 135-31 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-33
121:304
ARTICLE VII
Board of Appeals
§ 135-34. Establishment; membership and organization. [Amended
2-27-1995 by L.L. No. 1-1995]
There is hereby established a Board of Appeals consisting of seven
members, which shall function in the manner prescribed by law. The
members of the Board of Appeals shall be residents of the Village and
shall be appointed by the Board of Trustees to serve for five-year terms, as
prescribed by law. Vacancies occurring in said Board, by expiration of term
or otherwise, shall be filled in the manner provided by law. The Board of
Appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to
carry into effect the provisions of this chapter, and all its resolutions and
orders shall be in accordance therewith.
§ 135-35. Procedures.
The Board of Appeals shall act in strict accordance with the procedure
specified by law and by this chapter. All appeals and applications made
to the Board shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board. Every
appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of the chapter
involved and shall set forth the interpretation that is claimed, the details of
the variance that is applied for or the use for which the specific exception
is sought and the basis thereof. At least seven days before the date of the
hearing required by law on an application or appeal to the Board of Appeals,
the Secretary of said Board shall transmit to the Planning Board a copy
of said application or appeal, together with a copy of the notice of the
aforesaid hearing, and shall request that the Planning Board submit to the
Board of Appeals its opinion on said application or appeal, and the Planning
Board shall submit a report of such advisory opinion prior to the date of
said hearing. Upon failure to submit such report, the Planning Board shall
be deemed to have approved the application or appeal.
§ 135-36. Meetings.
All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as such Board may determine. The
Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. Meetings of the Board shall be open to
the public. Such Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon every question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official actions.
§ 135-37. Records.
All decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be by resolution, and a copy
of each decision shall be sent to the applicant, to the Village Clerk and
to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Every rule, regulation, amendment or
§ 135-34 TAXATION § 135-37
121:305
repeal thereof and every order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Board shall immediately be filed in the office of the Board and shall be a
public record. Each decision shall set forth fully the reasons for the decision
of the Board and the findings of fact on which the decision was based. Such
findings and reasons shall include references to the standards pertaining
thereto where the appeal is for a variance or a special exception.
§ 135-38. Appeals.
§ 135-39. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from,
unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been
filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property; otherwise
proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application or
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 135-40. Hearings and determinations.
A. The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. It shall also hear and decide all matters referred
to it upon which it is required to pass under this chapter. The
concurring vote of a majority of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary
to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect
any variation in this chapter. Such appeal may be taken by any persons
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Village.
B. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days or such additional time as
shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rule, by filing
with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and with the Board of Appeals a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
A. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and by publication at
least once in the official newspaper seven days before the date of the
hearing and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
B. The applicant shall bear the cost of advertising as required in
connection with hearings.
§ 135-37 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-41
121:306
§ 135-41. Jurisdiction.
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties prescribed
by statute and by this chapter as described below:
A. Jurisdiction:
(1) Appellate jurisdiction:
(a) Appeals from the interpretation of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
(b) To grant a variance in case of unnecessary hardship.
(2) Original jurisdiction: the granting of special exceptions for certain
uses stated in the chapter.
B. Interpretation: on appeal from a determination of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, to hear and decide on questions where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer involving the interpretation of
any provision of the chapter.
C. Variances: on appeal from a determination of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and in conformity with law, to vary the requirements as they
apply to a particular lot where the property owner can show that his
property was acquired in good faith and where the strict application of
this chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
hardship. No application for a variance shall be acted on until the
required public hearing has been held. The Board of Appeals shall
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to carry out the
requirements of this subsection and shall not grant any variance unless
it shall make a finding of fact based upon the evidence as presented to it
in each specific case that:
(1) Because of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of
the specific parcel or because of extraordinary topographic
conditions or other physical conditions or location of the specific
parcel, the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
actually prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the land or
building for which such variance is sought, that the granting of the
variance is necessary for the reasonable use of such property and
that the variance granted by the Board is the minimum variance
that will provide for the reasonable use of the property; or
(2) The granting of the variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable
hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience
sought by the owner, which conditions are peculiar to such land or
building and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the
vicinity or neighborhood and have not resulted from any act of the
applicant subsequent to the adoption of this chapter; and
§ 135-41 TAXATION § 135-41
121:307
§ 135-42. Special exceptions.
Special exceptions to be considered by the Board of Appeals include the
following:
(3) In any case, the granting of the variance will be in harmony with
the intent and purpose of this chapter, will not constitute, in effect,
an amendment of any district regulations or boundaries or uses and
will not be injurious to the neighborhood.
D. Special exceptions: On application supplementing an application to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer for a permit or certificate of occupancy, the
Board of Appeals may authorize the Zoning Enforcement Officer to
grant a permit for any use for which approval of the Board is required
by this chapter. The Board shall, pursuant to law, hold a public hearing
on any such application prior to acting thereon. In authorizing such
permit, the Board may designate appropriate conditions in harmony
with the following standards:
(1) The use shall be of such location, size and character that it will be
in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the
district in which it is situated and will not be detrimental to the
orderly development of adjacent districts and uses.
(2) The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its
site layout and its relation to streets giving access to it shall be
such that traffic to and from the use and the assembly of persons in
connection with it will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the
neighborhood or conflict with the normal traffic of the
neighborhood. In applying this standard, the Board shall consider,
among other things, convenient routes of pedestrian traffic,
particularly of children, relation to main traffic thoroughfares and
to street and road intersections and the general character and
intensity of development of the neighborhood.
(3) The location and height of buildings, the location, nature and
height of walls and fences and the nature and extent of landscaping
on the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage
the proper development and use of adjacent land and buildings or
impair the value thereof.
A. Public utility stations or structures. Such uses shall include electric
substations, transformers, switches and auxiliary apparatus serving a
distribution area and water-pumping stations in any residential district
and shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such facility shall not be located on a residential street, unless no
other site is available, and shall be so located as to draw a minimum
of vehicular traffic to and through such streets.
§ 135-41 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-42
121:308
(2) The location, design and operation of such facility shall not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential area.
(3) Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be
provided and the facility shall be screen-planted in accordance with
the provisions of § 135-22.
B. Drive-in restaurants or refreshment stands. In addition to meeting the
minimum yard and lot coverage requirements, such businesses, where
persons are served in automobiles or out of doors, shall be subject to
the following regulations:
(1) Such use shall be not closer than 200 feet to a residence district.
(2) Such use shall have frontage on a public street.
(3) Ingress and egress shall be so designed as to minimize traffic
congestion, and for this purpose, the number and location of
driveways shall be subject to review and approval of the Board of
Appeals.
(4) Such use shall be adequately fenced and screened from any
adjacent residential property, and lighting shall be directed away
from adjacent property.
C. Auto washes. In addition to meeting the minimum yard and lot coverage
requirements, any auto wash establishment shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Such establishment shall not be closer than 200 feet to a residence
district.
(2) The wash water shall not pollute any stream nor create a hazard
because of surface drainage.
(3) The number and location of driveways shall be subject to review
and approval of the Board of Appeals.
(4) Such establishment, in addition to meeting the off-street parking
requirements of Schedule B,42 shall provide four stacking spaces
per bay on the lot to prevent the waiting of automobiles in the
public street.
D. Commercial excavations. Except in a commercial excavation district
and except when incidental to the construction of a building on the
same lot, the excavation, processing or sale of topsoil, earth, sand,
gravel, clay or other natural deposits is subject to the following
conditions:
(1) An application shall be made to the Board of Appeals for a special
exception for commercial excavation.
42.Editor's Note: See § 135-26I of this chapter.
§ 135-42 TAXATION § 135-42
121:309
(2) In its consideration of said application, the Board of Appeals shall
find that such excavation will not endanger the stability of adjacent
land or structures nor constitute a detriment to public welfare,
convenience or safety by reason of excessive dust, noise, traffic or
other conditions. The Board of Appeals shall specify any reasonable
requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare in
granting such permit, including the following:
(a) The slope of material in such topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or other
earth shall not exceed the normal angle of repose of such
material.
(b) The top and the base of such slope shall not be nearer than 50
feet to any property line nor nearer than 50 feet to the right-ofway
line of any street or highway.
(3) A plan for restoration and rehabilitation of a commercial earth
excavation area or burrow pit shall accompany the application for a
special exception and shall assure conformance with the public
health, safety and welfare. The Board of Appeals, upon approval of
such plan, shall require a performance bond to assure
rehabilitation of commercial excavation sites in conformance
therewith.
E. Junkyards and automobile junkyards. No junkyard or automobile
junkyard shall be operated or established hereafter in any area of the
Village unless a special exception shall have been granted by the Board
of Appeals for such use. Any such use existing at the time of adoption of
this chapter shall be discontinued within two years unless such use
shall comply with the requirements below and shall be granted a
special exception by the Board of Appeals.
(1) Before a permit for a junkyard or automobile junkyard is
authorized, the Board of Appeals shall find that such use will not
constitute a detriment to the public health, safety, welfare,
convenience and property values by reason of dust, smoke, fumes,
noise, traffic, odors and vermin or other conditions.
(2) The Board of Appeals may specify any reasonable requirements to
safeguard the public health, welfare, safety, convenience and
property values in granting such permit, including the following:
(a) Said use shall not be located within 50 feet of any highway,
stream or property line or within 500 feet of any existing
church, school, public building or place of public assembly.
(b) Any junkyard or automobile junkyard shall be completely
surrounded with a fence which substantially screens said area
and shall have a suitable gate which shall be closed and locked,
except during the normal working hours of said use. Such
fence shall not be erected nearer than 50 feet to any highway
or property line. All junk and dumping materials stored or
§ 135-42 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-42
121:310
deposited at the site shall be kept within the enclosure of
the fence and below the top of the fence, except during
transportation of the same in the reasonable course of the
business. No dumping or burning of the same shall be
accomplished within the Village.
(c) Where the topography, land forms, natural growth of trees or
other considerations accomplish the purpose of this section in
whole or in part, the fencing requirements hereunder may be
reduced by the Board of Appeals; provided, however, that such
natural barrier conforms to the purposes of this section. Where
the topography, land forms, natural growth of trees or other
considerations are such as to prevent effective screening,
other means shall be designed, or the use shall not be allowed
in the particular location.
F. Used car sales. Any used car sales establishment shall be subject to the
following regulations: [Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
(1) Such establishment shall not be closer than 200 feet to a residence
district.
(2) A site plan showing the lot dimensions and the proposed building
dimensions and location on the lot shall be submitted with the
application. The relationship of the size of the building to the lot
size and yard dimensions shall be subject to review and approval of
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Such use shall be adequately fenced and screened from any
adjacent residential property.
(4) All work performed shall be conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building.
(5) Such use shall not include auto salvage, as defined in this chapter.
G. Auto body shops. Any auto body establishment shall be subject to the
following regulations:
(1) Such establishment shall not be closer than 200 feet to a residence
district.
(2) A site plan showing the lot dimensions and the proposed building
dimensions and location on the lot shall be submitted with the
application. The relationship of the size of the building to the lot
size and yard dimensions shall be subject to review and approval of
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Such use shall be adequately fenced and screened from any
adjacent residential property.
(4) All work performed shall be conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building.
§ 135-42 TAXATION § 135-42
121:311
(5) Such use shall not include auto wrecking, as defined in this chapter.
(6) Any additions or alterations to the exterior of existing structures
shall be subject to review and issuance of special permit by the
Zoning Board of Appeals prior to issuance of a building permit.
§ 135-42 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-42
121:312
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 135-43. Initiation.
§ 135-44. Referral.
A. The Board of Trustees may, from time to time on its own motion, amend,
supplement, repeal or change the regulations and district boundaries
established by this chapter pursuant to law.
B. Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the frontage in any district or
part thereof included in such change shall present a petition duly
signed and acknowledged to the Board of Trustees requesting an
amendment, supplement or change of the regulations prescribed for
such district or part thereof, it shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees
to vote upon said petition within 90 days after the filing of the same by
the petitioners with the Village Clerk.
C. The Planning Board may, by resolution, propose an amendment to the
Board of Trustees suggesting a change or repeal of specific portions of
the regulations. Within 30 days from the time such resolution is filed
with the Village Clerk, it shall be the duty of the Board to vote on such
proposed amendment.
D. Amendment of this chapter may be subject to the state environmental
quality review process (SEQR). The Board of Trustees should identify
the type of action the zone change is according to SEQR regulations.
Depending on the size of the zone change and several other factors, it
may be a Type I or unlisted action. To make a decision, the Board should
consult Part 617 of the New York Codes Rules and Regulations (NYCRR)
and Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law.
E. If it is determined that an environmental impact statement will be
prepared for the proposal in question, all time frames and deadlines are
delayed until a draft environmental impact statement has been filed. An
application is not complete and therefore the review clock does not
start until a determination of no significance has been made or until a
draft environmental impact statement is completed.
A. All proposed amendments, supplements or changes originating by
petition or by motion of the Board of Trustees shall be referred to the
Planning Board for a report and recommendation thereon. The Planning
Board shall submit its report within 30 days after receiving such
referral. Failure of the Planning Board to report within the required
time shall be deemed to be disapproval of the proposed amendment.
B. Whenever any zoning regulation or any amendment including special
permits or variances would change the district classification of or a
regulation applying to real property in a neighboring municipality or
upon other county or state property as described in §§ 239-l and 239-m
§ 135-43 TAXATION § 135-44
121:313
§ 135-45. Hearing.
§ 135-46. Adoption.
After the public hearing and referral to and report by the Planning Board, a
majority vote of the members of the Board of Trustees shall be required to
amend this chapter, except as described in § 135-47, Protest petition.
§ 135-47. Protest petition.
If a protest against a proposed amendment, supplement or change is
presented to the Board of Trustees duly signed and acknowledged by the
owners of 20% or more of the area of the land included in such proposed
change or by the owners of 20% or more of the land immediately adjacent
extending 100 feet therefrom or by the owners of 20% or more of the land
directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such
of the General Municipal Law, said zoning regulation or amendment
shall be referred to the Oneida County Department of Planning, which
Department shall report its recommendations to the Board of Trustees.
Failure of the County Department of Planning to report within 30 days
may be construed to the approval by the Department.
C. The concurring vote of a majority plus one of the Board of Trustees shall
be necessary to override the County Planning Department
recommendations of approval with modifications or disapproval.
D. Within seven days after final action by the Board of Trustees on the
recommendations, modifications or disapproval of a referred matter,
the Board shall file a report of the final action with the County Planning
Department. Any defect in complying with this referral procedure will
render the Board of Trustees powerless to take further action under the
adoption procedure.
A. Before any amendment, supplement or change in the regulations or
district boundaries, there shall be public notice and a hearing thereof
as provided by law. Such hearing shall be held by the Board of Trustees.
In addition to the public notice of a hearing, notice shall be given, in
writing, either personally or by mail, to all property owners of the land
included in such proposed change and the land immediately adjacent
extending 100 feet therefrom and the land directly opposite thereto
extending 100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite land, as
said property owners and addresses appear on the latest completed
assessment roll of the Village.
B. Where more than 12 properties are included in such change and the
Board of Trustees, by resolution, determines that notice, in writing, to
each property owner is not feasible, the notice of hearing shall be
published in the official paper once a week for three successive weeks
and shall be posted in public places in the Village, of which six shall be
in the area affected.
§ 135-44 YORKVILLE CODE § 135-47
121:314
opposite land, such amendment shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of at least four members of the Board of Trustees.
§ 135-48. Periodic review.
From time to time, at intervals of not more than three years, the Planning
Board shall reexamine the provisions of this chapter and the location of
district boundary lines and shall submit a report to the Board of Trustees
recommending such changes or amendments, if any, which may be
desirable in the interest of public safety, health, convenience, necessity or
welfare.
§ 135-47 TAXATION § 135-48
121:315

ARTICLE IX
Interpretation; Availability
§ 135-49. Interpretation of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, morals, safety or general welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any
other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive
or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
§ 135-50. Availability of copies.
This chapter and all subsequent amendments thereto, when adopted, shall
be published, and printed copies shall be available from the Village Clerk at
a charge to be determined by the Board of Trustees.43
43.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 135-49 TAXATION § 135-50
121:317
APPENDIX
Chapter A140
FEES
§ A140-1. Schedule of fees and charges.
A. Chapter 40, Amusement Devices, § 40-9: [Amended 5-17-2011 by
L.L. No. 4-2011]
(1) For mini-theatres, projection booths or other devices displaying a
film: $200 per device.
(2) For all other devices:
(a) Fifty dollars per machine per year.
(b) Twenty dollars per premises where such devices are located,
per year.
B. Chapter 94, Peddling and Soliciting, § 94-7A: [Amended 5-17-2011 by
L.L. No. 4-2011]
(1) Peddler's or solicitor's license: $100 per month, payable in
advance.
(2) Transient merchant's license: $50 per day, payable in advance.
C. Chapter 115, Streets and Sidewalks: [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L.
No. 4-2011]
(1) Street opening permits (§ 115-6): $500 for each street cut. A
deposit of between $1,500 and $5,000, depending on the street,
shall be required to ensure the repair of streets for any work done
on any street in the Village of Yorkville, by any party performing
street cuts. The deposit will be returned upon the satisfaction of the
repair performance by the Highway Superintendent. In the event
that street damage occurs and is not repaired within one year from
the day the permit is issued, the deposit money will be forfeited by
the applicant and will be considered as reimbursement to the
Village for work in repairing any street damage done as a result of
the applicant's construction. [Amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No.
5-2017]
D. Chapter 118, Subdivision of Land: [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L. No.
4-2011]
(1) Minor subdivision application (§ 118-7A): $100 per lot.
(2) Major subdivision final plat approval (§ 118-9A): $150 per lot.
§ 135-50 YORKVILLE CODE § A140-1
121:318
E. Chapter 127, Vehicles and Traffic: [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L. No.
4-2011]
(1) Parking fines: $35 for each violation. If this fine is not paid or
postmarked within 72 hours, a fine of $50 will be imposed. If it is
necessary to issue a warrant, the fine increases to $100.
(2) For illegal parking in a handicap zone, the fine will be $100.
F. Chapter 135, Zoning:
(1) Annual inspection fee for billboards: $1 per linear foot of longest
dimension on any billboard, but in no event shall the fee be less
than $25.
(2) Building permit and inspection fee schedule.
(a) Building permits. [Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
Type Fee
Residential (1- and 2-family) $15 per 100 sq. ft.
Multiple dwelling $15 per 100 sq. ft.
Residential additions $15 per 100 sq. ft.
Accessory building, residential
and commercial
$10 per 100 sq. ft.
(minimum $20)
Alterations and/or renovations $10 per 100 sq. ft.
In-ground pool $75
Aboveground pool $30
Fence $10
All decks $50
Commercial $15 per 100 sq. ft.
Signs $50 per face
Demolition, residential $50
Demolition, commercial $150
Driveway, residential $25 new construction
Permit renewals (one time only) 50% of original permit fee
New permit required in
the event building permit
expires
(b) Operating permits.
Type Fee
Issued, reissued or renewed $50
§ A140-1 TAXATION § A140-1
121:319
(c) Inspections (Note: No fee will be charged for an inspection
related to a complaint alleging Uniform Code violations.)
[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
Type Fee
Public assembly $50
Multiple dwelling, 3 plus units $25 per dwelling unit,
$100 minimum
Commercial
Up to 5,000 sq. ft. $150
5,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. $200
10,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. $400
50,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. $650
Over 100,000 sq. ft. $1,150
(d) Permit application fees are doubled if work is started without a
permit. [Added 5-1-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
[1] No-show fee: $100.
[2] If an inspection must be cancelled, notice must be made by
the property owner/manager to the Code Enforcement
Officer at least 24 hours in advance.
(e) Fire inspections: follow-up inspection(s) for inspection of
corrections: [Added 5-1-2018 by L.L. No. 1-2018]
[1] First follow-up inspection: no charge.
[2] Second follow-up inspection: $50.
[3] Each subsequent inspection: $100.
(3) Certificate of occupancy: Each certificate of occupancy issued by
the Codes Officer shall be $50. [Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No.
4-2012]
(4) Board of Appeals application fees. [Added 5-17-2011 by L.L. No.
4-2011; amended 10-3-2017 by L.L. No. 1-2017]
(a) For R-1 and R-2 (Residential): $45.
(b) For C-1 and C-2 (Commercial): $75.
(c) For M-1 (Manufacturing): $100.
G. Copies of the Code or pamphlets:
(1) Copy of the Village Code of the Village of Yorkville: $250, plus $25
each upgrade. [Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011;
9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012]
§ A140-1 YORKVILLE CODE § A140-1
121:320
§ A140-2. Penalties for late payment.
The failure to pay any fee when due shall constitute a penalty which will
be double the applicable fee set forth in § A140-1, except for parking ticket
fees, which shall be granted a separate schedule.
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. 10-1-1991 Taping of Board meetings Ch. 20, Art. I
Res. 12-11-1991 Procurement policy Ch. 25, Art.I
Res. 4-6-1992 Records retention Ch. 103, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-1993
3-2-1993 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
L.L. No.
1-1994
4-13-1994 Site plan review Ch. 109
L.L. No.
2-1994
4-13-1994 Emergency preparedness Ch. 11
Res. 7-18-1994 Sidewalk replacement
program
Ch. 115, Art. VI
L.L. No.
3-1994
12-6-1994 Garbage, rubbish and refuse Ch. 75
L.L. No.
4-1994
12-6-1994 Garage sales Ch. 74
L.L. No.
5-1994
12-6-1994 Noise Ch. 86
L.L. No.
6-1994
12-6-1994 Parks Ch. 91
(2) Pamphlet copy of Chapter 118, Subdivision of Land: $20.
[Amended 5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
(3) Pamphlet copy of Chapter 135, Zoning: $20. [Amended
5-17-2011 by L.L. No. 4-2011]
(4) There will be no updates sold for the pamphlets. If any changes
occur, the pamphlet becomes obsolete and a new one must be
purchased.
§ A140-1 TAXATION § DL-1
121:321
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No.
7-1994
12-6-1994 Fire, accident and police
scenes
Ch. 66
L.L. No.
8-1994
12-6-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No. 2-2007
L.L. No.
1-1995
2-27-1995 Planning Board amendment;
Zoning amendment
Chs. 23; 135
3-5-1996 Investment policy Ch. 15
Res. 4-1-1996 Notice for special meetings Superseded
4-1-1997
Res. 4-1-1996 Procurement policy
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
Res. 4-1-1996 Advance approval of claims Ch. 25, Art. II
Res. 4-1-1997 Notice for special meetings Superseded
4-7-1998
L.L. No.
1-1997
7-1-1997 Fees amendment Ch. A140
Res. 4-7-1998 Notice for special meetings Ch. 20, Art. II
L.L. No.
1-1998
7-7-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
L.L. No. 2-2007
L.L. No.
1-2000
5-2-2000 Flood damage prevention Repealed by L.L.
No. 2-2013
L.L. No.
1-2001
5-1-2001 Garbage, rubbish and
recyclables amendment
Ch. 75
Res. 4-14-2004 Office of Village Justice Ch. 34
L.L. No.
1-2005
6-7-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A140
L.L. No.
1-2006
7-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic Superseded by
L.L. No. 2-2007
L.L. No.
1-2007
2-6-2007 Adoption of local laws
amendment
Ch. 17
L.L. No.
2-2007
6-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 127
L.L. No.
3-2007
11-5-2007 Storm sewers: illicit
connections and discharges
Ch. 113, Art. I
L.L. No.
4-2007
11-5-2007 Site plan review
amendment; stormwater
management; subdivision of
land amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 109; 114;
118; 135
§ DL-1 YORKVILLE CODE § DL-1
121:322
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
L.L. No
1-2008
4-16-2008 Property maintenance:
cutting of grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 98, Art. I
L.L. No.
2-2008
4-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
1-2009
5-5-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
1-2010
3-2-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
1-2011
1-4-2011 Notification of defects Ch. 87
L.L. No.
2-2011
1-4-2011 Dogs and other animals:
definitions
Ch. 58, Art. III
L.L. No.
3-2011
5-17-2011 Property maintenance:
gardens and composting;
zoning amendment
Chs. 98, Art. II;
135
L.L. No.
4-2011
5-17-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A140
L.L. No.
1-2012
3-6-2012 Tax levy limit override 2012 NCM
L.L. No.
2-2012
9-4-2012 Building construction and
fire prevention; buildings,
unsafe repealer
Chs. 46; 49
(reference only)
L.L. No.
3-2012
9-4-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
4-2012
9-4-2012 Site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 109; 135;
A140
L.L. No.
5-2012
9-4-2012 Littering amendment; noise
amendment; property
maintenance amendment
Chs. 82; 86; 98
L.L. No.
1-2013
1-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
2-2013
5-7-2013 Flood damage prevention Ch. 70
Res. 8-5-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
NYS Order 5-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
§ DL-1 TAXATION § DL-1
121:323
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
NYS Order 5-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
1-2016
5-3-2016 Garbage, rubbish and
recyclables amendment
Ch. 75
L.L. No.
2-2016
5-3-2016 Garbage, rubbish and
recyclables amendment
Ch. 75
L.L. No.
3-2016
5-3-2016 Littering amendment Ch. 82
L.L. No.
4-2016
5-3-2016 Littering amendment Ch. 82
L.L. No.
5-2016
5-3-2016 Portable sports apparatus Ch. 96
L.L. No.
6-2016
5-25-2016 Portable sports apparatus
amendment
Ch. 96
L.L. No.
7-2016
5-25-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 115
L.L. No.
1-2017
10-3-2017 Fees Amendment Ch. A140
L.L. No.
2-2017
10-3-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Snow and Ice Removal
Ch. 115, Art. III
L.L. No.
3-2017
10-3-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
L.L. No.
4-2017
10-3-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
L.L. No.
5-2017
10-3-2017 Fees Amendment Ch. A140
L.L. No.
6-2017
10-3-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
L.L. No.
1-2018
5-1-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A140
L.L. No.
2-2018
5-1-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
L.L. No.
3-2018
5-1-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 127
L.L. No.
4-2018
7-10-2018 Sewers Amendment Ch. 107
§ DL-1 YORKVILLE CODE § DL-1
121:324
ZONING
135 Attachment 1
Village of Yorkville
ZONING SCHEDULE A
Part 1, Residential Districts
[Amended 9-4-2012 by L.L. No. 4-2012; 1-7-2020 by L.L. No. 1-2020; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
District
Principal Permitted Uses
(See Article III, Use Regulations,
for complete list.)
Special Exceptions by
Board of Appeals
Minimum Lot Size
Lot
Coverage
(maximum
percent)
Maximum
Building Height
Minimum Yard Dimensions
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
Rear
(feet)
Area
(square feet)
Width
(feet) Stories Feet
One
(feet)
Total
(feet)
R-1
Residential
1-family dwellings
Public or parochial schools
Churches, parish houses, convents or
rectories
Public parks or playgrounds
Public libraries, firehouses or other public
buildings or uses
Customary home occupations
Accessory buildings or uses
Private swimming pools
Two-family and multiple-family homes
existing as such prior to January 7, 2020,
have been issued an existing
nonconforming use.
See § 135-19
Public utilities
Child day care
10,000
5 acres
3 acres
—
—
—
65
500
300
—
—
—
20
20
25
—
—
—
2½
2
—
—
—
—
35
30
—
—
—
—
25
100
100
—
—
—
5
100
100
—
—
—
15
200
200
—
—
—
35
200
200
—
—
—
NOTES:
du = dwelling unit
du’s/ac = dwelling units per acre
135 Attachment 1:1 Publication, Aug 2020